TOWN OF PUTNAM, CONNECTICUT 

11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 1/167
Town of Putnam, CT
Sunday, November 3, 2019
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-4-2018 STM]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The compilation of the Special Acts and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Town of
Putnam, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code LLC, and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 314, together with an Appendix, is hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town of Putnam, Connecticut," hereinafter called the
"Code." All provisions contained in the compilation provided for herein and known as the "Code of the
Town of Putnam" shall be in force and effect on and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of the legislation in
force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation
of such legislation and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior legislation.
§ 1-3. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance, and, if this
ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town Clerk, and such certified copy
shall remain on file in the office of said Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-4. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Town of Putnam shall cause to be published, in the manner required by law, a copy of
this Adoption Ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for
inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this
ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all
purposes.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 2/167
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when adopted in such form
as to indicate the intention of the Town to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Town of Putnam" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be included in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by the Clerk, to keep up-todate
the certified copy of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for use
by the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of
this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said
Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-7. Supplementation of Code.
Supplements to this Code shall be prepared whenever authorized or directed by the Board of
Selectmen. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of
ordinances passed by the Town and all changes made thereby in the Code.
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or
organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in
ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so
to embody them into the unified Code. For example, the codifier may:
Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subsections;
Provide appropriate headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code
included in the supplement, and make changes in such headings and titles;
Assign appropriate numbers to chapters and sections to be inserted in the Code and, where
necessary to accommodate new material, change existing or other section numbers;
Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this
article," "this section," etc., as the case may be, or to "§§ _____________ to ___________"
(inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive
sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already in the Code.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from the Clerk or an authorized
agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by the Board of Selectmen. The Clerk may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 3/167
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
B.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or
portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause
the law of the Town of Putnam to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any part
of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $250.
§ 1-10. Severability.
Severability of Code provisions. Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an
independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof to be
unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
Severability of ordinance provisions. Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and
the holding of any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause
shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-11. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Town of Putnam of a general and permanent nature in
force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which are inconsistent with any provisions of the
Code are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-12. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise
affect the validity of any of the following:
Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the Town, or any
evidence of the Town's indebtedness;
Any appropriation ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for any annual budget;
Any order annexing territory to the Town or excluding territory as a part of the Town;
Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right;
Any Zoning Ordinance or amendment thereto;
Any Subdivision Ordinance or amendment thereto;
Any ordinance creating a special services district;
Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease,
deed or other instrument;
Any ordinance adopting a preliminary or development plan;
Any temporary or special ordinance.
All ordinances pursuant to this section are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect
to the same extent as if set out at length in this section.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 4/167
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
A.
B.
§ 1-13. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the
ordinance repealed took effect, unless expressly stated.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal
took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an
offense committed under the ordinance repealed.
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code of the Town of Putnam, no
changes in the meaning or intent of such ordinances have been made, except as provided for in
Subsection B hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes were
made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention of the Town that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A,[1] attached hereto and
made a part hereof, are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)
Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters, articles and sections which were added,
amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes
indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the following history:
"Amended (added, repealed) 9-4-2018 STM." Schedule A, which contains a complete description
of all changes, is on file in the Town offices.
§ 1-15. Catchlines, histories and references.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate
the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as
any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of
such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
The histories appearing in brackets after sections and subsections and the references and notes
located throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal
effect.
Chapter 7. Aquifer Protection Agency
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 9-7-2004 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 202.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 211.
§ 7-1. Findings.
Section 22a-354o of the Connecticut General Statutes provides that each municipality in which an
aquifer protection area is located shall authorize by ordinance an existing board or commission to act
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 5/167
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
an as Aquifer Protection Agency. It has been determined that it is in the best interest of the Town of
Putnam to designate the Zoning Commission as the Town's Aquifer Protection Agency.
§ 7-2. Designation and membership.
In accordance with the provisions of C.G.S. § 22a-354a et seq., the Putnam Zoning Commission
is hereby designated as the Aquifer Protection Agency (hereinafter the "Agency") of the Town of
Putnam.
Members of the Putnam Zoning Commission shall serve coexisting terms on the Agency. The
membership requirements of the Agency shall be the same as those of the Putnam Zoning
Commission, including, but not limited to, the number of members, terms, method of selection and
removal of members, and filling of vacancies, including alternates.
At least one member of the Agency or staff of the Agency shall complete the course in technical
training formulated by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut,
pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-354v.
§ 7-3. Regulations to be adopted.
The Agency shall adopt regulations in accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-354p and R.C.S.A. § 22a-354i-3.
Said regulations shall provide for:
The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be established and amended or
changed.
Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area.
The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the area.
Notice and publication requirements.
Criteria and procedures for the review of applications.
Administration and enforcement.
§ 7-4. Inventory of land use.
In order to carry out the purposes of the aquifer protection program, the Agency will conduct an
inventory of land use within the area to assess potential contamination sources.
Not later than three months after approval by the Commissioner of the Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection of Level B mapping of aquifers, the Agency will inventory land uses
overlying the mapped zone of contribution and recharge areas of such aquifers in accordance with
guidelines established by the Commissioner pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-354f. Such inventory shall
be completed not more than one year after authorization of the Agency (C.G.S. § 22a-354e).
Chapter 10. Boards, Commissions and Committees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Aquifer Protection Agency — See Ch. 7.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 6/167
[1]
A.
B.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 32.
Article I. Board of Finance
[Adopted 6-24-1932]
§ 10-1. Board established.
The Town of Putnam does hereby establish and create a Board of Finance for said Town of Putnam, as
provided in Connecticut General Statutes § 7-340 et seq.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 10-2. Membership.
The Board of Finance shall consist of six members, two of whom shall be elected to serve until the
next election and until their successors shall be elected and shall have qualified, two to serve until the
second annual election and until their successors shall be elected and shall have qualified, and two to
serve until the third annual election and until their successors shall be elected and shall have qualified.
§ 10-3. Election of members.
The members of the Board of Finance shall be elected by ballot at a special election legally warned for
such purpose, and the Selectmen of the Town are hereby instructed to call such a meeting for that
purpose as soon as may be done conveniently.
§ 10-4. Powers and duties.
The Board of Finance shall have all the powers and duties which are now or may be hereafter given
them by the General Statutes of Connecticut.
Article II. Clerks of Town Boards and Selectmen
[Adopted 10-2-1933]
§ 10-5. Position established.
A Clerk to assist all boards of Town officials shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen upon
nomination of the Board of Finance.
§ 10-6. Vacancies.
[Added 10-7-1935; amended 10-5-1936]
In the case of a vacancy in the office of Selectmen, for the position of Clerk of all Town boards,
said vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the Board of Finance.
In the event of a vacancy in the office of Clerk of the Board of Selectmen, said vacancy be filled by
appointment by the Board of Selectmen.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 7/167
Article III. Committee to Study Needs of the Aging
[Adopted 11-8-1965 (C)]
§ 10-7. Membership.
There shall be a committee to study the needs of and coordinate programs for the aging for the "City,"
consisting of the Mayor, and seven other members to be appointed by the Mayor, who shall be electors
of the City. The members so appointed shall be persons interested in the consideration and solution of
the problems of the aging.
§ 10-8. Duties.
The committee shall study continuously the conditions and needs of elderly persons in the community
in relation to housing, economic, employment, health, recreational and other matters. It shall analyze
the services for the aged provided by the community, both by public and private agencies, and shall
make recommendations to the Mayor and the Common Council regarding the development and
integration of public and private agencies in cooperation with state and other services to the extent
possible.
§ 10-9. Compensation.
The members of the committee so appointed shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for their necessary expenses.
§ 10-10. Term.
The members of the committee shall serve until their successors are designated and appointed in
accordance with § 10-7 above.
§ 10-11. Organization.
The committee may organize itself in whatever manner it may determine in order to carry out to the
fullest extent possible the duties set forth in § 10-8 above.
§ 10-12. Appropriations.
The City of Putnam may make appropriations to cover the expenses of the committee, including
reasonable clerical services.
Article IV. Conservation Commission
[Adopted 9-4-2018 STM]
§ 10-13. Authority and purpose.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 8/167
There is created a Conservation Commission for the Town of Putnam pursuant to Section 7-131a of
the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, for the purpose of the development, conservation,
supervision and regulation of natural resources, including water resources, within the Town of Putnam.
§ 10-14. Membership; term.
Said Commission shall consist of seven members, who shall be appointed by the First Selectman.
Said members shall be residents of the Town of Putnam. One new member shall serve one year; two
new members shall serve two years; two new members shall serve three years; and two new members
shall serve four years. Upon the expiration of any term of any member of said Commission, the
appointment shall be for a term of five years.
§ 10-15. Officers; rules; reports; vacancies.
The Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary from its members, shall adopt rules for the
transaction of business, and shall keep a public records of its activities and make an annual report to
the First Selectman. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the First Selectman for the unexpired
portion of the term.
§ 10-16. Rights and duties.
[Amended 9-4-2018 STM]
Said Commission shall conduct researches into the utilization and possible utilization of land areas of
the Town of Putnam and may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes, and may advertise, prepare and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets
necessary for its purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, for the purpose of obtaining information on
the proper use of such areas, and may from time to time recommend to the Planning Commission
plans and programs for the development and use of such areas. It may, with the approval of the Town,
acquire land and easements in the name of the Town and promulgate rules and regulations, including
but not limited to the establishment of reasonable charges for the use of the land and easements so
acquired for any of its purposes as herein set forth. The Commission may receive gifts in the name of
the Town of Putnam for any of its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to
the terms of the gift.
§ 10-17.
The Commission may exchange information with the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, and
said Commissioner may, on request, assign technical personnel to a Commission for assistance in
planning its overall program and for coordinating state and local conservation activities.
§ 10-18. Alternate members.
[Added 1-30-1975 STM]
There shall be three alternate members, who shall have the same qualifications as regular members
and who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen or a majority of said Board. One alternate
member shall serve from the date of appointment until the second Monday of October 1973. One
alternate member shall serve from the date of appointment until the second Monday of October 1977.
One alternate member shall serve from the date of appointment until the second Monday of October
1979. On or before the second Monday of October 1975, and every other year thereafter, the Board of
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 9/167
[1]
[2]
Selectmen, or a majority of said Board, shall appoint one alternate member for a term of five years
from the second Monday of October of the year in which appointment is made.
Article V. Solid Waste Management Committee
[Adopted 6-7-1977 STM]
§ 10-19. Committee established; membership.
A Solid Waste Management Ordinance Committee shall be elected. Said committee shall be
composed of five regular members and four alternate members having equal opportunity to contribute
suggestions. The five regular members shall have voting power on matters that must be decided by
vote. Any permanent vacancies arising in the regular membership shall be filled promptly by that body
from the alternate membership. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint the committee of five members
and four alternates, and only a bare majority of the members shall be appointed from either party.
§ 10-20. Ordinance amendments.
The committee is empowered to draft a proposed amendment to the Solid Waste Ordinance[1] for the
Town of Putnam within 90 days, subject to Chapter 361A of the Connecticut General Statutes,[2] and to
present such ordinance to the Town Meeting promptly upon its completion.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 264, Solid Waste.
Editor's Note: See now C.G.S. § 22a-207 et seq.
§ 10-21. Powers and duties.
The Solid Waste Management Ordinance Committee shall be granted such other powers as may be
necessary and proper to carry out the duties of said committee, including the study of the current
sanitary landfill management, funding, and usage, to establish true costs and to eliminate any tax
inequity, if existent, and may, if it deems advisable, negotiate with the City of Putnam for the orderly
transfer of the sanitary landfill to the Town of Putnam for funding and operational responsibilities. The
committee shall be charged in its deliberations to be particularly mindful that the residents of the Town
of Putnam are entitled to adequate and orderly solid waste disposal services at reasonable cost,
without damage to the environment and without loss of useful resources. The last charge is the stated
purpose of the original petition to the Selectman. The Solid Waste Management Ordinance Committee
is to investigate the existing ordinance and submit a plan for solid waste management, to contact
whatever boards or commissions would be helpful to perform its duties, and report back to the
Selectmen.
Article VI. Pension Committee
[Adopted 5-2-1990 STM]
§ 10-22. Membership; terms; duties.
The Town of Putnam Pension Committee shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor upon
advice and consent of the majority of the Board of Selectmen, plus the Mayor, who shall be an exofficio
voting member, and all such members shall serve two-year terms contemporaneous with the
Mayor's term. The committee shall administer the Town pension plan pursuant to the provisions of
Section 7-450 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Pursuant to 7-450A, no ordinance altering the
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 10/167
[1]
pension or retirement system shall be enacted until the legislative body has requested, received and
approved a qualified cost estimate from an enrolled actuary.
Article VII. Board of Finance Alternate Members
[Adopted 7-15-1991 STM]
§ 10-23. Appointment; terms.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-340a of the Connecticut General Statutes, there shall be,
effective August 1, 1991, three alternate members of the Board of Finance who shall act when a
regular member of such Board is absent pursuant to the provisions of said section. Initially, said
positions shall be filled by appointment pursuant to the provisions of Chapter II, Section 5, of the Town
Charter. Thereafter, at the election of November, 1993, one alternate member shall be elected for a
term of two years and two alternate members shall be elected for a term of four years, and alternately
thereafter at each biennial election there shall be elected one or two alternate members of the Board of
Finance for a term of four years to succeed those whose term expire.
Article VIII. Board of Education Members
[Adopted 5-18-1993 STM]
§ 10-24. Statutory authority for restrictions on party affiliation.
The Town of Putnam hereby adopts in its entirety the provisions of Section 9-204b of the Connecticut
General Statutes entitled "Optional Alternative System for Towns with Four-Year Terms for Board of
Education." Notwithstanding the provisions of any General Statute to the contrary, the Town adopts the
provision of said section, which controls the number of persons from any one political party who may
be nominated, voted for, and/or elected to the Board of Education of the Town of Putnam.
Article IX. Zoning Commission
[Adopted 8-8-1955]
§ 10-25. Authority and purpose.
The Town of Putnam hereby adopts the provisions of Chapter 43 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
Revision of 1949, as amended,[1] for the purpose of exercising through a Town Zoning Commission the
powers granted thereunder.
Editor's Note: See Section 8-5 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 10-26. Membership; terms.
The Town Zoning Commission shall consist of the three Selectmen, ex officio, and two electors of the
Town to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for respective terms of two years, from the second
Monday in October in the odd-numbered years. At least one of such electors to be appointed by the
Selectmen shall reside in the Town of Putnam outside of the limits of the City of Putnam.
§ 10-26.1. Alternate members.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 11/167
[1]
[Added 6-24-1976]
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 8-1b of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Board of
Selectmen or a majority thereof are to appoint three alternate members to the Zoning Commission.
One such alternate member shall serve for one year to the second Monday of October 1977; one for
two years to the second Monday of October 1978; and one for three years to the second Monday of
October 1979; and thereafter each new alternate member shall be appointed for a term of three years.
All such terms shall commence upon appointment.
Article X. Zoning Board of Appeals
[Adopted 8-8-1955]
§ 10-27. Board established; membership; terms.
Pursuant to said General Statutes,[1] there shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals in the Town of Putnam
consisting of five members with terms beginning on the second Monday of October 1956. The
members of said Board shall be appointed by the Selectmen, one of the original members to serve for
one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years and one for five years, and
thereafter each new member shall be appointed for a term of five years. The members of such Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be electors and shall not be members of the Zoning Commission.
Editor's Note: See Section 8-5 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Article XI. Planning Commission
[Adopted 4-23-1956 STM]
§ 10-28. Commission established.
There is created a Planning Commission for the Town of Putnam pursuant to Chapter 45 of the
Connecticut General Statutes (Revision of 1949), as amended.
§ 10-29. Membership; terms.
Said Commission shall consist of five members, who shall be electors of Putnam residing within said
Town who shall hold no salaried Town office, to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. One member
shall be appointed to serve until the second Monday of October 1956, one member to serve until the
second Monday of October 1957, one member to serve until the second Monday of October 1958, one
member to serve until the second Monday of October 1959, and one member to serve until the second
Monday of October 1960. On or before the second Monday of October 1956, and annually thereafter,
the Board of Selectmen shall appoint one member for a term of five years from the second Monday of
October of the year in which the appointment shall be made.
§ 10-30. Alternate members.
[Added 1-30-1975]
There shall be three alternate members who shall have the same qualifications as regular members
and who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen or a majority of said Board. One alternate
member shall serve from date of appointment until the second Monday of October 1975. One alternate
member shall serve from date of appointment until the second Monday of October 1977. One alternate
member shall serve from date of appointment until the second Monday of October 1979. On or before
the second Monday of October 1975, and every other year thereafter, the Board of Selectmen, or a
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 12/167
majority of said Board, shall appoint one alternate member for a term of five years from the second
Monday of October of the year in which appointment is made.
§ 10-31. Officers; rules; vacancies.
The Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary from its members, shall adopt rules for the
transaction of business and shall keep a public record of its activities. Vacancies shall be filled by the
Commission for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 10-32. Duties.
Said Commission shall exercise its statutory powers and shall prepare a plan of development for the
Town, pursuant to Chapter 45 of the Connecticut General Statutes (Revision of 1949), as amended.
Article XII. Inland-Wetlands Commission
[Adopted 3-21-1974]
§ 10-33. Creation of Inland-Wetlands Commission.
There shall be an Inland-Wetlands and Water Courses Commission established in accordance with an
act concerning Inland Wetlands and Water Courses (Public Act 155, 1972 Session of the General
Assembly, State of Connecticut, amended Public Act 571, 1973 session).
§ 10-34. Responsibilities.
Said Commission shall have all the powers and responsibilities authorized under Public Act 155, as
amended.
§ 10-35. Designation.
The Conservation Commission of the Town of Putnam created by ordinance of Town Meeting of
October 1, 1962, shall be designated as the Inland-Wetlands Commission.
§ 10-36. Alternate members.
[Added 1-30-1975]
The Inland-Wetlands Commission shall have three alternate members who shall have the same
qualifications as regular members and who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen or a majority
of said Board. One alternate member shall serve from the date of appointment until the second
Tuesday of January 1976. One alternate member shall serve from the date of appointment to the
second Tuesday of January 1978. One alternate member shall serve from date of appointment to the
second Tuesday of January 1980. On or before the second Tuesday of January 1976, and every other
year thereafter, the Board of Selectmen, or a majority of said Board, shall appoint one alternate
member for a term of five years from the second Tuesday of January of the year in which appointment
is made. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Board of Selectmen or a majority of said
Board for the unexpired portion of the term.
Article XIII. Economic Development Commission
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 13/167
[Adopted 6-26-1974]
§ 10-37. Authority; Commission established.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 7-136 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut,
there is hereby created a Municipal Economic Development Commission of five members with all the
powers and duties specified in Section 7-136 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, 1958
Revision, as amended, for the Town of Putnam.
§ 10-38. Membership; terms.
The members of said Commission shall be appointed by the chief executive authority, Board of
Selectmen, of the municipality. There shall be appointed one member who shall hold office for one
year from the date of appointment, one member who shall hold office for two years from the date of
appointment, one member who shall hold office for three years from the date of appointment, one
member who shall hold office for four years from the date of appointment, and one member who shall
hold office for five years from the date of appointment.
§ 10-39. New members; terms.
[Amended 6-12-1976]
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint two new members to said Commission not later than September
1, 1976. One such new member shall hold office for a term of four years from the date of his
appointment and the other such new member shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of
his appointment.
§ 10-40. Vacancies.
Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term
by the Board of Selectmen.
Chapter 16. Cemeteries
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 10-2-1916 ATM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 16-1. Acceptance of funds for care of cemeteries.
The Town will accept, upon request, from time to time any and all funds from any person, association
or corporation, provided by will, gift or otherwise, for the care of any cemetery in the Town of Putnam,
or any lot therein.
§ 16-2. Payment of Interest.
The Town shall pay interest thereon at the rate of 4% per annum, payable semiannually.
§ 16-3. Expenditure of funds.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 14/167
[1]
In the case of the deposit of any such fund by any cemetery association, the income of such fund shall
be paid to such association, on demand, to be expended by it. In the case of the deposits by other
persons, associations or corporations, the income of any such fund, or such part as shall be
necessary, shall be paid to the association having charge of the cemetery or lot for the benefit of which
such fund is given, or if there be no such association in charge of such cemetery or lot, or so much as
may be necessary, shall be expended on such cemetery or by the Selectmen.
§ 16-4. Disposition of funds by Treasurer; annual report.
The Town Treasurer is hereby authorized to accept all such funds as may be offered from time to time.
He shall issue a proper voucher to the person, association or corporations depositing the same, and he
shall immediately notify the Selectmen of the receipt of every such fund, and the purpose for which the
same is to be used. All such funds shall be used by the Town for such purposes as ordinary loans to
the Town would be used, or may be invested, if not needed by the Town as a loan in legal trust funds.
A separate account of all such funds shall be kept by the Town Treasurer and rendered annually and
shall be printed in each Annual Town Report.
Chapter 20. Community Development Action Plan Agency
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 5-20-1970 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 20-1. Creation.
There is hereby created a Community Development Action Plan Agency for the Town of Putnam.
§ 20-2. Purpose.
The Town of Putnam shall exercise through such agency the powers granted thereto under the
provisions of C.G.S. § 8-169c.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 20-3. Membership.
[Amended 3-30-1971 TM]
The Community Development Action Plan Agency for the Town of Putnam shall consist of nine
members who shall be electors of the Town of Putnam, and shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen of the Town of Putnam with the approval of the voters of said Town of Putnam at Town
Meeting.
§ 20-4. Terms.
The terms of office for said members shall be for a two-year period commencing April 13, 1970.
§ 20-5. Vacancies.
Vacancies on said Agency shall be filled for unexpired terms by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 20-6. Compensation.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 15/167
A.
B.
The members of said Agency shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for necessary
expenses.
Chapter 28. Elections
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Voting Hours
[Adopted 9-7-1949 STM; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 28-1. Hours established.
Polls of the Town of Putnam shall be open for the reception of ballots at all Town elections and at all
special elections called to fill a vacancy in any office at any Town election from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
in accordance with C.G.S. § 9-174.
Article II. Voting Districts
[Adopted 5-21-1969 STM]
§ 28-2. Districts established.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 9-169 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town of
Putnam is hereby divided into two voting districts:
The first of said two voting districts shall comprise that portion of the area of the Town of Putnam
located within and having the same boundaries as the City of Putnam.
The second of said two voting districts shall comprise that remaining portion of the area of the
Town of Putnam which is located outside of the boundaries of the City of Putnam.
§ 28-3. Polling place.
The Registrars of Voters of the Town of Putnam, in accordance with the provisions of said statutes,
shall provide a suitable polling place in each district.
Article III. Board for Admission of Electors
[Adopted 1-30-1975 STM]
§ 28-4. Membership.
The Town Board for Admission of Electors shall include only the Town Clerk and the Registrars of
Voters as authorized by Section 9-15a of the Connecticut General Statutes and effective immediately.
Article IV. Shifts for Election Officials
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 16/167
[Adopted 2-10-1988 STM]
§ 28-5. Number of shifts.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-258a of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town Meeting of
the Town of Putnam does hereby authorize the conducting of elections by two shifts of election
officials, provided that the Moderator shall keep a written record of the specific hours and times served
at the polls by such election officials, and subject to the other provisions of Section 9-258a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
Chapter 30. Eminent Domain
[At the adjourned Town Meeting held 9-1-2005, the Town adopted "an ordinance prohibiting acquisition
of certain property by eminent domain for privately held or controlled economic development purposes
in Putnam, Connecticut."]
Chapter 32. Ethics, Code of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 7-12-2010 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See Ch. 10.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 88.
§ 32-1. Purpose.
Public office is a public trust. The trust of the public is essential for government to function effectively.
Public policy developed by government officials and employees affects every citizen of Putnam, and it
must be based on honest and fair deliberations and decisions. This process must be free from threats,
favoritism, undue influence, and all forms of impropriety so that the confidence of the public is not
eroded. By enacting this code, the Town of Putnam seeks to avoid any loss of trust and to maintain
and increase the confidence of citizens in the integrity and fairness of their government.
§ 32-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUSINESS
Any entity through which business for profit or not for profit is conducted, including a corporation,
partnership, proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, or self-employed
individual.
BUSINESS DAYS
Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, excluding days on which the Putnam
Town offices are closed for holidays, special observances, inclement weather conditions or
emergencies.
BUSINESS WITH WHICH ONE IS ASSOCIATED
Any sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, trust or other entity through which business
for profit or not for profit is conducted in which the public official or public employee or member of
his or her immediate family is a director, officer, owner, limited or general partner, beneficiary of a
trust or holder of stock constituting 5% or more of the total outstanding stock of any class;
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 17/167
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
provided a public official or public employee, or member of his or her immediate family shall not be
deemed to be associated with a not-for-profit entity solely by virtue of the fact that the public
official or public employee or member of his or her immediate family is an unpaid director or officer
of the not-for-profit entity. "Officer" refers only to the president, executive or senior vice president
or treasurer of such business.
COMMISSION
The Town of Putnam Ethics Commission established in § 32-3.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Information, whether transmitted orally or in writing, which is obtained by reason of the public
position or office held and is of such nature that it is not, at the time of transmission, a matter of
public record or public knowledge.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
An interest which is in substantial conflict with a public official's or public employee's proper
discharge of his or her duties or employment in the public interest and of his or her responsibilities
as prescribed by law. Such public official or public employee has such an interest if he or she has
reason to believe or expect that his or her own self, spouse, dependent child, or a business with
which he or she is associated will derive a direct monetary gain or suffer a direct monetary loss, as
the case may be, by reason of his or her official activity. Any such public official or public employee
does not have an interest which is in substantial conflict with the discharge or his or her duties in
the public interest and of his or her responsibilities as prescribed by law if any benefit or detriment
accrues to himself or herself, his or her spouse, dependent child or to a business with which he or
she, his or her spouse or dependent child is associated as a member of a profession, occupation
or group to no greater extent than to any other member of such profession, occupation or group. If
there is any conflict between the provisions of this definition and any other portion of this code, the
provisions of this definition shall prevail.
FINANCIAL INTEREST
Any interest with a monetary value of $100 or more or which generates a financial gain or loss of
$100 or more in a calendar year.
GIFT
Anything of value, including entertainment, food, beverage, travel, and lodging given or paid to a
public official or public employee to the extent that consideration of equal or greater value is not
received. A gift does not include:
A political contribution otherwise reported as required by law or a donation or payment as
described in Subdivision (9) or (11) of Subsection (b) of Section 9-601a of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
Services provided by persons volunteering their time.
A commercially reasonable loan made on terms not more favorable than loans made in the
ordinary course of business.
A gift received from:
An individual's spouse, fiance or fiancee;
The parent, brother or sister of such spouse or such individual; or
The child of such individual or the spouse of such child.
Goods or services which are provided to the municipality and facilitate governmental action or
functions.
A certificate, plaque or other ceremonial award costing less than $100.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 18/167
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
A rebate or discount on the price of anything of value made in the ordinary course of business
without regard to that person's status.
Printed or recorded informational material germane to governmental action or functions.
Items of nominal value, not to exceed $20, containing or displaying promotional material.
An honorary degree bestowed upon a public official or public employee by a public or private
university or college.
A meal provided at an event and/or the registration or entrance fee to attend such an event, in
which the public employee or public official participates in his or her official capacity; or a
working business meal for which the value of the public employee's or public official's meal
does not exceed $25.
A meal provided in the home by an individual who resides in the municipality.
Gifts in-kind of nominal value not to exceed $25 tendered on gift-giving occasions generally
recognized by the public, including Christmas, Hanukkah, birthdays, the birth or adoption of a
child, weddings, confirmations or bar/bat mitzvahs, provided the total value of such gifts in
any calendar year does not exceed $50.
INDIVIDUAL
A natural person.
INDIVIDUAL WITH WHOM ONE IS ASSOCIATED
An individual with whom the person or a member of his or her immediate family mutually has an
interest in any business.
MUNICIPALITY
Includes any special district contained therein which has taken appropriate legal action to adopt
this Code of Ethics to apply to the conduct of its public officials and public employees.
OFFICIAL RESPONSIBILITY
The direct administrative or operating authority, whether intermediate or final and whether
exercisable personally or through subordinates, to approve, disapprove, or otherwise direct
government action.
PERSON
An individual, sole proprietorship, trust, corporation, union, association, firm, partnership,
committee, club or other organization or group of persons.
PERSONAL INTEREST
An interest in any action taken by the municipality in which an individual will derive a nonfinancial
benefit or detriment but which will result in the expenditure of municipal funds.
PROBABLE CAUSE
For the purpose of a complaint under the Town of Putnam Ethics Ordinance, shall consist of such
state of facts which would induce a reasonably intelligent and cautious individual to believe that a
violation of the code has occurred.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE
A person employed, whether part-time or full-time, by the municipality or a political subdivision
thereof.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL
An elected or appointed official, whether paid or unpaid or full- or part-time, of a municipality,
including candidates for the office.
RELATIVE
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 19/167
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
A.
The spouse, parent, grandparent, child, grandchild, sibling, stepparent, and stepchild of an
individual, and also their respective spouses.
SPECIAL DISTRICT
A district established pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-324.
§ 32-3. Municipal Ethics Commission.
There shall be a Town of Putnam Ethics Commission consisting of five members. The members
shall be appointed by majority vote of the Board of Selectmen for a term of two years. No more
than three shall be members of the same political party.
All members shall be electors of the municipality. No member of the appointing authority, which is
the Board of Selectmen, shall serve on the Ethics Commission and no member of the Ethics
Commission shall serve as an officer of any political party or political committee, but mere
membership on a political committee shall not be a bar to service on the Ethics Commission.
Political activity.
Although any member of the Commission shall have an unrestricted right to vote, make
political contributions, and attend fund-raising or other political events, no member or
employee shall take a leadership role in any candidate's political campaign for any municipal
office subject to the Commission's jurisdiction. An individual would take a leadership role by,
for example, serving as a campaign manager, giving a speech at a political event, or formally
endorsing a candidate.
No candidate for political office may disseminate information which indicates that a
Commission member or employee supports his or her candidacy.
The Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside at meetings of the Commission and
a Vice Chairperson to preside in the absence of the Chairperson. Three members shall constitute
a quorum. A majority vote of the quorum shall be required for action of the Commission, except as
specified in § 32-5D. The Chairperson or any two members may call a meeting.
Vacancies on the Commission will be filled in the manner prescribed by the Charter of the Town of
Putnam for other appointive offices.
§ 32-4. Duties of Commission; rules and regulations; employment
of staff.
The Commission shall:
Compile and maintain a record of all reports, advisory opinions, statements, and memoranda
filed by and with the Commission to facilitate public access to such reports and statements.
Issue advisory opinions with regard to the requirements of this code upon the request of any
public employee or public official inquiring on his or her own behalf. The Commission shall
provide such an advisory opinion no later than 35 business days after it receives the request
for the advisory opinion. Advisory opinions rendered by the Commission, until amended or
revoked, shall be binding on the Commission and shall be deemed to be final decisions of the
Commission. Any advisory opinion concerning the person who requested the opinion and who
acted in reliance thereon, in good faith, shall be an absolute defense in any matter brought
under the provisions of this code.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 20/167
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
(1)
B.
The Commission may adopt, after a public hearing, rules and regulations not inconsistent with this
code for the administration and implementation of the code.
The Commission may employ necessary staff or outside counsel within available appropriations.
§ 32-5. Complaints; investigations and hearings; statute of
limitations; protection of complainants.
Upon the complaint of any person, set forth on a form prescribed by the Commission, signed
under penalty of false statement and addressed to the Commission in care of the Town Clerk (who
shall then forward the complaint forthwith to the Ethics Commission), the Ethics Commission shall
investigate any alleged violation of this code.
Not later than 10 business days after the Commission's receipt of such complaint from the
Town Clerk, the Commission shall provide notice of such receipt and a copy of the complaint
by registered or certified mail to any respondent against whom such complaint is filed, and
shall also include notice of the confidentiality provisions listed in § 32-6 of this code, including
notice that the respondent has the right to waive confidentiality by submitting a written request
to the Commission. The Commission shall also provide the complainant with notice of the
receipt of the complaint by registered or certified mail. The correspondence to the respondent
and complainant described above shall include notification of the date, time and place for the
commencement of the Commission's meeting for preliminary review of the complaint,
described in Subsection A(2) of this section, and also notification that the respondent has the
right to attend that meeting, but not to participate except as requested by the Commission.
The Commission shall meet to hold a preliminary review of the complaint to determine
whether or not the allegations contained therein, if true, would constitute a violation of any
provision of the code. The commencement of the meeting for preliminary review of the
complaint shall be held within 15 business days after the correspondence to the complainant
and respondent described in Subsection A(1) of this section has been sent
If the Commission determines at its preliminary review that the allegations, if true, would
constitute a violation of any provision of this code, then the Commission shall fix a date for the
commencement of a probable cause hearing on the complaint. The probable cause hearing
will be scheduled not more than 10 nor fewer than five business days after the completion of
the preliminary review.
If the Commission determines that there is probable cause to believe that the allegations in
the complaint are true and that, if true, they constitute a violation of this code, then the
Commission shall fix a date for the commencement of a public hearing on the allegations not
more than 10 nor fewer than five business days after the finding of probable cause.
The Commission shall inform the complainant and the respondent of the result of the public
hearing by registered or certified mail not later than three business days after the termination
of the hearing. The notification shall include a summary of the Commission's reasons for
making such a finding.
The Commission shall have the authority to adjourn any of its proceedings for completion at a
later date.
Complaints initiated by Commission.
A complaint under this code may be initiated by the Commission itself, acting on its own
behalf. Before the issuance of such a complaint, the Commission may conduct an
investigation as described in § 32-6C. No complaint shall be issued by the Commission
without a finding that the allegations therein, if true, would constitute a violation of the code.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 21/167
(2)
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
Not later than five business days after the Commission's issuance of such complaint, the
Commission will provide a copy of the complaint by registered or certified mail to any
respondent against whom such complaint is filed, and shall also include notice of the
confidentiality provisions listed in § 32-6 of this code, including notice that the respondent has
the right to waive confidentiality by submitting a written request to the Commission. The
Commission shall then proceed to a meeting for preliminary review of the complaint as
described in § 32-5A(2) of this code, and the correspondence to the respondent shall include
notification of the date, time and place of the commencement of such meeting, which shall
take place within 15 business days after the correspondence is sent. The correspondence
shall also include notification that the respondent has the right to attend the meeting. Further
proceedings shall take place as described in Subsection A of this section.
Rights of Commission and respondent in investigations and hearings.
In the conduct of its investigation of an alleged violation of this code, the Commission shall
have the power to hold hearings, administer oaths, examine witnesses, receive oral and
documentary evidence, subpoena witnesses, and require the production for examination by
the Commission of any books and papers which the Commission deems relevant in any
matter under investigation or in question.
The respondent shall have the right to appear and to be represented by legal counsel and to
examine and cross-examine witnesses.
The Commission shall make no finding that there is a violation of any provision of this code except
upon the concurring vote of at least three of its members.
Any hearing conducted by the Commission shall be governed by the administrative rules of
evidence.
No complaint may be made under this code except within one year next after the violation alleged
in the complaint has been committed. No complaint may be made under this code for any
violations alleged to have occurred prior to the enactment of this code.
No person shall take or threaten to take official action against an individual for such individual's
disclosure of information to the Commission under the provisions of this code. After receipt of
information from an individual, the Commission shall not disclose the identity of such individual
without his or her consent unless the Commission determines that such disclosure is unavoidable
during the course of an investigation.
§ 32-6. Confidentiality of complaints and Commission
proceedings.
All proceedings prior to the Commission's finding of probable cause shall be confidential except
upon the written request of the respondent. If the Commission finds probable cause to believe that
the allegations in the complaint are true and that, if true, they would constitute a violation of this
code, the record of all proceedings in the matter shall be made public no later than five business
days after such finding of probable cause.
If the Commission makes no such finding of probable cause, the complaint and the record of its
investigation shall remain confidential, except upon the written request of the respondent. No
complainant, respondent, witness, designated party, or Commission or staff member shall disclose
to any third party any information learned from the investigation, including knowledge of the
existence of a complaint, which the disclosing party would not otherwise have known.
Prior to the filing of a complaint by the Commission on its own behalf, the Commission may
conduct a preliminary investigation to determine whether the filing of a complaint is warranted.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 22/167
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
This preliminary investigation shall be confidential except upon the written request of the
respondent. If the investigation is confidential, any allegations and any information supplied to or
received from the Commission shall not be disclosed during the investigation to any third party by
a complainant, respondent, witness, designated party, or Commission or staff member.
§ 32-7. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of any provision of this code shall constitute grounds for, and may be punished by:
Public censure and reprimand.
A civil penalty of not more than $100 per violation.
Restitution of any pecuniary benefits received because of the violation committed.
Removal from a municipal position of any individual who gained that position under circumstances
prohibited by this code.
§ 32-8. Hiring practices.
Hiring of relatives.
No municipal board, commission or other public body shall hire a relative of any member of
that board, that commission or that public body.
No public employee with the authority to hire other public employees shall hire a relative of
himself or herself or of any member of the municipal board, commission or other public body
by which he or she is employed.
Relatives with hiring authority.
No person shall accept a position of municipal employment if a relative has hiring authority
over that position, whether that relative is a public employee or public official.
Officials of municipal boards, commissions and bodies with hiring authority, and public
employees with hiring authority, shall require all applicants for municipal positions to sign a
statement that they do not have a relative with hiring authority over the position which the
applicant is seeking.
The provisions of Subsections A and B above shall not apply to the hiring or employment of
persons under 21 years of age for municipal positions that are temporary and/or seasonal in
nature.
No individual shall be appointed to a municipal board, commission or other body, including
appointment to fill a vacancy in an elective office, if that board, commission or other body employs
a relative of that individual.
Nothing in this code shall prevent an individual from seeking elective office because a relative is
an employee of the municipal board, commission or other body on which he or she is seeking a
seat.
§ 32-9. Conflicts of interest.
No public employee or public official shall engage in or participate in any business or transaction,
including outside employment with a private business, or have an interest, direct or indirect, which
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 23/167
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official responsibilities in the public interest
or which would tend to impair his or her independent judgment or action in the performance of his
or her official responsibilities.
Prohibited gifts.
No public employee or public official shall solicit or accept any gift from any person who to his
or her knowledge is interested in any pending matter within such individual's official
responsibility.
If a prohibited gift is offered to a public employee or public official, he or she must refuse it,
return it, pay the donor the full value of the gift, or donate it to a nonprofit organization,
provided he or she does not take the corresponding tax write-off. Alternatively, it may be
considered a gift to the municipality, provided it remains in the municipality's possession
permanently.
A public official or public employee must refrain from voting or taking action on any matter in which
he or she has an interest which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his or her
duties or employment in the public interest and of his or her responsibilities as prescribed by law.
Such public official or public employee has such an interest if he or she has reason to believe or
expect that his or her own self, spouse, dependent child, or a business with which he or she is
associated will derive a direct monetary gain or suffer a direct monetary loss, as the case may be,
by reason of his or her official activity. Any such public official or public employee does not have
an interest which is in substantial conflict with the discharge or his or her duties in the public
interest and of his or her responsibilities as prescribed by law if any benefit or detriment accrues to
himself or herself, his or her spouse, dependent child or to a business with which he or she, his or
her spouse or dependent child is associated as a member of a profession, occupation or group to
no greater extent than to any other member of such profession, occupation or group.
Representation of private interests.
Except for a public official who receives no compensation for his or her service to the
municipality other than per-diem payments and reimbursement of expenses, no public
employee or public official shall appear on behalf of private interests before any board,
agency, or committee of the municipality.
Except for a public official who receives no compensation for his or her service to the
municipality other than per-diem payments and reimbursement of expenses, no public
employee or public official shall represent private interests against the interest of the
municipality in any litigation to which the municipality is a party.
Nothing contained in this code shall prohibit or restrict a public employee or public official from
appearing before any board or commission of the municipality on his or her own behalf, or from
being a party in any action, proceeding or litigation brought by or against the public employee or
public official to which the municipality is a party.
No public employee or public official shall disclose confidential information concerning municipal
affairs, nor shall he or she use such information for the financial interests of himself or herself or
others.
No public employee or public official shall request or permit the use of municipal-owned vehicles,
equipment, facilities, materials or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such
are available to the public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such public
employee or public official in the conduct of official business.
No public employee or public official, or a relative or a business with which he or she is
associated, shall enter into a contract with the municipality unless it is awarded through a process
of public notice and competitive bidding.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 24/167
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
No public employee or public official may use his or her position or office for the financial benefit of
himself or herself, a business with which he or she is associated, an individual with whom he or
she is associated, or a relative.
No public employee or public official acting in his or her official capacity shall accept a fee or
honorarium for an article, appearance or speech, or for participation at an event.
No public employee or public official, or his or her relative or business with which he or she is
associated, shall solicit or accept anything of value, including, but not limited to, a gift, loan,
political contribution, reward or promise of future employment based on any understanding that
the vote, official action or judgment of the public employee or public official would be or had been
influenced thereby.
§ 32-10. Paid consultants.
No paid consultant of the municipality shall represent a private interest in any action or proceeding
against the interest of the municipality which is in conflict with the performance of his or her duties
as a consultant.
No paid consultant may represent anyone other than the municipality concerning any matter in
which he or she participated personally and substantially as a consultant to the municipality.
No paid consultant shall disclose confidential information learned while performing his or her
duties for the municipality nor shall he or she use such information for the financial interests of
himself or herself or others.
§ 32-11. Former employees and officials.
No former public employee or public official shall appear for compensation before any municipal
board or agency in which he or she was formerly employed at any time within a period of three
months after termination of his or her service with the municipality.
No former public employee or public official shall represent anyone other than the municipality
concerning any particular matter in which he or she participated personally and substantially while
in municipal service.
No former public employee or public official shall disclose or use confidential information acquired
in the course of and by reason of his or her official duties for financial gain for himself or herself or
others.
No former public employee or public official who participated substantially in the negotiation or
award of a municipal contract obliging the municipality to pay an amount of $100,000 or more, or
who supervised the negotiation or award of such a contract, shall accept employment with a party
to the contract other than the municipality for a period of one year after such contract is signed.
§ 32-12. Distribution of Code of Ethics.
The Town Clerk shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be distributed to every public employee
and public official within 30 business days after enactment of this code. Each public employee and
public official shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of his or her office or
employment. A signed receipt for all copies shall be returned to the Town Clerk and retained on file.
Chapter 37. Finances
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 25/167
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Orders to Town Treasurer
[Adopted 12-21-1878 STM]
§ 37-1. Itemization required.
The Selectmen of the Town of Putnam are hereby instructed to issue no orders on the Treasurer of
said Town except upon bills with items of days and hours of labor rendered and monies paid.
Article II. Reports
[Adopted 12-18-1882 STM]
§ 37-2. Deposit and school funds.
A written report of the agent of the Town deposit fund and local school fund shall be made and duly
recorded each year.
Article III. Payment of Bills
[Adopted 10-3-1932 ATM]
§ 37-3. Itemized bills required.
All bills rendered to the Town shall be itemized, shall bear the date when the same shall have been
incurred, and the name of the contracting authority, and upon approval by the Board of Selectman, by
the Board of Education or by other proper authority, as by statute is provided, shall be paid, provided
all bills rendered to the Town for payment of any sum to any member of the Board of Selectmen or to
any member of the Board of Education, except such as shall have been specifically voted by the Town
to said officer as a salary, shall be presented to the Board of Finance before the same shall be paid.
Chapter 41. Fire Districts
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 8-7-1958 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 41-1. Fire District No. 1 established.
The area within the boundary limits of the Town of Putnam, bounded on the west side by the
Quinebaug River, and the City of Putnam, on the north side by the Town of Thompson, on the east side
by the State of Rhode Island, and on the south by the Town of Killingly, shall be organized as a Fire
District for the purpose of preventing and extinguishing fires.
§ 41-2. West Putnam District established.
[Added 6-4-1980 STM]
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 26/167
[1]
A district is formed for the following services: fire, municipal garbage disposal, police, water and sewer,
and streetlights.
Chapter 45. Funds
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Interscholastic Sports Fund
[Adopted 7-22-1996 STM]
§ 45-1. Fund created; deposits.
There is created a special revenue fund to be known as the "Interscholastic Sports Fund." All gate
receipts and related athletic revenues shall be deposited into said fund, which shall be held by the
Town Treasurer.
§ 45-2. Expenditures.
The expenditure of any portion of said fund shall be as authorized by resolution of the Board of
Finance for any capital athletic expense as requested by the Board of Education of the Town of
Putnam. The resolutions, approved by the Board of Finance and the Board of Education, must be
identical in their verbiage.
§ 45-3. Term.
This fund shall constitute a continuing fund which shall not lapse at the conclusion of any fiscal year
but shall be carried forward from year to year.
Article II. Local Scholarship Fund
[Adopted 3-19-2001 STM]
§ 45-4. Authority; establishment; purpose.
Pursuant to the authorization contained in Public Act 00-222,[1] the Town of Putnam does hereby
establish a Local Scholarship Fund to provide financial assistance for post-secondary education for
residents of the municipality.
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 12-169a.
§ 45-5. Selection of scholarship recipients; designation of tax
receipts and other donations for fund.
The Putnam High School Scholarship Committee is hereby designated and authorized to select
annually the scholarship recipients. The Town of Putnam is hereby authorized to designate on its
municipal motor vehicle property tax bill a place to check off donation amounts to the Local
Scholarship Fund pursuant to Public Act 00-222, subject to the approval of the Office of Policy and
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 27/167
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
Management. The Town Treasurer is hereby authorized to deposit all monies collected as a result of
the check-off in the Scholarship Fund, and the Treasurer may accept additional donations from any
other source for the purpose of funding the Scholarship Fund.
§ 45-6. Annual number and amount of scholarships.
The Board of Selectmen shall, subject to the advice of the Town Treasurer as to available resources,
set the amount and number of scholarships to be awarded each year by March 1 and shall promptly
transmit the amount and number of scholarships available to the Putnam High School Scholarship
Committee, so that the scholarships can be awarded for the succeeding academic year. One or more
of such scholarships shall be awarded annually, subject to such particulars as the Board of Selectmen
by resolution may set, but in no event may the scholarship awarded exceed the existing funds
available as reported by the Town Treasurer. Should the Putnam High School Scholarship Committee
be unwilling or unavailable to make awards for this scholarship, the Board of Selectmen may, by
resolution, designate another appropriate Town board or committee to fulfill this duty, or create a new
committee to discharge the duties of the Scholarship Committee as set in the Public Act and this
article.
Article III. Economic Development Trust Fund
[Adopted 3-3-2014 STM]
§ 45-7. Establishment; conditions.
An Economic Development Investment Fund is hereby established and shall be governed by the
following conditions:
General conditions governing use of the Economic Development Trust Fund.
Said Trust shall be expended by the Town to enhance, encourage and promote economic
development in the Town of Putnam. Uses may include, but shall not be limited to: marketing
activities, infrastructure improvements in areas designated for development, contractual
services, materials, and supplies and equipment, including professional services needed for
development projects, and purchase of land for the development of industry and business in
Town.
Said Trust may use as its revenue source any of the following: donations from organizations,
associations, businesses, or private individuals; proceeds from business advertising; interest
income earned by the Trust; and contributions from other Town funds as may be authorized
by Town Meeting. The Economic Development Commission may elect to reject a donation
offered to the Trust if it determines said donation not be in the best interest of the Town.
The Trust shall be in the custody of the Finance Director of the Town of Putnam; and all or
any part of the moneys in said Trust may, from time to time, be invested in any securities in
which public funds may be invested. All income derived from such investments shall be paid
into the Trust and become a part thereof. The moneys so invested shall at all times be subject
to withdrawal from such investment for use as allowed.
Both principal and interest may be expended for the purposes specified in this article for said
Trust.
The trust fund will be allowed to increase up to the amount $750,000. Thereafter, any funds
under this article shall revert to the general fund of the Town unless specifically designated
otherwise by the source of the funds.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 28/167
(6)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
All disbursements from the Trust under $5,000 shall be authorized by the Economic
Development Commission. Any expenditures in excess of $5,000 shall be approved by the
Economic Development Commission and the Board of Finance. An annual report shall be
provided to the Board of Selectmen and Board of Finance following the close of the fiscal
year.
In furtherance of the objectives of this Trust, the Economic Development Commission and the
Director of Economic and Community Development are charged with the responsibility for
promoting the Trust in the community at large and preparation of a budget for use of the funds in
accordance with the purposes specified herein and subject to approval of the overall Commission
budget at Town Meeting. Expenditures in excess of $5,000 per item require approval by the Board
of Finance as herein provided.
Appropriations and expenditures.
Any municipal funds designated to the trust fund shall be subject to the normal appropriation
process.
Any expenditure of municipal funds in excess of the approved annual budget shall be subject
to the normal appropriation process.
No funds committed to the trust fund shall be expended without the approval of the Economic
Development Commission.
Chapter 53. Health, Department of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 5-2-1973 STM; amended in its entirety at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 53-1. Northeast District Department of Health.
The Town of Putnam agrees to join with any or all of the following towns to form a District Department
of Health, provided that the total population of the towns joining shall be 40,000 or more: Woodstock,
Thompson, Killingly, Canterbury, Sterling, Eastford, Brooklyn, and Pomfret. The District Department of
Health shall be known as the "Northeast District Department of Health."
Chapter 62. Human Resource Development Agency
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 10-1-1973 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 62-1. Findings.
On August 21, 1973, the First Selectmen of the municipality designated the Putnam-Thompson
Community Council, Inc., hereinafter referred to as the "agency," as the human resource development
agency for the municipality under C.G.S. § 17b-852. Such designation authorized the agency to carry
out and coordinate human resource development programs (and to develop and operate child daycare
centers) and to enter into contracts with and receive grants-in-aid from the Commissioner for
purposes of carrying out a human resource development program under C.G.S. § 17b-852 and child
day-care centers under C.G.S. § 8-210(b).
§ 62-2. Designation approved.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 29/167
A.
B.
[1]
A.
The designation of the agency by the First Selectman as the human resource development agency for
the municipality is hereby approved.
§ 62-3. Authority.
The agency is authorized to carry out and coordinate human resource development programs
(and to develop and operate child day-care centers) by or through contract with, or delegation to,
any nonprofit agency or any agency, department, board or commission of the municipality.
The agency is authorized to enter into contracts with and to receive grants-in-aid from the
Commissioner for the purposes of carrying out a human resource development program under
C.G.S. § 17b-252 [and for the purposes of developing and operating child day-care centers under
C.G.S. § 8-210(b)].
Chapter 75. Library
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 10-1-1894 ATM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 75-1. Library established.
The Town of Putnam hereby establishes a public library, which shall, under the proper regulations to be
adopted by the Directors, be free to all of the inhabitants of the Town.
§ 75-2. Directors.
The number of Directors of the public library shall be nine. Each Director shall serve a term of office of
three years.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 75-3. When effective.
These provisions shall take effect when the Putnam Library Association donates to the Town of
Putnam the books belonging to said library.
Chapter 88. Officers and Employees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Justices of the Peace
[Adopted 7-14-1964 STM]
§ 88-1. Findings.
Section 9-183a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, provides that the number of
Justices of the Peace for each town shall be equal to 1/3 the number of jurors to which such Town
is by law entitled.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 30/167
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
By law, the Town of Putnam is entitled to 96 jurors.
There is no need for the election of 32 Justices of the Peace in the Town of Putnam.
Section 9-183a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, provides that any town (by
ordinance) may provide for the election of a lesser number of Justices of the Peace for such town.
§ 88-2. Number of Justices.
[Amended 5-20-1996 STM]
The number of Justices of the Peace for the Town of Putnam shall be fixed at 24.
Article II. Collector of Sewerage System Connection and
Use Charges
[Adopted 12-10-1973 (C)]
§ 88-3. Designation.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-258 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Clerk of
the Water Pollution Control Facility of the City of Putnam is hereby designated as the collector of
sewerage system connection and use charges for the Putnam Sewer Authority.
§ 88-4. Collection procedure.
The Collector shall collect such sewerage system connection and use charges in accordance with the
provisions of the General Statutes of Connecticut for the collection of property taxes.
§ 88-5. Authority.
The Collector shall have the same powers and authority as tax collectors possess in accordance with
the provisions of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
Article III. Terms of Office of Registrars of Voters
[Adopted 1-12-1981 (C)]
§ 88-6. Four-year term established.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 9-189a of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
Registrars of Voters of the City of Putnam shall, at the next succeeding regular election of such
office and thereafter, be elected for a term of four years.
Such four-year term shall begin on the Wednesday following the first Monday of January
succeeding their election.
Article IV. Salaries of Elected Officials
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 31/167
[Adopted 7-11-1989 STM; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 88-7. Pay period.
All salaries of elected officials shall be paid on a current pay period basis. Pay periods for elected
officials shall be the current pay period applicable to other Town employees.
Article V. Health Care Coverage for Mayor
[Adopted 2-6-1990 STM]
§ 88-8. Level of coverage.
The Mayor shall be eligible to receive the same level of health insurance coverage as other Town of
Putnam employees.
Article VI. Workers Compensation
[Adopted 6-18-1990 STM]
§ 88-9. Findings.
Elected and appointed Town officials devote a great deal of time to Town business, and there is a
certain degree of exposure to potential accidents and/or injuries when such officials are on Town
business. The Connecticut Workers' Compensation Law permits municipal officials who are not paid to
be covered by workers' compensation insurance. CIRMA, the Town's workers' compensation insurance
carrier, can provide such coverage but only after the local legislative body has voted to authorize such
coverage.
§ 88-10. Extension of coverage.
The Town Meeting of the Town of Putnam authorizes workers' compensation coverage for unpaid
elected and appointed Town officials.
Article VII. Return of Municipal Property
[Adopted as §§ 144 and 145 (C)]
§ 88-11. Return required upon expiration or termination of
employment.
All officers and employees of the City, at the expiration of their several terms of office or employment,
unless otherwise provide for by the Charter and ordinances of the City, shall forthwith turn over to and
deposit with the City Clerk all records, books, papers, maps, plans, tools, apparatus, equipments, or
other property belonging to the City then in their possession and custody.
§ 88-12. Penalties for offenses.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 32/167
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Any person violating any of the provisions of § 88-11 of this article shall forfeit and pay a fine not
exceeding $100.
Article VIII. Town Historian
[Adopted 6-3-2002 STM]
§ 88-13. Purpose.
Pursuant to Public Act 87-278 of the State of Connecticut, a Town Historian shall be appointed for the
Town of Putnam to promote a knowledge, appreciation and dissemination of the Town of Putnam's
history.
§ 88-14. Qualifications.
The Town Historian shall be a legal resident and elector of the Town of Putnam.
The Town Historian shall be qualified by his knowledge of the Town of Putnam's history as well as
general state and American history by a knowledge of historical research and by good writing and
speaking skills.
§ 88-15. Term of office; method of appointment; vacancies.
The Putnam Historian shall be appointed to a term of four years with a term commencing July 1,
2002, and terminating June 30, 2006, or until a successor is duly appointed and qualified.
Appointment shall be by the Mayor of the Town of Putnam and confirmed by the Board of
Selectman, and there shall be no limit to the number of terms the Historian may serve.
A vacancy in the office of the Town of Putnam Historian shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor
and confirmed by the Board of Selectman for the unexpired portion of the term vacated.
§ 88-16. Duties and responsibilities.
The Town Historian shall:
Promote an awareness of and an appreciation for the Town of Putnam's history, through research,
writing, and public speaking; through publications projects, exhibits, displays, celebrations, and
commemorations; through the maintenance of plaques, markers and monuments; and through the
preparation of classroom aids, guides, workshops and training.
Advise the Town of Putnam government on historical objects, historical structures and sites,
historic districts, National Register properties and historic preservation.
Serve as a liaison among the Town of Putnam's museums, libraries and historical associations,
and with similar outside groups, to encourage historical coordination, cooperation and resource
sharing; maintain a reference library of historical information; serve as a central referral point for
inquiries for information.
As appropriate, supervise staff and programs of the municipality, maintain an office, expend funds,
and obtain contributions and grants to carry out these duties.
Chapter 94. Property, Naming of
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 33/167
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 6-7-1982 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 94-1. Dedication or naming at Town Meeting.
All municipal-owned buildings and/or parks shall be dedicated or named at a Town Meeting.
Chapter 97. Property, Sale of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 12-23-1946 STM; amended in its entirety at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
§ 97-1. Acceptance and disposal of property in lieu of taxes.
The Selectmen of the Town of Putnam are authorized to accept any conveyance of property in
payment of unpaid taxes due to the Town of Putnam and to sell and dispose of any such property in
any manner they may see fit.
Chapter 101. Purchasing and Contracts
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 32.
Finances — See Ch. 37.
Article I. Design-Build Contracts
[Adopted 3-18-2002 STM]
§ 101-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Design-Build Ordinance."
§ 101-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DESIGN-BUILD CONTRACT
A single contract with a design-build firm for the design and construction of a public construction
project.
DESIGN-BUILD FIRM
A partnership, corporation or other legal entity which engages in contracting through a certified or
registered general contractor, building contractor, architect, or engineer. The design-build firm is
responsible to the Town to deliver the project design, budget, schedule, and actual completed
construction. The design-build firm may subcontract with other firms or professionals for design,
budgeting, site development or construction.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 34/167
[1]
DESIGN CRITERIA PACKAGE
Performance-oriented specifications or drawings for a public construction project. The purpose of
the design criteria package is to furnish sufficient information so as to permit design-build firms to
prepare a bid or a response to request for proposal. Performance-based criteria for a public
construction project may include, but not be limited to, site dimensions, site development
requirements, provisions for utilities, conceptual or schematic drawings, interior space
requirements, parking requirements, material quality standards, a proposed design and
construction schedule, and any other requirements, terms or conditions as may be applicable to
the project.
DESIGN CRITERIA PROFESSIONAL
A professional registered to practice architecture, landscape architecture, or engineering.
§ 101-3. Issuance of design-build procurements.
Prior to the issuance of a design-build procurement, the design criteria package and cost estimate
shall be reviewed and approved by the Board of Selectmen. Thereafter, the approved design-build
procurement shall be exempt from the bidding requirements described in the Town's Policy for the
Purchase and Disposition of Goods, Services, Equipment, Supplies, and Property for the Town of
Putnam.[1] A legal advertisement describing the procurement shall be published once in a newspaper
circulated in the Town of Putnam at least 10 working days prior to the response deadline.
Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 101-4. Request for qualification process.
To procure a design-build contract, the Town may use either a one-stage bid process or a two-stage
request for qualifications and request for proposals process. If the Town elects to use the two-stage
process, it shall prequalify and select no fewer than three design-build firms as the most qualified
based on any combination of the qualifications of those who would work on the project, availability,
prior similar experience, and past performance on public and private projects, including that of the
partners or members, or financial stability.
§ 101-5. Solicitation and review of bids or proposals.
Design-build bids or proposals shall be solicited from design-build firms pursuant to a design criteria
package. Where a request for qualification process has been utilized, a request for proposals may be
exclusively directed to the proposers deemed prequalified without further legal advertisements.
Design-build contract responses shall be evaluated and selected based on price, value of the program
of improvements proposed, design-build firm qualifications and experience, and technical and design
aspects of the public construction project. The Town may pre-establish a cost reimbursement not-toexceed
guaranteed maximum price and base its selection upon the value of the program of
improvements proposed for the pre-established price. The design-build contract shall be negotiated
first with the proposer whose response is deemed by the awarding authority to be of the overall "best"
quality in providing the services desired, taking into account the criteria for evaluating responses,
requirements, terms and conditions contained in the procurement documents; all responses shall be
ranked in the order of their overall quality. The awarding authority's representative shall then negotiate
a contract with the firm offering the best response, at a compensation determined to be fair and
reasonable to the Town, considering the estimated value, the scope, the complexity and the nature of
the services to be rendered. Should a satisfactory contract not be able to be negotiated with such firm,
negotiations shall be formally terminated. The awarding authority's representative shall then undertake
negotiations with the firm offering the next best response and may proceed to the next firm in the order
of rank and in the same fashion, until a contract is negotiated at a fair and reasonable compensation to
the Town or until the procurement is cancelled without a contract award.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 35/167
A.
B.
C.
§ 101-6. Design criteria professional.
The Town shall employ a design criteria professional to prepare the design criteria package and shall
consult with that professional concerning the evaluation of responses submitted by design-build firms.
A design criteria professional who has been selected to prepare the design criteria package shall not
be eligible to render services under a design-build contract executed pursuant to the design criteria
package.
§ 101-7. Administration of design-build contracts.
If a design-build contract is utilized for a public construction project, the Town shall consult with a
design criteria professional:
In the review of detailed working drawing for the project;
In the resolution of disputes; and
In the evaluation of project construction for compliance with the project design criteria package.
§ 101-8. Contract requirements; payment.
Before entering into a contract, the design-build firm shall post a performance bond in such amount as
is reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the Town and to assure complete, proper, and
full performance of the contract; a 101% performance bond shall be required on all public works
construction projects costing $50,000 or more. The design-build firm shall also indemnify the Town
from all mechanic lien claims attributable to work subcontracted by the design-build firm. A designbuild
contract shall provide for a contract price set on a cost-reimbursement basis, with a guaranteed
maximum price. The cost of the work, as defined in the contract, will not exceed the guaranteed
maximum price, subject to adjustment for material changes required by the Town. The "cost of the
work" is defined to include design costs, labor costs, subcontract costs, cost of materials and
equipment incorporated in the construction, construction materials, equipment and temporary facilities,
and other related miscellaneous costs, such as building permits, testing and inspection fees. Progress
payments are to be made to the design-build firm on a monthly basis pursuant to applications for
payment. The design-build firm is required to submit the appropriate invoices, check vouchers and
other backup for costs to be reimbursed, and payment is to be made in accordance with a schedule of
values and an allocation of the guaranteed maximum price specified in the contract, less retainage
from progress payments. Final payment is due when a final application for payment, accompanied by a
final accounting of the cost of the work, written confirmation from all subcontractors indicating that full
payment has been received and all mechanic lien claims have been waived, and a final certificate for
payment, has been submitted by the design-build firm and approved by the design criteria
professional.
Article II. Purchasing
[Adopted 11-20-2006 STM; amended in its entirety 11-17-2014 STM]
§ 101-9. Authority and adoption.
The Town of Putnam bidding ordinance adopted May 20, 1970, was amended in Town Meeting on July
11, 1989, and as amended in its entirety at a Town Meeting of November 20, 2006, is further amended
and restated as follows.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 36/167
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 101-10. Purchase under $2,500.
Purchases for items with a value in excess of $100 and less than $2,500 must have documented
verbal quotes or written quotes, whenever possible, from at least three vendors. Items with a value of
$100 or less are exempt from this process.
§ 101-11. Purchases between $2,500 and $10,000.
Items costing between $2,500 and $10,000 shall require the department head to solicit at least three
quotes and to provide the three quotes together with the name and telephone number of each person
who supplied a quote to the Mayor for his approval. If the item is such that three quotes are
unobtainable, that fact shall be documented to the Mayor in writing, and the Mayor shall sign a written
waiver of the requirement of three quotes.
§ 101-12. Purchases in excess of $10,000.
Any item purchased by the Town of Putnam costing in excess of $10,000 shall be subject to a
formal bid procedure. All bids shall be in writing and shall be submitted in a sealed envelope to the
Mayor's office at a date and time specified in the invitation to bid. All such bids shall be published
at least once at least seven days before the due date in either a newspaper or other publication,
delivered generally to the residents of Putnam. All such bids shall be opened at the Selectmen's
meeting and formally awarded to the lowest responsible qualified bidder based upon:
Price;
Recommendation of the department head;
Compliance with bid requirements and specifications;
Ability of the vendor to provide services, if applicable; and
Vendors' references, if applicable.
The Town of Putnam reserves the right to waive any informality with any bid and if all the bids
exceed the amount in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen readily available for the specific
project, the Town reserves the right to enter into negotiation with the low bidder to modify the
specifications.
§ 101-13. Exceptions.
The following items shall be exempt from the bidding ordinance:
The purchase of any item certified by the department head as an emergency purchase and
countersigned by the Mayor. Any such waiver shall be immediately reported to the Board of
Selectmen and shall, in a formal report to the Board of Selectman, be made at the next
Selectmen's meeting indicating the nature of the emergency and the basis for the award;
All professional services; formal bidding procedures shall not be required for the award of
standard professional services such as architects, engineers, legal counsel, professional
consultants in the areas of personnel, insurance and the like, although the Town should use an
RFP process in appropriate circumstances; and
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 37/167
C.
D.
Any item covered by an existing state or regional bid such as those obtained by the State of
Connecticut or the Council of Governments. Any time an existing bid is used for a Town project,
the department head or other individual responsible for the specific project shall certify in writing to
the Board of Selectmen that he or she has reviewed other relevant options and in his or her
opinion the acceptance of the existing bid is in the best interest of the Town of Putnam.
Exemption by board or commission. Whereas, the Board of Education, the Putnam WPCA,
Putnam Housing Authority and the Putnam Redevelopment Agency have traditionally awarded
their own bids independently of' the Board of Selectmen, upon certification by the respective
agencies that they have the ability to implement this article internally and for reasons of efficiency
feel that their specific boards should award their respective bids, the Board of Selectmen shall
exempt such board or commission from the provisions of this article that require action by the
Board of Selectmen, and their respective agencies shall implement the article pursuant to their
own bylaws' rules of procedure.
§ 101-14. Annual bids.
The Town shall solicit bids on an annual basis for supplemental or additional equipment, and that bid
shall remain valid for the calendar year.
§ 101-15. Lump sum bids.
Any project costing in excess of $10,000 shall be bid as a lump sum unless the department head
certifies in writing to the Board of Selectmen that in excess of 50% of the labor cost of the project is
provided by Town forces.
§ 101-16. Additional provisions.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to adopt by resolution supplements and regulations
further implementing this article, but nothing contained in such resolution shall lower the standards
herein set forth.
Chapter 105. Records
[HISTORY: Adopted by Town of Putnam as § 146 (C). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 105-1. Records of streets, sewers, and public works.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to record and keep in such manner that they shall be or can be
easily examined all surveys and layouts of streets, sewers and public works, of which a manuscript,
survey or layout is adopted by the Common Council.
Chapter 109. Regional Cooperation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Regional Resource Recovery Authority
[Adopted 2-2-1987 STM]
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 38/167
§ 109-1. Name; powers and duties; statutory authority.
There is hereby created a regional resource recovery authority pursuant to Sections 7-273aa to 7-
273oo of the Connecticut General Statutes to be known as the "Northeastern Connecticut Regional
Resource Recovery Authority"; principal office address being P.O. Box 198, Brooklyn, CT 06234,
subject to the modifications and limitations set forth in this article. The Northeastern Connecticut
Regional Resource Recovery Authority shall have all the powers and duties of a municipal authority
and of a regional authority pursuant to Chapters 103b, 446d (formerly 361a) and 446e (formerly 351b)
of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 109-2. Initial membership.
The first members of the Authority are: the Town of Canterbury, Canterbury Town Hall, P.O. Box 26,
Canterbury, CT 06331, whose initial representative's term of office shall be one year; the Town of
Killingly, Killingly Town Hall, 127 Main Street, Danielson, CT 06239, whose initial representative's term
of office shall be two years; the Town of Plainfield, Plainfield Town Hall, 8 Community Avenue,
Plainfield, CT 06374, whose initial representative's term of office shall be three years; the Town of
Pomfret, Pomfret Town Office Building, R.F.D. #1, Pomfret Center, CT 06259, whose initial
representative's term of office shall be one year; the Town of Putnam, Putnam Town Hall, 126 Church
Street, Putnam, CT 06260, whose initial representative's term of office shall be two years; and the
Town of Thompson, Thompson Municipal Building, North Grosvenordale, CT 06255, whose initial
representative's term of office shall be three years. In the event that any of the above-named
municipalities do not adopt this article, the terms of office of the initial representatives as shown above
shall be redefined according to § 115-4 of this article for any of the above-named municipalities which
adopt this article.
§ 109-3. Appointment and removal of representatives.
Membership in the Authority shall consist of those municipalities that adopt this joint resolution as set
forth in § 115-7 of this article. The representative to the Authority from each member Town shall be
appointed by the Board of Selectmen of each municipality, except for the representative of the Town of
Killingly, who shall be appointed by the Town Council. The Board of Selectmen or Town Council of
each member Town shall be authorized to attend meetings and vote in the place of an absent
representative. Representatives shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed by the
Authority for necessary expenses incurred in conducting Authority business. Any representative may
be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the Board of Selectmen or Town Council of the
Town which appointed the representative.
§ 109-4. Number of representatives.
Each member municipality shall be entitled to one representative on the Authority and to one alternate,
who may vote only in the absence of the regular representative. Representatives and alternates shall
serve for three-year terms, except that the initial appointments shall be for one-, two- or three-year
terms based on alphabetical assignment of those municipalities comprising the Authority. Thereafter,
initial terms for representatives of new municipal members shall rotate among one, two and three
years in the order of adoption of the joint ordinance. All initial terms shall be deemed to begin on the
day the Authority is created.
§ 109-5. Voting and quorum.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 39/167
A.
The Northeastern Connecticut Regional Resources Recovery Authority shall operate with 100 voting
units, which shall be assigned to member municipalities in proportion to each municipality's share of
the total population of all members of the Authority as determined by the latest decennial federal
census of population. There shall be no fractional votes. Each municipality shall have a minimum of
one vote. The distribution of voting units among members shall be recomputed following each
decennial federal census and upon the withdrawal or termination of any member municipality or the
admission of a new member. Action by the Authority shall require the affirmative action of at least 60%
of the total voting units present and voting at a duly called meeting of the Authority at which a quorum
is present. The presence, at a meeting, of representatives from a majority of the member municipalities
shall be necessary for a quorum.
§ 109-6. Liabilities of member towns.
A member municipality shall not assume any liabilities or responsibilities of the Northeastern
Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority or created by the action of said Authority, or be
responsible for payment of any expenses of said Authority unless an appropriation for the
municipality's proportionate share of such expenses has been approved by the municipality or a
contract setting forth such liabilities and responsibilities for expenses has been approved by the
municipality.
§ 109-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect when it has been adopted by five or more towns in the Northeastern
Connecticut Planning Region.
§ 109-8. Withdrawal from Authority.
No municipality may withdraw its membership in the Authority without a vote of its legislative body to
withdraw from the Authority and giving at least six months' notice to each of the other participating
municipalities and to the Northeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority. Such
withdrawal of membership will not in any manner relieve the municipality of liabilities or responsibilities
assumed prior to withdrawal, including, without limitation, contracts and agreements to supply
municipal solid waste, to pay tipping fees or other charges, and to make landfill space available.
§ 109-9. Use of Town of Putnam dumping site.
Only the Towns of Putnam and Pomfret shall be allowed to use the Town of Putnam dumping site until
a solid waste recovery unit is built. Once the resource recovery unit is operating, any solid waste
disposal in Putnam will require Town Meeting approval. The incinerator will not be located in Putnam.
Article II. Regional Council of Governments
[Adopted 3-26-1987 STM, effective 4-21-1987]
§ 109-10. Findings.
A Joint Committee of the Northeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency and the
Northeastern Connecticut Town Administrators' Association has found that a strengthened
regional planning organization is needed to assist the 10 towns in the Northeastern Connecticut
Planning Region in dealing effectively with regional issues; and
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 40/167
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
The Joint Committee of the Northeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency and the
Northeastern Connecticut Town Administrators' Association has found that a Regional Council of
Governments will provide the most effective organization for:
Addressing pressing regional issues resulting from increased growth and development;
Functioning as an advocate of its member towns on matters relating to the state and federal
governments;
Coordinating the delivery of shared services to its member towns; and
The Northeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency and the Northeastern Connecticut Town
Administrators' Association have recommended that a Regional Council of Governments be
formed and that regional planning should be given equal importance with implementation by
assuring that equal status is given to the Council's Regional Planning Commission in the
preparation of the Council of Governments Annual Work Program and Budget.
§ 109-11. Participation by Town.
The Town of Putnam does hereby adopt Sections 4-124i through 4-124p of the Connecticut General
Statutes as amended, providing the formation of a Regional Council of Governments, and does hereby
join such Regional Council of Governments when and as such Council is duly established in
accordance with said statutes, upon the adoption of said statutes by not less than 60% of all
municipalities within the Northeastern Connecticut Planning Region as defined by the Secretary of the
Office of Policy and Management or his designee and upon certification by the Secretary of the Office
of Policy and Management or his designee that a Regional Council of Governments has been duly
established.
§ 109-12. Withdrawal of participation from planning agency.
When the Regional Council of Governments is duly established and the transition period called for in
Section 4-124-1c of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended has been completed, then the Town
does hereby rescind the ordinance adopted by the Town of Putnam and dated April 30, 1962, and any
amendments thereto that created the Town's participation in the Northeastern Connecticut Regional
Planning Agency.
Chapter 115. Regional Resource Recovery Authority
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of Putnam 2-2-1987. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 115-1. Name; statutory authority.
There is hereby created a regional resource recovery authority pursuant to Sections 7-273aa to 7-
273oo of the Connecticut General Statutes to be known as the Northeastern Connecticut Regional
Resource Recovery Authority, principal office address being P.O. Box 198, Brooklyn, CT 06234,
subject to the modifications and limitations set forth in this ordinance. The Northeastern Connecticut
Regional Resource Recovery Authority shall have all the powers and duties of a municipal authority
and of a regional authority pursuant to Chapters 103b, 446d (formerly 361a) and 446e (formerly 351b)
of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 115-2. Initial membership.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 41/167
The first members of the Authority are: the Town of Canterbury, Canterbury Town Hall, P.O. Box 26,
Canterbury, CT 06331, whose initial representative's term of office shall be one year; the Town of
Killingly, Killingly Town Hall, 127 Main Street, Danielson, CT 06239, whose initial representative's term
of office shall be two years; the Town of Plainfield, Plainfield Town Hall, 8 Community Avenue,
Plainfield, CT 06374, whose initial representative's term of office shall be three years; the Town of
Pomfret, Pomfret Town Office Building, R.F.D. #1, Pomfret Center, CT 06259, whose initial
representative's term of office shall be one year; the Town of Putnam, Putnam Town Hall, 126 Church
Street, Putnam, CT 06260, whose initial representative's term of office shall be two years; and the
Town of Thompson, Thompson Municipal Building, North Grosvenordale, CT 06255, whose initial
representative's term of office shall be three years. In the event that any of the above named
municipalities do not adopt this ordinance, the terms of office of the initial representatives as shown
above shall be redefined according to Section 3 of this ordinance for any of the above named
municipalities which adopt this ordinance.
§ 115-3. Appointment of representatives.
Membership in the Authority shall consist of those municipalities that adopt this Joint Resolution as set
forth in paragraph 6 of this resolution. The representative to the Authority from each member Town
shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen of each municipality, except for the representative of the
Town of Killingly which shall be appointed by the Town Council. The Board of Selectmen or Town
Council of each member Town shall be authorized to attend meetings and vote in the place of an
absent representative. Representatives shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed by
the Authority for necessary expenses incurred in conducting Authority business. Any representative
may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the Board of Selectmen or Town Council of
the Town which appointed the representative.
§ 115-4. Number of representatives.
Each member municipality shall be entitled to one representative on the Authority and to one alternate,
who may vote only in the absence of the regular representative. Representatives and alternates shall
serve for three-year terms, except that the initial appointments shall be for one, two or three-year terms
based on alphabetical assignment of those municipalities comprising the Authority. Thereafter, initial
terms for representatives of new municipal members shall rotate among one, two and three-years in
the order of adoption of the Joint Ordinance. All initial terms shall be deemed to begin on the day the
Authority is created.
§ 115-5. Voting and quorum.
The Northeastern Connecticut Regional Resources Recovery Authority shall operate with one hundred
voting units which shall be assigned to member municipalities in proportion to each municipality's
share of the total population of all members of the authority as determined by the latest decennial
federal census of population. There shall be no fractional votes. Each municipality shall have a
minimum of one vote. The distribution of voting units among members shall be recomputed following
each decennial federal census and upon the withdrawal or termination of any member municipality or
the admission of a new member. Action by the Authority shall require the affirmative action of at least
60% of the total voting units present and voting at a duly called meeting of the Authority at which a
quorum is present. The presence, at a meeting, of representatives from a majority of the member
municipalities shall be necessary for a quorum.
§ 115-6. Liabilities of member towns.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 42/167
A.
B.
A member municipality shall not assume any liabilities or responsibilities of the Northeastern
Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority or created by the action of said Authority, or be
responsible for payment of any expenses of said Authority unless an appropriation for the
Municipality's proportionate share of such expenses has been approved by the municipality or a
contract setting forth such liabilities and responsibilities for expenses has been approved by the
municipality.
§ 115-7. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect when it has been adopted by five or more towns in the Northeastern
Connecticut Planning Region.
§ 115-8. Withdrawal from authority.
No municipality may withdraw its membership in the Authority without a vote of its legislative body to
withdraw from the authority and giving at least six months notice to each of the other participating
municipalities and to the Northeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority. Such
withdrawal of membership will not in any manner relieve the municipality of liabilities or responsibilities
assumed prior to withdrawal, including, without limitation, contracts and agreements to supply
municipal solid waste, to pay tipping fees or other charges, and to make landfill space available.
§ 115-9. Use of Town of Putnam dumping site.
That only the Towns of Putnam and Pomfret be allowed to use the Town of Putnam dumping site until a
solid waste recovery unit is built. Once the resource recovery unit is operating, any solid waste
disposal in Putnam will require Town Meeting approval. The incinerator will not be located in Putnam.
Chapter 118. Rehabilitation Areas
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Main Street and Pomfret Street Rehabilitation Area
[Adopted 7-29-1985 STM]
§ 118-1. Findings.
Pursuant to Sections 12-65c through 12-65f of Chapter 203 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended, the legislative body of the Town of Putnam is authorized to designate any area within
the Town as a rehabilitation area for purposes of thereafter acting upon applications by owners of
real property within such area for a deferral of any increased assessment attributable to
rehabilitation or new construction taking place in such a designated area, and to also set forth
certain criteria for eligibility of such an area for consideration for such assessment increase
deferral relien.
It is desirable and in the public interest to so designate a specific area within the Town of Putnam
as a rehabilitation area for purposes of Sections 12-65c through 12-65f of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended, said area specifically being a certain parcel of land with all buildings and
improvements thereon standing located at the corner of Main Street and Pomfret Street in the
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 43/167
A.
B.
C.
Town of Putnam and known as the former "Montgomery Wards Building," and as hereinafter more
particularly set forth and described.
§ 118-2. Description of area.
The following real property, together with all buildings and improvements thereon standing, located at
the corner of Pomfret Street and Main Street in the Town of Putnam, County of Windham and State of
Connecticut, is hereby designated as a rehabilitation area as provided for, and in accordance with,
Sections 12-65c through 12-65f of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended: that certain tract or
parcel of land situated at the northwest corner of Main Street and Pomfret Street in the Town of
Putnam, County of Windham, and State of Connecticut, with the former Montgomery Ward building,
so-called, thereon standing, and bounded and described as follows:
Northerly by other land of Marion Dozodoy along a common with an adjoining building 98
feet, more or less;
Easterly by Main Street 54.50 feet, more or less;
Southerly by Pomfret Street, 119.64 feet; and
Westerly by Canal Street 50.00 feet, more or less.
§ 118-3. Criteria for eligibility.
In accordance with Section 12-65d of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the criteria for
the eligibility of said property for designation as a rehabilitation area, for purposes of Sections 12-65c
through 12-65f, is as follows:
Said property is presently in a serious state of disrepair as a result of an extensive period of
neglect and nonuse and, as such, may have an adverse effect upon the surrounding properties
and businesses located thereon.
The rehabilitation of said property shall require extensive physical and structural repairs and
improvements of the building located thereon, which repairs and improvements shall be in
conformity with the plan of development for the Town of Putnam and with all applicable local
zoning regulations.
All repairs and improvements which may take place on said premises shall also be in compliance
with all applicable local and state building codes and fire codes.
§ 118-4. Agreements.
Upon adoption of this article, the Board of Selectmen shall be empowered to hereafter consider and
act upon applications by the owner of said area above described, who shall present a plan for the
rehabilitation of said premises, and enter into an agreement with such owner deferring any increased
assessment of said premises attributable to any rehabilitation or new construction on said premises, in
accordance with Section 12-65e of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Article II. Putnam Rehabilitation Area
[Adopted 2-4-2002]
§ 118-5. Findings.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 44/167
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
Pursuant to Sections 12-65c through 12-65f of Chapter 203 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended; the legislative body of the Town of Putnam is authorized to designate areas within
the Town as rehabilitation areas eligible for deferrals in the increase of property tax assessments
resulting from investments in property rehabilitation in designated rehabilitation areas, and to also
set forth certain criteria for eligibility of such areas for assessment increase deferrals; and
It is desirable and in the public interest to adopt Rehabilitation Area Program guidelines to assure
the consistent application of program criteria and an equitable opportunity for any eligible property
owner to participate.
§ 118-6. Description of area.
The real properties shown at Exhibit A[1] as included within the Putnam Rehabilitation Area are hereby
designated as being in a rehabilitation area as provided for, and in accordance with, Sections 12-65c
through 12-65f of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, together with all structures or
facilities appurtenant thereto, located in the Town of Putnam, County of Windham and State of
Connecticut.
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Town offices.
§ 118-7. Criteria for eligibility.
In accordance with Section 12-65d of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the criteria for
the eligibility of said properties for inclusion in the Rehabilitation Area Program are as follows:
Said properties are presently deteriorating, substandard or detrimental to the safety, health,
welfare or general economic well-being of the community.
The rehabilitation of said properties requires significant physical and/or structural repairs and
improvements of the structures or facilities appurtenant thereto, which repairs and improvements
shall be in conformity with the plan of development for the Town of Putnam and with all applicable
local zoning regulations.
All repairs and improvements which may take place on said properties shall be in compliance with
all applicable local and state building codes and fire codes.
The value of the proposed property improvement, as determined by the Town's Building Official,
shall exceed $20,000.
§ 118-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GENERAL MAINTENANCE or MINOR REPAIRS
Physical and/or structural repairs and improvements not expected to increase the assessed value
of existing structures or facilities appurtenant thereto; general maintenance or minor repairs shall
not be eligible for a rehabilitation area agreement unless such repairs and improvements
represent less than 50% of the value of property improvements proposed in a rehabilitation plan.
IMPROVEMENT OR REPAIR OF A STRUCTURE OR FACILITIES APPURTENANT THERETO
Significant physical and/or structural repairs and improvements expected to increase the assessed
value of existing structures or facilities appurtenant thereto such as the replacement of roofs, the
improvement of exterior facades, including windows, doors and siding, the installation of exterior
fixtures, including fencing, signage, lighting and curbing for landscaped areas. "Improvement or
repair of a structure or facilities appurtenant thereto" shall not mean the construction of a new
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 45/167
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
structure unless such structure is determined by the Town's zoning and building officials to be an
addition to an existing structure or a comparably sized (within 50%) replacement of a structure of
the same use which has been demolished.
§ 118-9. Plans and agreements.
Upon adoption of this article, the Board of Selectmen shall be empowered to consider and act upon
individual applications by property owners who present rehabilitation plans to the Board of Selectmen,
and the Board of Selectmen may enter into rehabilitation area agreements with such owners deferring
any increased assessment attributable to the improvement or repair of a structure or facilities
appurtenant thereto, exclusive of general maintenance or minor repairs, in accordance with Section
12-65e of the Connecticut General Statutes and as hereafter described.
Rehabilitation plans shall be reviewed and recommended by the Town's zoning and building
officials prior to referral to the Board of Selectmen.
Agreements shall be contingent upon the continued use of the property for the purposes specified
in the agreement and shall be for a period not to exceed 11 years from the date of completion of
such rehabilitation, which shall be within seven years of the date of the agreement.
For the first year following completion of such rehabilitation, the full increased assessment
attributable to property improvements made after the date of agreement shall be deferred; the
below tax deferral schedule shall be incorporated into each agreement.
Incremental Amount to be Taxed for Indicated Property Improvement Values
Year $20,000 to $49,999 $50,000 to $99,999 $100,000 or Higher
1 0% 0% 0%
2 10% 10% 10%
3 20% 20% 20%
4 100% 30% 30%
5 40% 40%
6 50% 50%
7 100% 60%
8 70%
9 80%
10 90%
11 100%
In the event of a general revaluation in the year in which such rehabilitation is completed resulting
in any increase in the assessment on such property, only that portion of the increase resulting
from such rehabilitation shall be deferred.
In the event of a general revaluation in any year after the year in which such rehabilitation is
completed, such deferred assessment shall be increased or decreased in proportion to the
increase or decrease in the total assessment on such property as a result of such general
revaluation.
A continued deferral in the increase of an assessment shall cease upon the sale or transfer of the
property for any other purpose unless the Board of Selectmen shall have consented thereto.
An agreement may contain such other commitments by the property owner as may be negotiated
by the Town.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 46/167
A.
B.
Chapter 134. Town Government
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Clerk and Treasurer Insertions in Annual Report
[Adopted 1-12-1914 ATM]
§ 134-1. Votes passed at Town Meeting; statement of liabilities.
The Town Clerk shall have inserted in the annual reports of the Town the votes passed at the Town
Meetings; and the Treasurer shall have inserted a comparative statement for three years of the
liabilities of the Town.
Article II. Town Reports
[Adopted 10-4-1915 ATM]
§ 134-2. Preparation.
The Selectmen shall have the Town reports ready for distribution before the Annual Town Meetings.
§ 134-3. Availability of copies.
Copies of the Town reports shall be left at the Chamber of Commerce and at the Town Clerk's office in
the Town Building.
§ 134-4. Contents.
The Selectmen shall be authorized to include in each Annual Report all calls for meetings which
they have issued and all votes passed by said Town during the preceding fiscal year.
The Annual Report of the Town of Putnam for the year 1938 and each year thereafter shall be
made in more detail; the report shall be such as to show the expenditures of each department
detailed, giving the names of the recipients of funds and amount received by such recipients, with
the exception of the department for which the law prohibits the publishing of names and amounts,
if there be such a department. The expenditures of the Selectmen above and over their respective
salaries shall be detailed, giving the name of recipients, the nature of work performed and the
amount received for such work.
[Added 3-14-1938 STM]
Article III. Date of Annual Town Meeting
[Adopted 6-23-1988 STM]
§ 134-5. Date established.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 47/167
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
The Annual Town Meeting shall be held on the second Wednesday of May commencing with the May
1989 Annual Town Meeting.
Article IV. Budget Votes
[Adopted 7-12-1990 STM]
§ 134-6. Secret ballot required.
All votes of the Annual Town Meeting on the annual budget, including any proposed amendments
thereto, shall be by secret ballot.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 140. Adult Businesses
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 4-19-1999 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Massage parlors — See Ch. 230.
§ 140-1. Findings and purpose.
The Town Meeting of the Town of Putnam, Connecticut finds:
Should adult-oriented establishments locate in the Town of Putnam, they will require special
supervision from the Town's public safety agencies in order to protect and preserve the health,
safety and welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as well as the health, safety and welfare
of the Town's citizens.
Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and towns in the United States
indicate that:
Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such adult-oriented establishments,
especially those which provide closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms for the private
viewing of so-called "adult" motion pictures and/or videotapes and/or live entertainment; and
Such closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used by patrons, clients or
customers of such adult-oriented establishments for the purpose of engaging in certain sexual
acts; and
Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such establishments in order to
provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients or customers of such establishments within such
booths, cubicles and rooms; and
Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the entrances and/or exits of
such booths, cubicles, studios, and rooms which are closed while such booths, cubicles,
studios and rooms are in use encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios and
rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes or others, thereby promoting and
encouraging prostitution and the commission of sexual acts which cause blood, semen and
urine to be deposited on the floors and/or walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms,
which deposits could prove detrimental to the health and safety of other persons who may
come into contact with such deposits; and
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 48/167
(5)
C.
D.
E.
The reasonable regulation and supervision of such adult-oriented establishments tends to
discourage such sexual acts and prostitution, and thereby promotes the health, safety and
welfare of the patrons, clients and customers of such establishments.
The unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments, including, without limitation, those
specifically cited Subsection A hereof, would be detrimental to the general welfare, health and
safety of the citizens of Putnam.
The Constitution and the laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the Town powers, especially
police power, to enact reasonable legislation and measures to regulate and supervise adultoriented
establishments as hereinafter defined in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
It is not the intent of the Town Meeting, in enacting this chapter, to deny to any person rights to
speech protected by the United States and/or State Constitutions, nor is it the intent of the Town
Meeting to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books and/or other materials. Further, by
enacting this chapter, the Town Meeting does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult
to obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials protected by the United States and/or State
Constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that
distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit
such materials.
§ 140-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following meanings,
unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context:
ADULT BOOKSTORE
An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in books, films,
videocassettes, sexual aids, toys, novelties, or magazines and other periodicals which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below, and may, in conjunction
therewith, have facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment, as defined below, and
including adult-oriented films, movies or live entertainment, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
Any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any
type, which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance any actual or simulated
performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas,
removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling, or any other
personal services offered customers.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER
An enclosed building with a capacity of fewer than 50 persons regularly used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by
patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER
An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by
patrons therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 49/167
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
B.
Includes, without limitation, adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini-motionpicture
theaters and further means any premises to which the public, patrons or members are
invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose
of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or any premises wherein an entertainer provides adult
entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, when such adult entertainment is
held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. An adult-oriented
establishment further includes, without limitation, any adult entertainment studio or any premises
that are physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult
entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling
studio, or any other term of like import.
EMPLOYEE FOR THE PURPOSES OF ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT
Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services
directly related to the operation of an adult-oriented establishment.
ENTERTAINER FOR THE PURPOSES OF ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT
Any person who provides entertainment within an adult-oriented establishment as defined in this
section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not
entertainment is provided as an employee or an independent contractor.
INSPECTOR
An employee of the Town of Putnam's Building or Zoning Department, the Northeast District
Department of Health or within the Special Services District, the Police Department.
MINOR
Refers to a person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR
Any person, partnership or corporation operating, conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented
establishment.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
As used in these regulations, is not intended to include any medical publications or films or bona
fide education publication or films, nor does it include any art or photography publications which
devote at least 25% of the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisement dealing with
subjects of art or photography; nor does this definition apply to any news periodical which reports
or describes current events and which, from time to time, publishes photographs of nude or
seminude persons in connection with the dissemination of the news; nor does this definition apply
to publications or films which describe and report different cultures and which, from time to time,
publish or show photographs or depictions of nude or seminude persons when describing cultures
in which nudity or seminudity is indigenous to the population.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
Human genitals, pubic region;
Buttocks;
Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 50/167
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts.
TOWN MEETING
The Town Meeting of the Town of Putnam, Connecticut.
ZEO
The Town of Putnam Zoning Enforcement Officer.
§ 140-3. Operating and supervisions requirements.
No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow or permit any minor to
loiter in any part of such establishment, including parking lots immediately adjacent to such
establishment used by patrons of such adult-oriented establishment.
Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the Town on or after May 1, 1999, shall be
well-lighted at all times and be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion
of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, wherein adult entertainment is provided, shall be clearly
visible from the common areas of the premises. Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms or
stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes, or any other
obstruction whatsoever. It shall be unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls
within adult-oriented establishments for whatever purpose, but especially for the purpose of
providing for the secluded viewing of adult-oriented motion pictures, or other types of adultoriented
entertainment.
On or after May 1, 1999, the operator of each adult-oriented establishment shall be responsible for
and shall provide that any room or other area used for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented
motion pictures or other types of live adult entertainment shall be well-lighted and readily
accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to view in its entirety. The premises shall be
equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which
patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the
floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator and its agents to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the
authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent
failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or
omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the licensee's
premises, and any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether
the operator shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter.
All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by a Putnam
inspector.
§ 140-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which is found to have violated this chapter shall be
fined a definite sum not exceeding $100 for each such violation.
Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, and any violation continuing
for more than one hour of time shall be considered a separate offense for each hour of violation.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 51/167
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
Chapter 143. Advertising Materials
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 5-14-1962 (§§ 7 and 8) (C). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
§ 143-1. Restrictions on posting of notices.
No person shall post or in any manner affix any bill, placard or notice upon any fence, wall, tree, or
private building in the City, without the consent of the owner thereof, nor upon any building,
sidewalk, curbstone, fence or post belonging to said City or upon any telegraph, telephone, fire
alarm or electric light pole, without the consent of the Public Works Director, except that the
Highway Committee may, for such fee as it shall deem proper, authorize any person pursuing the
calling of a bill poster to erect and maintain within the limits of said City, at such points and in such
manner, and for such length of time as said Committee may prescribe, boards or posts upon
which to post bills and notices in the exercise of his calling.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Any person offending against any of the provisions of this section, and any person who shall tear
down, remove or deface any bill, placard, or notice posted in conformity with this section, shall pay
a fine of not more than $10 for each offense.
§ 143-2. Littering prohibited.
No person shall distribute, throw or drop, or cause to be distributed, thrown or dropped in any of
the streets or public places of said City, any posters, handbills, advertising cards or other
substance used for the purpose of advertising.
Every person violating any of the provisions of this section shall forfeit and pay a penalty of not
more than $25 for every such offense, and may be prosecuted before the City Police Court for
each and every violation of this section; and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding $25.
Chapter 151. Alarm Systems
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Fire Alarm Telegraph
[Adopted as §§ 40 through 46 (C)]
§ 151-1. Tampering prohibited.
No person shall wilfully destroy, deface, or in any manner injure the fire alarm telegraph, or any part
thereof in said City, or any of the appurtenances of the same, or shall wilfully interfere with, or do
anything to the same to prevent delay or timely use thereof. Any person offending against any
provision of this section shall pay a penalty of not less than $20 for every such offense.
§ 151-2. Restrictions on opening of alarm boxes.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 52/167
[1]
No person shall open any alarm box connected with the fire alarm telegraph, except by the authority of
and with the key furnished by the superintendent of the fire alarm telegraph. Every person offending
against any provision of this section shall forfeit and pay a penalty of $25 for every such offense.
§ 151-3. Keys.
Every person who shall have, or keep in his possession, without permission of the superintendent of
the fire alarm telegraph, any fire alarm telegraph key shall forfeit and pay a penalty of $5 for every such
offense.
§ 151-4. Posting of notices.
No person shall post or in any way affix any placard, bill or notice, either written or printed, upon any of
the fire alarm boxes in said City. Any person offending against any of the provisions of this section
shall forfeit and pay for each offense a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $25.
§ 151-5. Authority of superintendent.
The superintendent of the fire alarm telegraph shall at all times, and in all matters, act under, subject
to, and in accordance with the advice and instruction of the standing committee on fire department.
Chapter 154. Alcoholic Beverages
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Sunday Sales
[Adopted 6-29-1936 STM, as amended 10-28-1980 STM]
§ 154-1. Certain sales permitted.
In accordance with PA 80-181 of the Connecticut General Statutes,[1] hotels, restaurants, and clubs
shall be allowed to sell alcoholic liquors between 12:00 noon Sunday and 1:00 a.m. Monday.
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 30-91.
Article II. Sales for Off-Premises Consumption
[Adopted 5-12-1958 (C)]
§ 154-2. Restrictions.
No building or premises which, prior to the effective date of this article, is not the site or location of a
business where alcoholic beverage is sold at retail for consumption off the premises under a package
store permit, a package store beer permit, a grocery store beer permit, a druggist permit for beer
and/or liquor shall thereafter be used either in whole or in part for the sale of alcoholic beverages,
liquor, wine, beer or ale, under any of the aforesaid permits issued by the Liquor Control Commission
of the State of Connecticut. No new permit shall be used in any building or premises if entrance to
such building or premises shall be within a radius of 1,500 feet from any other entrance to any other
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 53/167
A.
[1]
B.
[1]
[2]
A.
B.
[3]
C.
building or premises which shall be used for the sale of the alcoholic beverages, liquor, wine, beer or
ale under any of the aforesaid permits.
§ 154-3. Location restrictions.
This article shall permit any permittee using any building or premises for the sale of said beverages
under said permits issued by the Liquor Control Commission of the State of Connecticut to move said
place of business to another building or premises within the radius of 1,500 feet as above described,
provided:
Said other building or premises is not more than a radius of 750 feet from the building or premises
formerly occupied by said permittee for said purposes; and
Said removal shall be in accordance with the Liquor Control Commission and the rules and
regulations of the Liquor Control Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. Ch. 545.
§ 154-4. Businesses ceasing operation.
If any buildings or premises within the radius of 1,500 feet above described and used for the sale of
alcoholic beverages under the aforesaid permits shall cease to be actually so used under any such
permit, such buildings or premises shall not again be used for the sale of alcoholic beverages under
permits described above unless application shall be made within 30 days of such cessation to the
State Liquor Control Commission for one of the permits described above for the sale of alcoholic
beverages in said buildings or premises.
§ 154-5. Applicability.
This article shall affect all buildings, premises, and permits now in use and buildings, premises and
permits used in the future as described above and authorized by the Liquor Control Commission.
§ 154-6. Alcoholic beverage defined.
The words "alcoholic beverages" include the four varieties of liquor defined as alcohol, spirits, wine,
beer, and every liquor, patented or not, containing said liquid as defined, although capable of being
consumed by a human being for beverage purposes as defined in Chapter 204, Part 1, Section
4222(5), of the Liquor Control Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 30-1.
§ 154-7. Classes of permits.
The classes of permits described in this article are as listed in Chapter 204, as amended by the Liquor
Control Act, Part IV, Section 4237G:[1]
Package store permit.[2]
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 30-20, Subsection (a).
Package store beer permit.
Grocery store beer permit.[3]
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 30-20, Subsection (b).
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 54/167
[4]
D.
E.
[1]
[1]
Druggist permit.[4]
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 30-36.
Druggist permit for beer only.
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. Ch. 545, Part IV.
Chapter 158. Amusement Centers and Devices
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 7-12-1982 (C). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Entertainment establishments — See Ch. 198.
Fees and charges — See Ch. 206, Art. V.
§ 158-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AMUSEMENT CENTER
A commercial place of business containing one or more automatic coin devices, the sole function
of which is to provide amusement and recreation to the general public.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE
Each machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, trade-token or slug, operates or may be
operated as a game or contest of skill or amusement of any kind or description, and which
contains no automatic payoff device for the return of money, or trade-tokens or slugs, or which
makes no provision whatever for the return of money to the player. A "mechanical amusement
device" is hereby further defined as any machine, apparatus, or contrivance which is used or
which may be used as a game of skill and amusement wherein or whereby the player initiates,
employs or directs any force generated by the machine. The term "mechanical amusement
device" shall not include any machine vending recorded music or a period of radio or television
entertainment in return for the insertion or deposit therein of a coin, or of trade-tokens or slugs.
§ 158-2. License required; fee; term.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate an amusement center or to install or
maintain in any place of business any such mechanical amusement device without having first
obtained a license therefor. Applications shall be made to the City Clerk. The fee for a license to
operate an amusement center or for any other business to install or maintain any mechanical
amusement device shall be as set forth in Chapter 206, Fees and Charges, Article V. The license
period shall be the same as the fiscal year of the City (July 1 through June 30).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 158-3. Issuance and display of license.
No license shall be issued except to a person of good character, approved by the Common Council.
Upon approval of the applicant and the payment of the license fee, the City Clerk shall issue a stamp
bearing a notation "City of Putnam license for fiscal year 20___ through 20___." Said license shall be
placed in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
§ 158-4. Amusement center hours of operation.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 55/167
Licensed amusement centers shall be allowed to operate only during the following hours: Sunday
through Thursday from 12:00 noon until 9:00 p.m. and Friday and Saturday from 12:00 noon until
11:00 p.m.
§ 158-5. Age limits.
No person under the age of 14 years shall be allowed or permitted to play, use or operate any device
licensed hereunder unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Children under the age of 16
shall not be allowed to operate said machines during school hours.
§ 158-6. Location of devices; gambling devices prohibited.
All such devices shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of any person or persons who may
frequent or be in any place of business where such devices are kept or used. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to authorize, permit, or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever.
Machines shall be placed to provide an unobstructed corridor at least 36 inches wide for entrance and
exit.
§ 158-7. Inspection.
The Chief of Police shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such
device or devices are operated or set up for operation, and inspect and investigate such devices at
regular intervals.
§ 158-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed the sum of $100.
§ 158-9. Revocation of license.
In addition to any penalty imposed, the Common Council may revoke such license for any violations of
this chapter or of any ordinance pertaining to the conduct of such business.
Chapter 162. Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Snakes
[Adopted 9-7-1995 STM]
§ 162-1. Authority and purpose.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-148(c)(7)(D)(i) and (ii) of the Connecticut
General Statutes and for the purpose of public safety, convenience and welfare, and for the prevention
of cruelty to animals.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 56/167
[1]
A.
§ 162-2. Carrying of uncaged snakes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or display any noncaged snake upon any public street,
sidewalk, park or other public place of the municipality, except for educational purposes when
approved by the Animal Control Officer for the Town.
§ 162-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, a "cage" shall be defined as a frame or place completely closed in on all
sides with wires, bars, or other material sufficient for the secure confinement of the snake.
§ 162-4. Penalties for offenses.
A first-time violation of this article shall result in a fine of $25. Subsequent violations shall each result in
a fine of $100.
Chapter 166. Bazaars and Raffles
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 4-16-2018 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.[1]]
Editor's Note: By referendum held on 12-29-1955, the Town voted in favor of allowing the operation of
bazaars and raffles, and the provisions of Special Act 409 of the 1955 Session of the General Assembly
were adopted. See C.G.S. §§ 7-170 through 7-186.
§ 166-1. Authorization.
Bazaars and raffles are permitted in the Town as authorized by Connecticut state statutes, including
without limitation C.G.S. § 7-170 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time. In
accordance with Public Act No. 17-231, effective January 1, 2018, the Town will be responsible for the
permitting and enforcement of all bazaars and raffles. In addition, the Town will be responsible for
receiving and monitoring the post-event reporting by the organization.
§ 166-2. Permits.
Bazaar and raffle permits may be issued to qualifying nonprofit organizations by the Mayor. Permit
application forms are available on the Town's website or at the Town Clerk's office. The permit
application, proof of nonprofit status and fees shall be submitted to the Town Clerk.
§ 166-3. Permit fees.
Bazaar and raffle permit applications shall be accompanied with the fee as outlined in the table
below:
Permit Class Permit Fee
1 $50
2 $20
3 $20 per day
4 $5
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 57/167
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Permit Class Permit Fee
5 $80
6 $100
7 $100
Payment shall be made payable to "Town of Putnam" and submitted with the permit application to
the Town Clerk.
§ 166-4. Bazaars.
Bazaar permits may be issued to qualifying nonprofit organizations wishing to run a bazaar in the
Town of Putnam. Bazaar permit application fees are on a per-day basis. Examples of bazaar
games are 50/50, tea cup, and blower ball games. If total prizes exceed $7,500, the Town shall
investigate the qualifications of the organization and verify the facts on the application.
After each bazaar has been permitted and completed, a verified statement to include gross
receipts, expenses, net profit and prizes awarded is to be filed with the Town Clerk of the Town of
Putnam by the organization at the end of the next succeeding month. There is no payment to the
Town in conjunction with the verified statement.
§ 166-5. Raffles.
Raffle permits are issued to qualifying nonprofit organizations wishing to run a raffle in the Town of
Putnam. There are various classes of raffle permits which are based on factors such as length of
time tickets will be sold and the aggregate value of prizes to be awarded. The application fees
differ for each raffle permit type. Examples of raffles are cash prizes, duck race, cow chip, frog
race, golf ball drop, etc. If total prizes exceed $7,500, the Town shall investigate the qualifications
of the organization and verify the facts on the application.
After each raffle has been permitted and completed, a verified statement to include gross receipts,
expenses, net profit and prizes awarded is to be filed with the Town Clerk of the Town of Putnam
by the organization at the end of the next succeeding month. There is no payment to the Town in
conjunction with the verified statement.
§ 166-6. Revocation of permits.
The Mayor shall have the authority to investigate potential violations of this chapter and the applicable
state statutes and, in his or her discretion, to protect the public welfare, may immediately suspend or
revoke any permit issued under this chapter and to order that the person holding such permit cease
and desist from the actions constituting any such violation. Any person aggrieved by such order shall
have the right to appeal such decision as provided by state statute. In the event the Mayor revokes a
permit issued pursuant to this section, no bazaar or raffle permit shall be issued to such permittee for a
period of one year after the date of such revocation.
§ 166-7. Penalties for offenses.
Failure of any organization to file the required permit application or verified statement shall be in
violation of this chapter. Any organization violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $200 nor more than $1,000.
Chapter 170. Bingo
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 58/167
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
A.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 9-5-1939 (C); amended in its entirety 4-16-2018 STM.
Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement centers and devices — See Ch. 158.
Entertainment establishments — See Ch. 198.
§ 170-1. Authorization.
Bingo shall be legal in the Town of Putnam in accordance with the Connecticut state statutes governing
such games, including without limitation C.G.S. §§ 7-169 et seq., as the same may be amended from
time to time. In accordance with Public Act No. 17-231, effective January 1, 2018, the Town will be
responsible for the permitting and enforcement of all bingo games. In addition, the Town will be
responsible for receiving and monitoring the post-event reporting by the organization.
§ 170-2. Registration process.
Bingo registrations may be issued to qualifying nonprofit organizations by the Mayor of the Town.
Registration forms are available on the Town's website or at the Town Clerk's office. The
registration form, proof of nonprofit status and fees shall be submitted to the Town Clerk. Qualified
entities may apply for any of the following bingo permits:
Weekly: annual permit.
Monthly: annual permit.
Temporary single event: only allowed two per year.
Senior organizations consisting of members 60 years and older: permit for each event.
Parent/teacher organizations: annual permit.
Individual operators are required to submit a PIN operator registration form with the Town Clerk
prior to operating a bingo. All PIN operator registrations previously approved by the State of
Connecticut remain in effect. Individual operators must provide state documentation to the Town
Clerk for recording.
§ 170-3. Permit fees.
Bingo registration forms shall be accompanied with the fee as outlined in the table below:
Registration Class Permit Fee
A $75
B $10 per day
C $50
Payment shall be made payable to "Town of Putnam" and submitted with the registration forms to the
Town Clerk.
§ 170-4. Financial returns.
For Class A and Class C permits, a financial return shall be filed with the Town by the organization
at the end of each quarter. Financial returns are due by the last day of the month following the
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 59/167
B.
A.
B.
close of the quarter (i.e. April 30, July 31, October 31, January 31). Financial returns must include
payment of the 5% of the net profit for each bingo event. Payment shall be made payable to the
Town of Putnam. Financial returns must be submitted to the Revenue Office on or before the due
date.
For Class B permits, a financial return shall be filed with the Town by the organization at the
completion of the bingo event. The financial return must be submitted within 10 days, provide the
pertinent event information including the gross receipts, prizes awarded and net profit. Financial
returns must include payment of 5% of the net profit for the bingo event. Payment shall be made
payable to the Town of Putnam. Financial returns must be submitted to the Revenue Office on or
before the due date.
§ 170-5. Revocation of permits.
The Mayor shall have the authority to investigate potential violations of this chapter and the applicable
state statutes and, in his or her discretion, to protect the public welfare, may immediately suspend or
revoke any permit issued under this chapter and to order that the person holding such permit cease
and desist from the actions constituting any such violation. Any person aggrieved by such order shall
have the right to appeal such decision as provided by state statute. In the event the Mayor revokes a
permit issued pursuant to this section, no bingo permit shall be issued to such permittee for a period of
one year after the date of such revocation.
§ 170-6. Penalties for offenses.
Failure of any organization to file the required permit application, PIN registration or financial return
shall be in violation of this chapter. Any organization violating any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 and revocation of permit or PIN.
Chapter 172. Blighted Properties
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 4-15-2013 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Community Development Action Plan Agency — See Ch. 20.
Rehabilitation areas — See Ch. 118.
§ 172-1. Declaration of policy.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Municipal Powers Act of the Connecticut General Statutes
and general police powers, including those set forth in C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7), and the Town Charter.
This chapter is intended to be enforced as a blight ordinance, pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H),
and, because the Town has determined that blight is a significant nuisance to the Town, as a
nuisance ordinance, pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(E).
It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the Town of Putnam a number of blighted
properties and that continued existence of blighted properties constitutes a continuing nuisance
and contributes to the decline of neighborhoods and results in a deleterious effect upon
residential, commercial and industrial properties. Further, it is found that the existence of blight
adversely affects the economic well-being of the Town and is inimical to the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Town of Putnam. Moreover, many of the blighted properties may be
rehabilitated, reconstructed, demolished, cleaned up, groomed, maintained, returned to
satisfactory condition or reused to provide decent, safe, sanitary housing or commercial facilities.
Such rehabilitation, reconstruction, demolition, cleanup or reuse of the most-egregious examples
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 60/167
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
of blighted and nuisance properties would eliminate, remedy and prevent the adverse conditions
described.
§ 172-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
BLIGHTED PROPERTY
Any building, structure or parcel of land, including single-family or multifamily residential,
commercial or industrial, whether occupied or vacant, in which at least one of the following
conditions exists:
It does not comply with any municipal, state or federal law, regulation or code provision,
specifically including, where applicable, the regulations of the Putnam Special Services
District regarding occupancy, care, maintenance and upkeep, including:
The Town Planning and Zoning Regulations, as may be amended from time to time.
The State Building Code, as it may be amended from time to time.
The State Health Code, as it may be amended from time to time.
The Life Safety Code and the Fire Safety Code, as they may be amended from time to
time.
The District Department of Health for the Northeast District Regulations, as may be
amended from time to time.
It has been the site of documented illegal activities as referenced by a complaint to or report
from the Putnam Special Services District Police Department or the State Police for the State
of Connecticut, which activities resulted in one or more convictions.
The condition of the building, structure or parcel of land constitutes an unsafe structure and
poses a serious or immediate danger to the safety, health or general welfare of the
community as certified by the Building Official or Fire Marshal.
It is not being adequately maintained, as determined by the following factors: missing or
boarded windows or doors; collapsing or missing walls, roof or floors; seriously damaged or
missing siding or the building is otherwise dilapidated; a structurally faulty foundation; physical
hazards; rodent harborage and infestation; improper storage of garbage, trash, rubbish,
grocery carts, tires, or hubcaps; or a violation of the Town of Putnam ordinances, or, morespecifically,
Putnam's Abandoned Motor Vehicle Ordinance; or a structure which has suffered
damage due to fire, natural disaster or otherwise, which damage would require substantial
repair, if such substantial repair is not commenced within 60 days of the incident causing the
damages or if such repairs, once commenced, are substantially abandoned for a continuous
period of 30 days.
It is adjacent to a sidewalk, which the property's owner, agent, tenant or responsible person is
responsible to maintain in a safe condition for the use of the public, or if the sidewalk is in
violation of any ordinance in the Town of Putnam or the Putnam Special Services District
regarding maintenance of sidewalks and/or removal of ice and snow from sidewalks, and its
sidewalk is in any way obstructed by or littered with any substance, including trees, bushes,
overgrowth, leaves, gravel, dirt, rubbish, garbage, bulky waste or trash, which would in any
way impede or imperil public travel upon said sidewalk or render it unsafe or unsightly.
It attracts or harbors vectors, rodents, insects, vermin and disease-carrying animals.
It is dilapidated: any building or structure or part thereof that would not qualify for occupancy
or which is an unsafe structure, and any dwelling unit or units which is (are) unfit or unsafe for
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 61/167
H.
I.
J.
A.
human habitation or is (are) unsafe for persons walking around it (them) or nearby it (them).
It is a property occupied by a structure intended for human occupancy in which grass, weeds
or brush is allowed to reach and maintain a height of 18 inches or greater and which situation
continues for 20 days or longer. Property maintained in its natural state, gardens, ornamental
plantings and property subject to conservation easement shall be exempt from this provision.
It is a property occupied by a structure intended for human occupancy which contains two or
more dead, decayed, diseased or damaged trees which constitute a hazard or danger to
adjacent premises, the occupants of the subject premises or adjoining public property,
including sidewalks and roadways.
It is a property occupied by a structure intended for human occupancy, either the building or
grounds of which create a substantial and unreasonable interference with the use and
enjoyment of other premises within the surrounding area, as documented by neighborhood
complaints, police reports or reports from appropriate municipal or other governmental
officials.
CITATION HEARING OFFICER
The Mayor of Putnam shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers, other than police officers
or employees or persons who issue citations, to conduct hearings authorized by C.G.S. § 7-152c.
The Town shall institute a citation hearing procedure pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-152c and act in
accordance with the procedures set forth therein.
CIVIL PENALTY
The Town may assess a civil penalty for violations of this chapter, with such penalties as
hereinafter set forth pursuant to the provisions of § 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended by § 12-146, and such civil penalties shall be subject to the citation hearing procedure
as set forth in this chapter.
DESIGNATED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Any police officer of the Putnam Special Services District or any State Police officer exercising his
jurisdiction outside the Putnam Special Services District and within the Town of Putnam. The
Building Official of the Town of Putnam and his or her assistant, the Zoning Enforcement Officer of
the Town of Putnam and his or her assistant, and the Fire Marshal of the Town of Putnam and his
or her deputy. Further, when special circumstances require, the Mayor may formally designate an
enforcement officer to enforce specific sections of this code as required.
EXEMPT PROPERTY
Any building or structure undergoing remodeling being diligently conducted and pursued under an
active building permit would only be exempt during such remodeling period.
§ 172-3. Creation or maintenance of a blighted property
prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation, no owner, agent, tenant, operator, or possessor of real property, and no
other person responsible for the care, maintenance and/or condition of real property shall cause or
allow any blighted property, as defined in § 172-2, to be created, maintained or continued.
§ 172-4. Enforcement.
The Town of Putnam, acting directly or by or through its designated enforcement officer or officers,
may enforce this chapter according to law by civil action or in such manner is authorized by Town
Charter, ordinance and state statutes, provisions of the State of Connecticut Building Code, the
Life Safety Code and the Fire Code. In addition to any other remedy, such officer may serve
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 62/167
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
written notice to an owner, agent, tenant or other person responsible for any violation and may
order the correction and cessation of such violation, which shall constitute an order to abate. The
notice may be hand-delivered or mailed to the last-known address of the owner, operator or any of
the persons identified in § 172-3. If the notice is mailed only to one of the responsible parties, it
shall in no way be or be construed to be a release of any other responsible party nor evidence that
any other party is responsible. If there is more than one responsible party identified in the order,
the responsibility for complying with the order shall be joint and several. Notwithstanding anything
to the contrary, the notice shall state the violation(s) of this chapter, and, when necessary for the
health and safety of Town residents, the enforcement officer may require abatement within 24
hours from the time of notification or immediately as may be necessary. Said notice may be
enforced by way of civil action. In any proceedings brought pursuant to Connecticut General
Statutes § 7-148(c), the owner and occupant of the property shall be given written notice of any
violation and provided a reasonable opportunity for the owner and occupant to remediate the
blighted conditions prior to any enforcement action being taken.
If the owner, agent, tenant or responsible person fails to correct the violations or fails to provide
notice to the Town of his or her intent to correct the violations set forth in the order to abate within
a reasonable period of time, and if any violation continues unabated after 20 days from the date
such order to abate is served, or if the owner fails to correct the violations as set forth in his or her
notice to the Town, the Town may issue an enforcement citation as specified in this chapter.
If the owner, agent, tenant or responsible person fails to correct the violations, the Town may take
any action necessary to abate the nuisance at any time after the initial seventy-two-hour notice at
the expense of the owners and send an invoice for the Town's costs of such abatement to the
owner of the property. The expense incurred by the Town to abate the violation, together with a
reasonable administrative fee that relates to the abatement, the amount as set forth in such
invoice, shall become a lien upon the land if such invoice remains unpaid for a period of over six
months, and said officer shall file upon the land records a notice of the lien, which shall state the
address of the property, the name of the record owner, and the amount of the lien. Said lien may
be foreclosed and enforced in the same manner as an emergency lien or other municipal lien.
If the Town is proceeding pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c), any person who is a new owner or a new
occupant shall, upon request, be granted a thirty-day extension of the notice and an opportunity to
remediate provided pursuant to Subsection A of this section. For the purpose of this section, "new
owner" means any person or entity who has taken title to a property within 30 days of the notice,
and "new occupant" means any person who has taken occupancy of a property within 30 days of
the notice.
If the Town is pursuing a remedy pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c), Subparagraph (H)(xv) of
Subdivision (7), an unpaid penalty imposed by the municipality pursuant to said sections shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate against which the penalty was imposed from the date of such
penalty. Each such lien may be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by the
General Statutes for continuing, recording and releasing of property tax liens. Each such lien shall
take precedence over all other liens filed after July 1, 1997, and encumbrances except taxes and
may be enforced in the same manner as property tax liens.
§ 172-5. Hearing procedure for citations.
The Town of Putnam shall adopt hearing procedures for enforcement citations in compliance with the
requirements of C.G.S. § 7-152c as follows:
Hearing officers. The Mayor shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers, and the terms are
going to run from the date of appointment and shall terminate on the first Tuesday in December of
even-numbered years. No person who serves as a police officer or employee or person who
issues citations shall serve as a citation hearing officer. No appeal of a citation shall stay any
administrative or judicial proceedings upon the violation or upon a notice.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 63/167
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
C.
Notice of citation. The municipality, acting by the Mayor or the Mayor's designee, shall, at any time
within 60 days from the expiration of the final period for uncontested payment of a fine, penalty,
cost or fee for any citation issued under any ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of
C.G.S. § 7-148 or § 22a-226d or other relevant statute or ordinance for an alleged violation
thereof, send notice to the persons therein cited. Such notice shall contain at a minimum the
following information:
The allegations against the person so cited, together with the amount of the fines, penalties,
costs, or fees due.
The fact that the person may contest his or her liability before a citation hearing officer by
delivery in person or by mail of a written notice within 10 days from the date of the herein
specified notice.
That if a hearing is not demanded, an assessment and judgment shall be entered as of
course.
Any such judgment may issue without further notice to the individual.
Payment of such fine, penalties and costs shall be made to the office of the Mayor, or the
Mayor's designee, in person or by mail. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any
proceedings, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making
the payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within 10
days of the date of the initial notice as provided herein shall be deemed to have admitted
liability, and the designated municipal official shall certify such person's failure to respond to
the citation hearing officer. The citation hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the
fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by the applicable ordinances and shall follow the
procedures set forth herein and in § 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Any person who requests a hearing within the time specified in this chapter will be given
written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing, which shall be held not less than 15
nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of the notice, subject to reasonable
requests for good cause shown for continuance or postponement by an interested party. The
original or a certified copy of the initial notice of violation shall be filed and retained by the
municipality and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of § 52-180 of the
Connecticut General Statutes and evidence of the facts contained therein. The accused shall
have the right to request the issuing official or police officer be present at the hearing, and
such individual shall in fact be present at the hearing if so requested. At such hearing, the
accused may appear and present evidence on his or her own behalf, and the designated
municipal official other than the citation hearing officer may present evidence on behalf of the
issuing official or the municipality. Any person who fails to appear may be defaulted and an
assessment by default entered against him or her upon a finding of proper notice and liability
under applicable statutes or ordinances. The hearing shall be conducted as set forth in § 7-
152c of the Connecticut General Statutes, and the citation hearing officer shall announce his
or her decision at the termination of the hearing.
Notice of assessment. If the assessment is not paid as of the date of its entry, the citation hearing
officer shall send by first-class mail a notice of the assessment to the person found liable and shall
file not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the
notice of the assessment with the Clerk of the Superior Court facility designated by the Chief Court
Administrator within the boundaries of the judicial district in which the municipality is located,
together with an entry fee of $8. A certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a
record of assessment, and the Clerk of the Superior Court shall enter judgment in the amount of
such record of assessment and court costs of $8 against such person in favor of the municipality.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Connecticut General Statutes, the citation hearing
officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the affect of a civil money
judgment, and a levy of execution on such judgment may be made without further notice to such
person.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 64/167
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
Appeal. There shall exist a right of appeal in favor of any person against whom an assessment
has been entered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. An appeal shall be instituted within 30
days of the mailing notice of such assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together
with an entry fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to § 52-259
of the Connecticut General Statutes in the Superior Court for the geographical area in which such
municipality is located, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of
the Judges of the Superior Court.
Violations; penalties. The following ordinances shall be enforceable by citation pursuant to the
provisions of § 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes, in addition to any other penalties
contained in the respective ordinances and the respective amounts specified as fine or penalty.
The ordinances to which these procedures shall apply are as follows:
The Town of Putnam Anti-Blight Ordinance.
The Town of Putnam Sidewalk Ordinance Governing Snow Removal and Sidewalk
Maintenance.
The Town of Putnam Property Identification Ordinance.
§ 172-6. Municipal abatement.
If any action is brought to enforce this chapter or to enforce any violation hereof, including the failure to
pay a fine or penalty, the Town may recover its costs, any and all fines provided for herein, equitable
and legal relief, along with any reasonable attorneys' fees and its witness fees, and such other relief as
permitted by law.
§ 172-7. Recording of lien.
In addition to having a lien for abatement expenses, any unpaid fines or costs of abatement shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate in accordance with C.G.S. § 7-148aa, and each such lien shall be
continued, recorded and released as provided for therein.
§ 172-8. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter is a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter and the General Statutes. This
chapter is intended to provide additional enforcement officers to the appropriate municipal officials of
the Town of Putnam, and provisions of this chapter shall be considered in addition to and not in
derogation or restriction of any other power available to any municipal official of the Town. The penalty
for any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be $25 per day, and each day that the violation
continues shall be considered a separate violation with a separate penalty.
Chapter 175. Building Construction
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 187.
Building permit fees — See Ch. 206, Art. II.
Street numbering — See Ch. 269.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 65/167
[1]
[1]
[1]
[2]
Article I. Building Permits
[Adopted 4-23-1956 STM]
§ 175-1. Permit required.
No person shall construct or alter any building or structure, or portion thereof, within the Town of
Putnam until a building permit has been duly issued therefor.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-2. Applications.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the Board of Selectmen in writing on forms furnished by
the Town.
§ 175-3. Issuance of permit.
The Board of Selectmen shall issue a building permit upon proper application, provided they find
proposed construction or alteration would not be in violation of any lawful zoning or building regulation
of the Town. Such a building permit shall become void unless operations are commenced within six
months from date of issuance.
§ 175-4. Record of permits issued.
On or before October 1 of each year, the Board of Selectmen shall file with the Town Board of Tax
Assessors a record of all building permits issued by them within the previous 12 months.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating § 175-1 of this article shall be fined not less than $200 nor more than $1,000, or
be subject to six months' imprisonment, or both, for each building or structure or part thereof so
constructed or altered, in addition to the relief granted under Section 388d of the 1955 Supplement of
the Connecticut General Statutes.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 8-27.
Article II. Lots Abutting Unaccepted Streets
[Adopted 7-11-1989 STM]
§ 175-6. Building in approved subdivisions.
No building permit shall be issued for the erection of buildings or structures on lots abutting
unaccepted Town highways or streets except insofar as said proposed structures are located in a
subdivision approved by the Putnam Planning Commission, and which subdivision is currently bonded
or the completion of which has been guaranteed by proper security accepted and approved by the
Putnam Planning Commission. This article shall not prevent the construction of farm or accessory
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 66/167
buildings which are not in violation of any lawful zoning or building regulation of the municipality, and
any building erected in violation of this article shall be deemed to be an unlawful structure, and the
municipality, through the appropriate office, may bring action to enjoin erection of such structure or
cause it to be vacated or removed.
§ 175-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of this article may be fined not more than $200 for
each building or structure so erected, in addition to the relief herein otherwise granted to the
municipality.
§ 175-8. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to Section 8-27 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
Chapter 187. Driveways
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 3-19-1980 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 175.
Excavations — See Ch. 202.
Fees and charges — See Ch. 206.
Street numbering — See Ch. 269.
§ 187-1. Permit required; considerations.
No person, firm or corporation shall construct a new driveway or relocate an existing driveway leading
onto a Town road without first obtaining a written permit from the Building Official of the Town of
Putnam. In determining the advisability of issuing such permit, the Building Official shall include in his
consideration the location of the driveway with respect to its effect on highway drainage, highway
safety, the width and character of the highway affected, the density of traffic thereon, and the character
of such traffic.
§ 187-2. Liability for costs.
The person to whom such permit is issued shall comply with the provisions and restrictions contained
therein at his own expense.
§ 187-3. Violations.
Failure of any person constructing or locating such new driveway to first obtain such a permit shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. Each day such driveway is permitted or suffered to remain shall
constitute a separate violation. In addition, the Building Official shall have the right of injunctive relief
against such violators.
§ 187-4. Penalties for offenses.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 67/167
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than
$25.
§ 187-5. Appeals.
Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the Building Official shall have the right of appeal to
the Board of Selectmen.
§ 187-6. Standards for issuance of permits.
The Selectmen are hereby authorized to adopt reasonable standards for the issuance of said permits,
which regulations shall be placed on file in the Town Clerk's office.
Chapter 193. Emergency Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam) 3-3-1942 (C). Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Blackouts
§ 193-1. Purpose; compliance with authorities required; warning
signals.
In order to further national defense and safeguard and protect life and property within the City of
Putnam in case of enemy air raids or attacks or threatened air raids or attacks or for the purpose of
trial blackouts or other trials or tests to prepare to meet such air raids or attacks, all persons within the
City are required to comply with the rules, regulations and orders pertaining thereto by the Army, Navy
or State Defense Council, or by any person or organization acting by lawful authority of them or any of
them; provided, however, that warnings of the beginning and termination of the period of any such
eventuality shall be given throughout the City by audible signals.
§ 193-2. Emergency authorities.
All police and firemen and all members of the auxiliary police and fire forces of the City are hereby
authorized and directed to enforce blackout plans and defense measures and the rules, regulations
and orders pertaining thereto during such periods and summarily to compel compliance therewith. In
cases of immediate threat of enemy action, they may abate conditions dangerous to the public safety.
§ 193-3. Authority of Mayor.
The Mayor is authorized to establish, promulgate and enforce such local rules, regulations and orders
with respect to such periods not inconsistent with the rules, regulations and orders referred to in § 193-
1 hereof, as he shall deem necessary or appropriate to effect the spirit and intent of this chapter.
§ 193-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or, during any period of blackout and
defense, any of the rules, regulations and orders pertaining thereto or who shall fail or refuse during
any such period to comply with any instructions lawfully given by any police or fireman or any member
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 68/167
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
of the auxiliary police or fire forces of the City, or who shall obstruct or interfere with any such officer in
the performance of his duties shall be fined not exceeding $100 or imprisoned not more than two
months, or both.
Article II. Air Raids
§ 193-5. Warning signal.
The public warning signal of air raids shall be a series of short, intermittent blasts of horns or sirens or
both for a duration of six minutes; the "all clear" signal shall be two short strokes similar to the "all out"
fire alarm signal of the Putnam Fire Department.
§ 193-6. Authorization to issue signal.
Such public signals shall be sounded by all persons having custody of said horns (sirens) upon
instructions from the Chief Air Raid Warden or his deputy.
The Chief Air Raid Warden or his deputy shall issue the instructions for the sounding of the public
air raid signals only upon orders from the Army or Navy received either directly from Army or Navy
headquarters or received through the District Warning Center of the official Air Raid Warning
System.
§ 193-7. Conduct upon sounding of signal.
After the sounding of the public warning signal and until the sounding of the "all clear" signal:
No person may travel upon, use, enter upon or remain upon any public highway or street, except
persons upon active duty as members of the military forces, public officials, police officers,
members of state and municipal services, members of civilian defense emergency services, and
members of authorized transportation, plant protection, hospital and public utility services, and
except persons whose presence upon the highways or streets is necessary on a mission directly
connected with the public safety or who have been specifically authorized by the local or state
police.
All persons not in the classifications listed in Subsection A shall immediately seek the nearest
available shelter or cover and shall remain in such shelter or cover until the "all clear" signal has
sounded.
The operators of all vehicles, except those required for use by persons in the classifications listed
in Subsection A, shall immediately bring their vehicles to a stop as far as possible on the righthand
portion of the highway or street, shall turn off the engines of same, shall vacate same,
leaving the doors unlocked, and shall seek shelter as required in Subsection B above.
§ 193-8. Nighttime restrictions.
Upon the sounding of the public warning signal during the night season and until the sounding of the
"all clear," or upon the order of the Army or Navy without the sounding of the public warning signal and
until the Army or Navy order shall have been lifted:
The lights of all buildings shall immediately be extinguished or completely obscured by the
owners, operators, or tenants of such buildings so as not to be visible from outside such buildings,
except that exterior exit lights of apartments, commercial buildings, factories, institutions, theaters
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 69/167
B.
C.
D.
and buildings used for public assembly may remain lighted if such lights are so shaded or shielded
that no light source shall be visible from above the horizontal and provided that in the case of
electric lighting no lamp shall emit more than a standard blackout lamp or a ten-watt inside frosted
lamp.
The operators of all vehicles shall immediately stop and extinguish the lights of such vehicles,
except that vehicles in use by persons in the classifications listed in § 193-7A shall be permitted to
continue operation using an emergency identifying light of a type approved by the State Defense
Council.
All streetlights, all traffic control and traffic warning signals, all exterior illuminated signs and
displays, all exterior night lights and all interior night lights visible from the outside of buildings
shall be immediately extinguished by the person or persons in control thereof.
The owners, operators, tenants or lessees of all exterior illuminated signs and displays and of all
exterior night lights and all interior night lights visible from outside of buildings shall install
accessible switches and shall be responsible for the extinguishment of all such lights, signs or
displays.
§ 193-9. Fires, chimneys and furnaces.
All fires, chimneys, furnaces and other devices emitting light or steam shall be so shaded or shielded
by the persons in control thereof that no evidence thereof shall be visible during a blackout. Adequate
preparation for the control and obscuration of such light and steam shall be undertaken by such
persons immediately upon the promulgation of these regulations.
Chapter 198. Entertainment Establishments
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as §§ 72 through 75 (C). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult businesses — See Ch. 140.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 154.
Amusement centers and devices — See Ch. 158.
Bazaars and raffles — See CH. 166.
Bingo — See Ch. 170.
Massage parlors — See Ch. 230.
§ 198-1. License required; exceptions.
No public exhibition of any sport, amusement, circus, menagerie, game, show, concert, opera, roller
skating, theatrical, or other performance, public dance, or ball shall be made or given without a license
from the Mayor; provided, however, that exhibitions, performances, or entertainments given for
religious, charitable, or public purposes and all exhibitions of outdoor games and sports are hereby
excepted from the provisions of this chapter. All licenses must be issued by the City Clerk, under the
Seal of the city, by order of the Mayor, and all fees for the same must be paid to the City Clerk.
§ 198-2. Duty of owner of property to be used for entertainment
purposes.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 70/167
A.
B.
No person or persons, being the owners, proprietors, lessees or janitors of any public hall in said
City, shall suffer or permit such hall to be used for the purpose of giving any concert, opera,
theatrical or other public amusement or performance, without having first received from the
proprietor or agent of the person or persons giving such performance a written or printed license
from the City therefor.
Every place in said City wherein any public amusement, concert, opera, play or other public
exhibition shall be held shall be deemed a public hall within the meaning of this chapter.
§ 198-3. Mayor's authority to grant yearly licenses.
[Added 7-5-1916]
The Mayor shall have the power to grant yearly licenses to the owners or lessees of any place or
public amusement upon such terms as the Common Council may prescribe.
§ 198-4. Penalties for offenses.
Every person who shall violate the provisions of § 198-1 or 198-2 shall pay a fine of not less than $5
nor more than $50 for every such offense.
§ 198-5. Records to be maintained by Clerk.
The license prescribed in the preceding sections shall be issued by the City Clerk, and moneys
therefor shall be received by him, and he shall keep a complete record of the same, specifying the
name or style of exhibition licensed, the name of licensee, the date and time for which said license is
given, and amount of money received therefor, which date, name, time, limit and price shall also
appear on the face of the license.
Chapter 202. Excavations
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as §§ 87 and 88 (C). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 175.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 273.
§ 202-1. Lighting required for building materials left on right-ofway.
Whenever any lumber, brick, mortar, or other materials used in building shall necessarily be left out
overnight in any of the streets of the City, the owner or person in charge thereof shall place over or
near the same, in some conspicuous place, a large well-lighted lantern, which shall be kept burning
and lighted during the whole night. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall pay a fine of
not more than $100 for the use of the City Treasury.
§ 202-2. Protection of excavations.
Whenever any excavation shall be made in any of the streets or sidewalks of the City, the person in
charge thereof shall cause large, well-lighted lanterns to be kept burning around the same during the
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 71/167
whole night, and such person shall post a bond of indemnification and/or a certificate of liability in the
amount of not less than $100,000 for the duration of the excavation. Any person violating the
provisions of this section shall pay a fine of not more than $100.
Chapter 206. Fees and Charges
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. License Fees
[Adopted 10-2-1934 (C)]
§ 206-1. Fees established.
License fees shall be as follows:
Subject Matter Fee
First-class circus $50/day
Ten- and twenty-five-cent shows under canvas $10 to $25 per day
Concerts, operas, theatricals and other public exhibitions
given in opera houses or other halls
$2/day
Bowling alleys, billiard and pool rooms $10/year for each table or alley used
Restaurants and lunch carts - victualer's license $5/year
Peddling, vending or selling of merchandise of whatever kind
and description not otherwise exempted by law, upon the
streets or from house to house
[Amended 5-14-1979]
$5 for 60 days or less; $25 for one
year
Junk dealers, for the collecting and peddling of scrap metals
or junk
$1/year
Secondhand shops, for the sale of secondhand merchandise,
provided no such merchandise shall be displayed outside the
store or building
$5/year
§ 206-2. Penalties for offenses.
Every person who shall violate the provisions of the foregoing section shall pay a fine not exceeding
$25 for each offense.
Article II. Subdivision Fees
[Adopted 1-4-1990 STM]
§ 206-3. Authority; supersession of other fees.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 8-lc of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town of Putnam
adopts the following fees relative to applications filed with the Town of Putnam Planning Commission.
Pursuant to such statute, this fee schedule for the Town Planning Commission shall supersede any
specific fees set forth in the General Statutes or any Town ordinance or regulation.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 72/167
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
§ 206-4. Fee amounts; cumulative calculation.
The fees shall be as follows:
For any activity involving a public hearing before the Commission: $175.
For any subdivision or resubdivision of land: $100 per lot.
For the inspection of any proposed new road or improvement to an existing road as required
by a condition of subdivision approval: 2% of the estimated cost of said improvement. The
estimated cost of said improvement shall be based upon a certified estimate submitted by the
applicant's professional surveyor or engineer, and the Commission shall have authority to
adjust any estimate if it finds that the estimated fee as thus calculated does not correspond to
local construction costs as found by the Town Building Office.
These fees shall be applied on a cumulative basis such that an application involving a public
hearing and a road inspection, for instance, shall pay fees under each of the categories.
§ 206-5. Waiver.
The Putnam Planning Commission is expressly authorized to waive all or a portion of said fees to the
extent that the proposed application is to correct a previous informality or illegality and is not for the
purpose of new construction or the creation of new building lots. The intention of this provision is to
avoid the placing of an undue burden on an applicant who is merely correcting a previous problem.
Any time any fee or a portion thereof is waived by the Commission, it shall state upon the record the
basis for such waiver, which must comply with this section.
Article III. Building Permit Fees
[Adopted 1-18-2005 STM]
§ 206-6. Fees established.
The Town of Putnam shall charge building permit fees based upon square footage of construction and
the following table:
Construction Type Charge Per Square Foot
Unfinished basement $15
Finished basement $35
Living spaces $75
Porch — enclosed $20
Porch — open or deck $16
Pool — inground $12
Sheds/Barns $15
Utility farms buildings $10
Attached garages $25
Detached garages $25
Pool — aboveground N/A
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 73/167
A.
B.
§ 206-7. Calculation of fee; minimum fee.
The total fee shall be calculated by multiplying the cost of construction as determined from the
foregoing table by a fee of $11.16 per $1,000 or a multiplication factor of 0.01116. The fees for
commercial and industrial spaces shall be the same as for living spaces. The minimum fee for the
issuance of any permit shall be $25, specifically including any mechanical, electrical, plumbing or
similar permit. For any work not specifically specified herein, the Building Official shall make a
good estimate of the cost of construction and shall apply the $11.16 per $1,000 cost to said
estimate.
The amount specified for commercial and industrial spaces under the table under § 206-3 of this
article shall be considered minimum fees. If the estimated cost of construction submitted by the
applicant shall exceed such estimates, the Building Official shall use the estimated costs as
submitted for commercial and industrial construction, in which case the $11.16 per $1,000 charge
shall apply to the estimated construction cost.
§ 206-8. Formula.
The formula shall be number of square feet x applicable square footage charge for construction x
0.01116.
§ 206-9. Surcharge for commercial or industrial construction.
For commercial or industrial construction, the Town reserves the right to charge a surcharge on any
such application. The amount of the surcharge shall be the actual cost to the Town of any referral to
outside architects or engineers to review any proposal which, in the opinion of the Building Official,
requires additional professional review.
Article IV. Water Rates
[Adopted 10-18-1990 STM; amended in its entirety 7-28-2009]
§ 206-10. Consumption rates.
Water Usage
(gallons) Rate per 1,000 Gallons
0 to 20,000 $2.88
2,001 to 50,000 $2.99
Over 50,000 $2.70 per 1,000 gallons
§ 206-11. Miscellaneous charges.
Item/Service Charge
Public hydrant fee $69/year
Private hydrant fee $46/year
Sprinkler systems $9.20/1,000 square feet per year
Water service tie in, up to 2-inch $230
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 74/167
A.
B.
A.
B.
Item/Service Charge
Water service tie in, over 2-inch Time and materials
Sewer tie-in inspection $100
Water shut-off $28.75
Water turn-on $28.75
Water shut-off and turn-on within 1 hour $28.75
Inspection fee for cutoff and cap house service $28.75
Service calls $28.75, plus labor
Replace faulty meter No charge
Replace functioning meter $86.25
Ext. $46.72
For all services performed after normal working hours, a surcharge of 38 1/3% will be added to the
above rates.
Out-of-town customers shall be charged 172.50% of the meter charge plus 172.50% of the
consumption charge.
§ 206-12. Meter access charge (six months).
Meter access charges shall be as follows:
First unit.
Meter Size
(inches) Charge
5/8 $37.38
3/4 $46.00
1 $66.13
1 1/2 $88.55
2 and over $120.75
Charge for each additional unit, all sizes: $27.50.
Article V. Miscellaneous Fees
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 206-13. Fees associated with Code chapters.
Fees for services established throughout the Code of the Town of Putnam are as follows:
Code Section Fee For Amount
§ 158-2 License to operate amusement center
Business installing or maintaining mechanical
amusement devices
$100/year, plus $20/machine
$20/machine/year
§ 211-14 Development permit application $20
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 75/167
Code Section Fee For Amount
§ 239-4 Palmistry and phrenology license
License renewal
$50/year
$50
§ 250-6 Peddling and soliciting permit application $50
§ 250-6 Peddling and soliciting permit, for each solicitor,
peddler or vendor
$200
§ 312-19 Building sewer permit and inspection
Residential or commercial building $100
Industrial building $200, plus engineering and
consultation fees
Article VI. Required Fire Marshal Inspection and Permit
Fees
[Adopted 11-20-2017 STM]
§ 206-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this fee schedule is to allow the Fire Marshal's office of the Town of Putnam to collect
fees in connection with the Fire Marshal's fire inspection and plan review responsibilities under C.G.S.
§ 29-305; in addition, the responsibilities required by the State Fire Safety Code, the State Fire
Prevention Code, the Connecticut General Statutes and/or the regulations promulgated by the State
Fire Marshal's Office or the Department of Public Safety.
§ 206-15. Inspection.
When the Fire Marshal's Office performs an inspection that requires official certification issued from the
Office, a fee shall be charged for such inspection prior to the issuance of the certificate. The fees for
such inspection noted below shall apply.
Type of Occupancy Initial Fee Renewal Fee
Residential apartment buildings
(three-family or more)
$20 per dwelling unit
(Fee shall not exceed $200)
$10 per dwelling unit
(Fee shall not exceed $100)
Residential rental unit (vacated) $20 N/A
Real estate smoke/CO alarm
inspection
$25 N/A
Day-care facilities $50 $25
Educational $100 $50
Nursing and convalescent homes $100 $50
Institutional $100 $50
Assembly use/liquor license $100 $50
Residential board and care
Small (<16 residents) $50 $25
Large (>16 residents) $100 $50
Hotels $100 $50
1
2, 3,
4, 5
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 76/167
A.
Type of Occupancy Initial Fee Renewal Fee
Business/mercantile $50 $25
Bed-and-breakfast $100 $50
Dormitories $100 $50
Tents (1,200 square feet and
larger)
$50 N/A
Carnival/fair $50 N/A
Theater $100 $50
Wood stove $25 N/A
Gas piping pressure test
(commercial, including residential
three-family or more)
$25 $25
Fuel station pressure test $25 N/A
Sprinkler pressure test $25 N/A
NOTES:
1. A renewal fee shall only apply for reinspections that are conducted within 60 days of the
expiration of the previous inspection certificate. Any inspections done after the sixty-day grace
period shall be assessed the initial inspection fee.
2. No rental unit, once vacated, shall be reoccupied before the owner of the building containing
such dwelling unit shall obtain from the Fire Marshal or his/her designee a permit for rental
dwelling unit occupancy for the particular unit. After a rental unit has been vacated and cleaned,
the property owner shall contact the Building Safety and Inspection office and request an
inspection of the vacant unit.
3. No such permit shall be issued until the Fire Marshal or his/her designee has inspected the
dwelling unit and approved such unit meets the Connecticut State Fire Safety Code insofar as
such conformity may be ascertained by a visual inspection and until a fee of $20 per dwelling unit
has been paid to the Town of Putnam Fire Marshal.
4. Any residential building equipped with a fire alarm system, a fire suppression system (sprinkler or
otherwise), locked utility rooms, HVAC systems in locked rooms, or locked roof or basement
access shall be required to install a rapid entry system used by the local fire department.
5. Such permit shall not constitute any type of guarantee or warranty by the Town to any person as
to the condition of the premise(s) and that the landlord/owner of said premise(s) shall remain fully
liable for the condition of his/her premise(s).
§ 206-16. Plan review.
Whenever any person, firm, business, or other entity submits a plan in connection with a building
permit for review and/or approval from the Fire Marshal's Office, the fees for said review shall be based
on the building square footage as set forth in the table below. The Fire Marshal's Office shall have 30
days to complete plan reviews up to 10,000 square feet and 45 days to complete plan reviews greater
than 10,000 square feet. Authorization to release building permit shall be submitted in writing to the
Town of Putnam Building Official in accordance with C.G.S. § 29-263.
Building plan review:
Building Size
(new construction or area to be renovated) Fee
Up to 2,000 square feet $50
2,000 to 4,999 square feet $125
1
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 77/167
B.
C.
Building Size
(new construction or area to be renovated) Fee
5,000 to 9,999 square feet $250
10,000 to 24,999 square feet $500
25,000 to 39,999 square feet $750*
40,000 to 49,999 square feet $1,000*
50,000 square feet and over $1,500*
* NOTE: Any building plans for buildings 25,000 square feet or greater may be required to
have an independent plan review, as determined at the sole discretion of the Putnam Fire
Marshal's Office. The independent plan review shall be conducted by a plan reviewer hired
by the applicant and is subject to approval by the Fire Marshal's Office. The applicant shall
pay all costs associated with the approved and contracted plan reviewer's independent
review. The applicant shall submit the plan reviewer's written report, along with
documentation that the reviewer's costs have been paid in full. A fee of 1/4 the amount listed
above shall be assessed for a Fire Marshal's Office review of the written report and plans.
The Fire Marshal's Office will have 10 days to review and upon approval shall submit
authorization to release building permit, in writing, to the Town of Putnam Building Official in
accordance with C.G.S. § 29-263.
Fire alarm system.
Building Size
(square footage of area being protected) Fee
Up to 2,000 square feet $50
2,000 to 4,999 square feet $100
5,000 to 9,999 square feet $200
10,000 to 24,999 square feet $300
25,000 to 39,999 square feet $400*
40,000 to 49,999 square feet $500*
50,000 square feet and over $700*
* NOTE: Any building plans for buildings 25,000 square feet or greater may be required to
have an independent plan review, as determined at the sole discretion of the Putnam Fire
Marshal's Office. The independent plan review shall be conducted by a plan reviewer hired
by the applicant and is subject to approval by the Fire Marshal's Office. The applicant shall
pay all costs associated with the approved and contracted plan reviewer's independent
review. The applicant shall submit the plan reviewer's written report, along with
documentation that the reviewer's costs have been paid in full. A fee of 1/4 the amount listed
above shall be assessed for a Fire Marshal's Office review of the written report and plans.
The Fire Marshal's Office will have 10 days to review and upon approval shall submit
authorization to release building permit, in writing, to the Town of Putnam Building Official in
accordance with Connecticut General Statute 29-263.
Sprinkler system/active fire protection system.
Building Size
(square footage of are being protected) Fee
Up to 2,000 square feet $50
2,000 to 4,999 square feet $100
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 78/167
(1)
D.
E.
F.
Building Size
(square footage of are being protected) Fee
5,000 to 9,999 square feet $200
10,000 to 24,999 square feet $300
25,000 to 39,999 square feet $400*
40,000 to 49,999 square feet $500*
50,000 square feet and over $700*
* NOTE: Any building plans for buildings 25,000 square feet or greater may be required to
have an independent plan review, as determined at the sole discretion of the Putnam Fire
Marshal's Office. The independent plan review shall be conducted by a plan reviewer hired
by the applicant and is subject to approval by the Fire Marshal's Office. The applicant shall
pay all costs associated with the approved and contracted plan reviewer's independent
review. The applicant shall submit the plan reviewer's written report, along with
documentation that the reviewer's costs have been paid in full. A fee of 1/4 the amount listed
above shall be assessed for a Fire Marshal's Office review of the written report and plans.
The Fire Marshal's Office will have 10 days to review and upon approval shall submit
authorization to release building permit, in writing, to the Town of Putnam Building Official in
accordance with Connecticut General Statute 29-263.
Food service hood system.
Per hood system: $50.
Modifications, alterations or additions to existing fire alarm and/or sprinkler/active fire protection
systems will be assessed at 1/2 the fee listed above.
Resubmittal fee for rejected plans: 1/2 base fee.
§ 206-17. Permits.
Approval to install, operate or conduct an operation listed below shall require a permit be issued for the
Fire Marshal's Office prior to such action. When the Fire Marshal's Office issues a permit to install,
operate or conduct an operation, the fees listed below shall apply.
Permit Fee
Retail fireworks/sparkler vendor (annual) $50
Retail fireworks/sparkler vendor (thirty-day) $50
Private fireworks display* $100
Fireworks/explosives storage $100
Pyrotechnic/special effects $50
Underground flammable/combustible
Storage tank removal
Under 1,000 gallon capacity $25
Over 1,000 gallon capacity $50
Commercial fuel tank installation $50
Propane filling station (Annual) $25
Propane exchange retail operation (Annual) $25
Open burning permit
Seven-day permit No fee
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 79/167
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
C.
Permit Fee
Thirty-day permit No fee
Blasting permits $60 (per CGS)
Missed (no-show) inspection fee $25
Return check fee (per Town of Putnam policy)
NOTE:
* For private firework displays, one Fire Marshal and two certified firefighters with proper
extinguishing equipment shall be on site from the time the pyrotechnics arrive until the show is
over. The Fire Marshal cost shall be a rate of $45 per hour. The two firefighters shall be at a rate
of $100 per hour combined.
§ 206-18. Incident reports.
All requests for copies of reports will be charged a fee in accordance with the Town of Putnam policies
and the Freedom of Information Act.
§ 206-19. Enforcement.
No permit or required certificate shall be issued to any party until the fee for such permit or
certificate has been submitted with the appropriate application.
The Mayor may take all enforcement action necessary to secure payment of the delinquent unpaid
fees, including the authorization of the Town Attorney to bring action for payment in a court of law.
All fees shall be made payable by check only made out to the "Town of Putnam."
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this Code or violates any condition attached
to a permit or fails to carry out a order made pursuant to this Code shall be fined $25 per day.
§ 206-20. Exemptions.
Government, public education, and nonprofit organizations are exempt fees listed in this document
but are still subject to the required permits and inspections.
The Selectman, upon written request from the applicant and with approval from the Fire Marshal's
Office, may waive any fees listed in this document for the good of the Town of Putnam.
§ 206-21. Hazardous Buildings.
Cost of signage: N/A.
Any building deemed as a hazardous condition to firefighters by the local Fire Marshal shall be
required to display a twenty-four-inch by twenty-four-inch sign complying with the Fire
Department's marking system. The cost of such signage and mounting shall be paid for by the
property owner and mounted on the front exterior of such building in plain sight for as to be visible
for Fire Department personnel. See Appendix A.
Appendix A. Vacant building marking system.
Two-foot by two foot sign with white background and solid red markings.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 80/167
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
[1]
(a)
(b)
[1]
(c)
[1]
(d)
(e)
(3)
A.
B.
Basic marking.
Large red X: no entry permitted under fire conditions.
Slash: limited entry permitted under fire conditions.
Open box: entry is permitted under fire conditions.
Descriptive marking.
FO: Floor open (with floor number).
Example: FO 1 (hole in the first floor).
RO: Roof open.
SO: Stair open.
Example: SO 1-2 (stair between floors 1 and 2).
WO: Wall open or unstable (with building side).
Example: WO C (wall open, rear).
HC: hoarding condition.
Chapter 211. Flood Damage Prevention
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 10-17-1988 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — Ch. 175.
Utilities — See Ch. 298.
Article I. Statutory Authorization; Findings; Purpose
§ 211-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of Connecticut has, in Section 7-148(c)(7) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Town Meeting of
the Town of Putnam, Connecticut, ordains as follows.
§ 211-2. Findings.
The flood hazard areas of the Town of Putnam are subject to periodic inundation which results in
loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing
increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard area by uses
vulnerable to flood or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 81/167
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
§ 211-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or
erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which
are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood
damage; and
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
§ 211-4. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
To protect human life and health;
To minimize expenditures of public money for costly flood control projects;
To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone
areas in such manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and
To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Article II. Definitions
§ 211-5. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING)
Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected
by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is
connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new
construction.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 82/167
A.
B.
APPEAL
A request for a review of the Building Official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a
request for a variance.
[1]
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD
The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL
A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended, through its design
and construction, to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING
Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling
operations, or permanent storage of materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING
A nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means
of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or
breakaway walls.
FLOOD or FLOODING
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from:
The overflow of inland water.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM)
An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A (to be replaced
by FIRM).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk-premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY
The official report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood
profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOODWAY
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 83/167
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.
FLOOR
The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete
slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include
the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY
A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include
long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed
walls of a structure.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures
placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL
For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD)
As corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this
chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources
Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means the first placement or permanent
construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs
or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 84/167
[1]
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a home, a gas or liquid storage tank,
or other man-made facilities or infrastructures.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure taking place
during the life of a structure in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market
value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the
structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement or, in the case of damage, the value
of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition, substantial
improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary
hardship.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION
The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum,
where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article III. General Provisions
§ 211-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Putnam.
§ 211-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its
scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the Town of Putnam,
Windham County, Connecticut," dated October 18, 1988, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps and floodway maps, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. The
Flood Insurance Study is on file at the office of the Putnam Town Clerk, Putnam Town Hall, 126 Church
Street, Putnam, Connecticut.
§ 211-8. Development permit required.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the
commencement of any development activities.
§ 211-9. Compliance.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 85/167
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
(1)
A.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without
full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
All federal and state permits must be obtained.
[Added 12-27-1988 STM]
§ 211-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 211-11. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
Considered as minimum requirements;
Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
§ 211-12. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur
on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town of
Putnam or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Article IV. Administration
§ 211-13. Local administrator.
The Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 211-14. Permit procedures.
Application for a development permit shall be made to the Building Official on forms furnished by him
or her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location
of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
Application stage.
Requirements.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 86/167
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[a]
[b]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(d)
(2)
Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement)
of all structures [§ 211-18A(1)].
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed [§ 211-18A(2)(b)].
Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result
of proposed development.
A statement as to whether or not the proposed alterations to a existing structure meets
the criteria of the substantial improvement definition.
A statement as to whether there will be a dry access to the structure during the onehundred-
year storm event.
Where applicable, the following certifications by a registered engineer or architect are
required and must be provided to the Building Official. The design and methods of
construction must be certified to be in accordance with accepted standards of practice.[2]
Nonresidential floodproofing: must meet the provisions of § 211-18A(2).
Enclosed areas below the base flood elevation: If the minimum design criteria in § 211-
18B(1) through (3) are not used, then the design and construction methods must be
certified as explained in § 211-18B(1).
No increase in floodway heights may be allowed. Any development in a floodway must
meet the provisions of § 211-18C.
Breakaway walls.
Nonsupporting breakaway walls, lattice work or mesh screening shall be allowed
below the base flood elevation, provided it is not part of the structural support of the
building and is designed so as to break away, under abnormally high tides or wave
action, without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which it is to be
used and provided the following design specifications are met:
Design safe loading resistance of each wall shall not be less than 10 pounds per
square foot nor more than 20 pounds per square foot; or
If more than 20 pounds per square foot, a registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the design wall collapse would result from a water load
less than that which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated
portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to
collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components during the
base flood event. Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this
determination shall each have a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (one-hundred-year mean recurrence interval).
If breakaway walls, lattice work or screening are utilized, the resulting enclosed
space shall not be designed to be used for human habitation, but shall be designed
to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises.
Prior to construction, plans for any structures that will have breakaway walls, lattice
work or screening must be submitted to the Building Official for approval.
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure shall not enclose
the space below the lowest floor except with breakaway walls, lattice work, or
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 87/167
[1]
[2]
(e)
(f)
[2]
[3]
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
(5)
[1]
A.
B.
C.
screening.
Structural anchoring. All new construction or substantial improvement shall be securely
anchored on pilings or columns.
All pilings and columns and the attached structures shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads
acting simultaneously on all building components. The anchoring and support
system shall be designed with wind and water loading values which equal or exceed
the one-hundred-year mean recurrence interval (one-percent annual chance floods
and winds).
A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural
design specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design,
specifications and plans for construction are in accordance with acceptable
standards.
A fee shall be charged as set forth in Chapter 206, Fees and Charges, Article V.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Construction stage. Upon completion of the applicable portion of construction, the applicant
shall provide verification to the Building Official of the following as applicable:[3]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Lowest floor elevation. The elevation to be verified for:
A structure in a numbered A Zone is the top of the lowest floor (including basement)
[§ 211-18A(1)].
A structure which has been floodproofed is the elevation to which the floodproofing is
effective [§ 211-18A(2)].
Deficiencies detected by the review of the above listed shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to
submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue
a stop-work order for the project.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 211-15. Duties and responsibilities of Building Official.
Duties of the Building Official shall include, but not be limited to:
Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably
safe from flooding;
Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been
satisfied;
Advise the permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific
federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided
and maintained on file with the development permit. Possible required permits include, but are not
limited to: coastal area management permit, water diversion, dam safety, and Corps of Engineers
404;
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 88/167
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
Notify the Council of Governments/Regional Planning Agency and the affected municipality at
least 35 days prior to the public hearing if any change of regulation or use of a flood zone will
affect an area within 500 feet of another municipality;
Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Environmental Protection, Water Resources
Unit, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so
that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished:
Record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with § 211-18A(1);
Record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with § 211-18A(2);
When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Building Official shall obtain
certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with § 211-18A(2);
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions), the Building Official shall make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in this article;
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Building
Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of Article V;
and
All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the
Building Official.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article V. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 211-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required:
New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure.
New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage.
New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and other service facilities
shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 89/167
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
H.
A.
B.
A.
New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of floodwaters into the system.
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
Manufactured homes.
All manufactured homes (including mobile homes placed on a site for 180 consecutive days
or longer) to be placed or substantially improved shall be elevated so that the lowest floor is
above the base flood elevation;
They shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored and to
which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement, and
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors;
They shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage:
Adequate access and drainage should be provided.
Elevation construction standards include piling, foundations placed no more than 10 feet
apart, and reinforcement for piers more than six feet above ground level.
In any portion of a watercourse which is altered or relocated, the flood-carrying capacity shall
be maintained; and
A structure already in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be made
noncompliant by any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to the structure.
§ 211-17. Standards for streams without established base flood
elevations.
Any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including
data developed pursuant to § 211-15K of this chapter, shall be obtained, reviewed and reasonably
utilized as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development
in Zone A on the Community's FIRM meets the standards in § 211-18 and Article VI.
In A Zones where base flood elevations have been determined, but before a floodway is
designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill)
shall be permitted which will increase base flood elevations more than one foot at any point along
the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed
development.
Should data be requested and/or provided, a regulatory floodway shall be adopted based on the
principal that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing
the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point along the watercourse.
§ 211-18. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, Zones A1-30, where base flood elevation data has been
provided, as set forth in § 211-7 or § 211-15K, the following provisions are required:
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 90/167
(1)
(a)
[1]
(b)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
C.
D.
Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation.
Nonresidential construction.
New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or
nonresidential structure located in Zones A1-30 shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or
Nonresidential structures located in all A-Zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being
elevated, provided that, together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, the area
of the structure below the required elevation is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy are used. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural
design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for
meeting the provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the
Building Official as set forth in § 211-14A(2)(a).[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that
include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood
elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry
and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional
engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices,
provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood
elevation; and
Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
Floodways. Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as
floodways on the community's Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or as may have been
determined in § 211-15K. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
developments, shall be prohibited unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge.
In Zones AE along watercourses that have not been designated as a regulatory floodway, no new
construction, substantial improvement, or other development shall be permitted; unless it is
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 91/167
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
[Added 12-27-1988]
Article VI. Standards for Subdivision Proposals
§ 211-19. Requirements.
In all special flood hazard areas, the following requirements shall apply:
All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
In Zone A, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other
proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which are five
acres or 50 lots, whichever occurs first.
Article VII. Variance Procedures; Penalties
§ 211-20. Authority of Inland Wetlands Commission; appeals.
The Inland Wetlands Commission as established by the Town of Putnam shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
The Inland Wetlands Commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Inland Wetlands Commission or any person owning
land which abuts or is within a radius of 100 feet of the land in question may appeal within 15 days
after such decision to the State Superior Court as provided in Section 8-8 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ 211-21. Variances for specific situations.
Buildings on an historic register. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section, except
for § 211-22C, and provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not
result in the structure losing its historical character.
Preexisting, small lot location. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, in conformance
with § 211-22C.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 92/167
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
A.
B.
(1)
(a)
(2)
C.
Functionally dependent uses. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvement and other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use,
provided the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage,
create no additional threat to public safety and meet the requirements of § 211-22C.
Floodway prohibition. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase
in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
§ 211-22. Considerations for granting of variances.
In passing upon such applications, the Inland Wetlands Commission shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent
facility;
The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program for that area;
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters, and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, and streets and bridges.
Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this chapter, the Inland
Wetlands Commission shall attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
Conditions for variances
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of an historical
building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the
historic character and design of the building.
Variances shall only be issued upon:
A showing of good and sufficient cause;
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 93/167
(b)
(c)
(3)
[1]
(4)
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship;
and
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
Any applicant to who a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the
difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be
built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation up to amounts as high as $25. for $100. of
insurance coverage.
The Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 211-23. Penalties for offenses.
ion of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including ion of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions,
shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $250 per day if it is proven that the
violation was done willfully and $100 per day if not, or imprisoned for not more than 10 days for each
day of violation, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and reasonable legal fees involved in the
case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Putnam from taking such other lawful action
as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Chapter 230. Massage Parlors
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 4-11-1977 (C). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult businesses — See Ch. 140.
§ 230-1. Massage parlors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any establishment, regardless of whether it is a public or private facility, to
operate as a massage salon, bath parlor, or any similar type business, where any physical contact with
the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex.
§ 230-2. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist duly
licensed by the State of Connecticut, or to a licensed nurse acting under the direct prescription and
direction of any such physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath. Also, this chapter shall not apply to
barbershops or beauty parlors in which massage is given to the scalp, the face, the neck or the
shoulders.
§ 230-3. Penalties for offenses.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 94/167
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not
more than $100, and each day's operation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 235. Nuisances
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as §§ 57 through 79, 89 through 101 and 103 through 119
(C). Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Health and Sanitation
§ 235-1. Right of inspection; penalties for interference.
The Health Officer and the Health Committee shall have full power to enter into and upon all lands
and buildings within the limits of the City, for the purpose of inspecting the same with reference to
their sanitary condition; and the Health Committee may issue and enforce such orders as it shall
deem proper for the promotion of and the preservation of the health of the inhabitants of the City.
The Health Officer shall make such investigations and examinations as he deems necessary and
carry out and enforce the orders of said Health Committee and Common Council.
The Common Council shall regulate and prescribe the fees of the Health Officer. Every person
who refuses or neglects to obey the orders of the Committee or Officer, and every person who
shall resist, hinder or obstruct or abuse any member of the Health Committee or of said Officer in
the discharge of their duties shall pay a fine of not more than $25.
§ 235-2. Abatement of nuisances.
If any person or persons upon whom an order shall be made for removing or abating a nuisance or for
cleaning and purifying the land, buildings or place where such nuisance may exist shall neglect or
refuse to obey such order in the manner or time appointed by the Health Committee or Health Officers,
the Health Committee or Health Officer may cause such nuisance to be removed or abated, and such
land, buildings or place shall be cleaned and purified at the expense of the owner thereof; such
expense to be recovered in any action therefor brought in the name of the City.
§ 235-3. Privy vaults and cesspools.
[Amended 8-27-1900]
All privy vaults and cesspools within the City limits shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once every
12 months, between the first day of November and the first day of May next succeeding, and at
such other times as any Health Officer may direct. The contents of said vaults and cesspools shall
not be carried through the streets of said City between sunrise and 9:00 p.m. from May 1 to
November 1 without a permit from the Board of Health.
No person, without a permit from the Health Officer, shall convey the contents of any cesspool or
privy vault through any of the streets of the City, except in a tight box.[1]
Editor's Note: Former §§ 66 and 67, regarding quarantined buildings, which immediately followed
this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-4. Penalties for offenses.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 95/167
[1]
[1]
[1]
Any person who shall violate any of the requirements or provisions of this article shall pay a fine of not
more than $50 for each offense, and it shall be the duty of the Health Committee and the Health Officer
to report every such violation to the Prosecuting Attorney of the City Court, who shall prosecute the
same.
§ 235-5. Administration of orders.
Whenever the Health Committee shall make any orders pursuant to the provisions of this article or the
Charter of the City, a true and attested copy thereof specifying the action to be performed, and the time
limited therefor, shall be left with or at the place of abode of the person directed to perform such action.
In case such person is a nonresident, or is absent from the City, then a like copy left with his agent in
the City, or with the person occupying or having charge and care of the premises described in said
order, shall be sufficient notice.
Article II. Nuisances
§ 235-6. Keeping of swine.
No person shall keep swine in any pen, sty or other place in such manner that said place shall become
unwholesome or offensive in the judgment of the Board of Health.
§ 235-7. Disposal of wash water.
No person shall cause or permit any wash or dirty water or discharges from any sink to pass through
drains or otherwise into any street nor upon any sidewalk in the City.[1]
Editor's Note: Former § 94, prohibiting the deposit of garbage and refuse on streets, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-8. Animals at large.
No person shall permit any horse, cow or swine to be at large or pasture on any street or public park or
place.
§ 235-9. Permit required for certain construction.
No person shall erect, set up, or maintain any building, fence or gate upon any street or highway or
portion of the same, nor place any mortar bed, or place or continue the deposit of any building
materials in any street without a permit from the Public Works Director.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-10. Suspension of ropes and wires across streets.
No person shall suspend any rope, wire or pole across any street or highway without authority from the
Public Works Director.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-11. Excavations and open holes.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 96/167
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
No person shall leave open, without proper protection, any cellarway door, coal hole or any
excavations in any street or sidewalk.
§ 235-12. Hitching posts and tree guards.
No person shall place or keep any hitching post, tree guard or cover for any coal hole in any street or
sidewalk, unless the form, style, material and location of such posts, tree guard or cover shall have
been approved by the Public Works Director.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-13. Street obstructions.
No person, without a permit from the Public Works Director, shall place, keep or knowingly suffer to
remain any box, bale, case, barrel, bundle, package, goods, wares, merchandise, cart, carriage,
vehicle, lumber, refuse matter, rubbish, earth or stones, or any article, material or thing of any kind or
description upon any highway, street, sidewalk or public place in the City, so as to obstruct, interfere or
cause inconvenience to public travel.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-14. Permit required for excavations.
No person except the Public Works Director shall dig up or remove any turf, dirt or stone from, or
excavate any portion of any street, highway, park, sidewalk, crosswalk, or public place without a permit
from the Public Works Director.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-15. Nuisances on sidewalks, buildings and trees.
No person shall commit any nuisance on any sidewalk, or against any building, hydrant, tree, fence or
lamppost or electric light pole.
§ 235-16. Defacing property.
No person shall daub, besmear or mark any fence, building, sidewalk, tree, hydrant, lamppost, or other
property, public or private, without the license of the owner.
§ 235-17. Parks.
No person shall tramp upon the ground or grass outside of the regular walks in the public parks of the
City, or injure any of the trees, plants or shrubbery therein, nor commit any nuisance in or about said
parks.
§ 235-18. Trees.
No person shall cut down any tree standing upon any street or highway in said City without a permit
from the Public Works Director, subject to the approval of the Committee on Highways.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 97/167
[1]
§ 235-19. Bicycles.
No person shall ride or propel any bicycle out upon any sidewalk in said City.
§ 235-20. Lights and hydrants.
No person shall, without proper authority, extinguish any public light, or turn the water on at any public
hydrant.
§ 235-21. Interference with public officials.
No person shall resist, hinder, or obstruct the mayor, Public Works Director, Superintendent of Water
Works, Chief Engineer, any health officer, City Sheriff, fireman or police officer, or any public official in
the discharge of the duties of his office.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-22. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the last preceding sections of this article shall pay
a fine of not more than $25 for each offense.
§ 235-23. Disorderly conduct.
Any person who may be guilty of shouting, running, shuffling, or other disorderly conduct, in or about
any railway station, public building or grounds thereof, or in or about the post office, or who shall
disturb the peace or quiet of any of the citizens present at any concert, exhibition or entertainment, by
shouting, whistling, or other disorderly conduct, shall be fined not less than $2 nor more than $10 and
all policemen and other officers are empowered summarily to arrest and confine such offenders.
Chapter 239. Palm Readers and Fortune Tellers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 7-14-1952 (C). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 239-1. License required.
No person shall maintain a place of business in the City of Putnam for the purpose of giving
performances in the name of palmistry, phrenology, handwriting analysis, card readings, astrology,
seership or the like crafty science or fortune telling without a license for each place of business where
such performances are to be given.
§ 239-2. Applications; investigation.
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Chief of Police. Each such applicant shall furnish
evidence that he is a person of good moral character and financial responsibility and such other
information as may be pertinent. The Chief of Police shall cause to be made such inquiry and
examination as to the qualifications and moral character of such applicant, and his associates, as he
may deem necessary.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 98/167
[1]
§ 239-3. Granting of license.
Upon satisfying himself that such applicant is properly qualified, trustworthy, that the place of business
is not used for housing accommodations, and that the granting of a license is not against the public
interest, the Chief of Police may grant such a license.
§ 239-4. Fees; license term; renewal.
The fee for such license and each annual renewal thereof shall be as set forth in Chapter 206, Fees
and Charges, Article V, which shall be remitted to the City Treasurer. Each such license issued shall
expire at the end of the calendar year in which it was issued and the fee therefor shall not be
apportioned. Renewal licenses may be issued upon approval by the Chief of Police and payment of the
renewal fee set forth in Chapter 206, Fees and Charges, Article V.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 239-5. Advertising; fraud.
No such license shall be construed as giving the licensee the privilege of advertising contrary to the
Connecticut General Statutes or to practice any kind of deceit or fraud.
§ 239-6. Revocation of license.
Any license so issued may be revoked by the Chief of Police for any cause that would have been valid
reason for the denial of such license.
§ 239-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than $100.
Chapter 242. Parades and Processions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as §§ 173 through 175 (C). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 235.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
Use of Town property — See Ch. 291.
§ 242-1. Permission required.
All street parades and processions bearing banners or other conspicuous devices, or accompanied
with music or other disturbing noises, excepting the National Guard, the police and the Fire
Department, and funeral processions engaged in the burial of the dead, or the G.A.R. Memorial Day
services, are prohibited, unless permission therefor be first obtained as hereinafter provided.
§ 242-2. Authority of Mayor.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 99/167
The Mayor may permit, under such restrictions as may seem to him proper, any street parade or
procession, provided application is made therefor in writing specifying the object, time and route of
such parade or procession. The Mayor may also furnish a police escort for such parade or procession
if deemed by him necessary or proper.
§ 242-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit and pay a sum not exceeding $25
for each offense, for the use of the City.
Chapter 246. Parks and Recreation Facilities
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 154.
Snakes — See Ch. 162, Art. I.
Nuisances — See Ch. 235.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 304.
Article I. Use of High School Field
[Adopted 5-23-1932 STM]
§ 246-1. Sunday games.
The Board of Education is instructed and authorized to allow the playing of baseball on the High
School field on Sundays.
Article II. Use Regulations
[Adopted 5-11-1970 (C)]
§ 246-2. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, give, deliver, tender, sell, or drink any
alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to beer, liquors, and wine, upon the property located in
the of Putnam and known as recreational areas.
§ 246-3. Swimming restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, or enter the water except in cases of emergency, at the City
of Putnam recreation park at any time other than when lifeguards shall be on duty at the swimming
area. The hours that lifeguards are on duty shall be posted at the pool.
§ 246-4. Hours of operation.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 100/167
A.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, remain or be upon property of the City of Putnam known as
the recreational area between the hours of dusk and daylight unless specifically authorized to do so by
written permission from the Recreation Director.
§ 246-5. Property damage prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, damage or destroy any property, real or personal, of
the City of Putnam located at any recreational area.
§ 246-6. Penalties for offenses.
The violation of any section of this article shall be punishable by immediate removal of the offender
from the City of Putnam recreational area and by a fine not exceeding $100.
Article III. Operation of Motor-Driven Vehicles
[Adopted 6-9-1980 (C)]
§ 246-7. Operation on recreational property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor-driven vehicle, including but not limited to
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles, motor bikes and mopeds, on any of the properties
owned, leased, operated, or managed by the City of Putnam for recreational use.
§ 246-8. Applicability.
This article shall pertain to all parks and recreation areas under the supervision and management of
the City of Putnam Recreation Commission as are now or may be hereafter established.
§ 246-9. Penalties for offenses.
Anyone charged with a violation of any section of this article shall be subject to immediate removal
from the City of Putnam recreational area.
The penalty for violation of any section of this article shall be a fine not exceeding $100.
Chapter 250. Peddling and Soliciting
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 8-17-2009 STM; amended in its entirety 8-14-2017 STM.
Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 143.
Nuisances — See Ch. 235.
Use of Town property — See Ch. 291.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 304.
§ 250-1. Definitions.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 101/167
The following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different
meaning:
CHARITABLE
Includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, health, welfare, benevolent, educational,
civic, cultural or fraternal. Provided the primary purpose of said agency is the promotion of the
public good on a nonprofit basis. The existence of an exemption from federal taxation under
Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code as it may be amended from time to time shall be
definitive proof of a charitable intent. Likewise, local affiliates of nationally recognized charitable or
benevolent entities such as Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, 4-H and the like shall also be within this
definition.
CONTRIBUTIONS
Includes the words alms, money, subscription, property or any donations under the guise of a loan
of money or property.
DEPARTMENT
For any solicitation, peddling or vending to take place within the Special Services District, the
Putnam Police Department, and with regard to any solicitation, peddling or vending taking place
exclusively outside the limits of the Putnam Special Services District, the Connecticut State Police,
Troop D.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY
The Chief of Police for any solicitation or peddling taking place within the Special Services District
and the Mayor, or the designee of the Mayor, for any solicitation, peddling or vending taking place
in the Town of Putnam outside of the Special Services District.
FOOD VENDORS
Anyone who offers for sale to the general public, either from a vehicle, cart stand or otherwise,
food items for immediate consumption shall be considered as a food vendor and subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
PEDDLER
Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the Town, or upon the public
street, or upon any state highway or any land abutting such streets or highways, not having been
invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise or personal
property of any nature and offering the same for sale. This definition also includes any person who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of the scheme
to evade the provisions of this chapter.
PEDDLING
Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a peddler as indicated under paragraph (f) of this
Article.[1]
PERSON
A natural person or any firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization.
SOLICITATION
Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a solicitor as indicated under paragraph (h) of this
Article.[2]
SOLICITOR
Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the Town, not having been
invited by the occupant thereof, for the purpose of taking or attempting to take orders for the sale
of goods, merchandise, wares, or other personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for
services to be performed in the future. This definition also includes any person who, without
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 102/167
[1]
[2]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
invitation, goes upon private property, or upon the public street or upon any state highway or any
land abutting such streets or highways to request contribution of funds or anything of value, or sell
goods or services for political, charitable, religious, or other noncommercial purposes.
TOWN CLERK
The Town Clerk of the Town of Putnam or her assistant.
VENDOR
A peddler with a fixed location.
Editor's Note: So in original. See the definition of "peddler."
Editor's Note: So in original. See the definition of "solicitor."
§ 250-2. Permit requirements and exemptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling, solicitation or vending activities including
food vending within the Town of Putnam without first obtaining a permit issued by the Town Clerk
of the Town of Putnam; provided, however, that the following are exempted from the provisions of
this chapter.
Any solicitation made upon premises owned or occupied by an organization upon whose
behalf the solicitation is made;
Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions solely from persons who are
members of the organization at the time of such solicitation;
Any solicitation in the form of a collection at a regular meeting, assembly or service of a
charitable event;
Any solicitation for the relief of any individual specified by name at the time of the solicitation
where the solicitor represents in each case that the entire amount collected shall be turned
over to the named beneficiary;
Any entity specifically invited by and permitted for a specific Town sponsored/partnered event,
including but not limited to, food vendors at the Kennedy Drive Farmers' Market, the Car
Cruise, the Craft Fair, First Fridays, etc.
The following entities are exempt from fees and background checks but not exempt from the duty
to register.
No permit fee shall be required of a veteran as defined pursuant to the provisions of Section
21-37 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
No permit fee shall be required of a charitable or nonprofit entity as defined herein.
§ 250-3. Permit for sponsoring juvenile peddlers.
Any person engaged in peddling, solicitation or vending under the age of 16 shall, in addition to all
other requirements set forth in this chapter, observe all of the following requirements:
A permit shall be obtained by a sponsoring person, company or organization for the conduct
of any peddling, solicitation or vending activities involving, in whole or in part, a sales force of
one or more persons under 16 years of age.
The sponsor shall be responsible for supervising and controlling the conduct of all persons,
including juveniles, peddling under the sponsor's permit.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 103/167
(3)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
The sponsor shall provide to each individual in its sales force a badge or other easily readable
form of identification which identifies the name of the sponsor and the name of the individual.
The sponsor shall require all individuals in its sales force to wear such identification so that it
is clearly visible at all times when the individuals are peddling, soliciting or vending.
Any solicitation by juveniles under the age of 16 for a nationally recognized nonprofit or on behalf
of a public or private school shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 250-4. Permit application.
Every person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall file with the Town Clerk, who shall promptly
transmit to the Director of Public Safety, an application in writing on a form to be furnished by the
Department, which shall include the following information and such other information as the
Department deems pertinent and necessary to process the application:
Proof of age, address and identification of the applicant, to be provided through the applicant's
driver's license, articles of incorporation (for sponsors), or other legally recognized form of
identification;
A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted;
The hours and location for which the right to peddle, solicit or vend is desired;
If employed, the name, address and telephone number of the employer; or if acting as an agent,
the name, address and telephone number of the principal who is being represented, with
credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent
to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be;
A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or
ordinance violation (other than traffic violations), the nature of the offense or violation, the penalty
or punishment imposed, the date when and place where such offense occurred, and other
pertinent details thereof;
Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state or local laws or
regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business, or which,
under any such law or regulation, would exempt the applicant from the licensing requirements of
this chapter;
Two photographs of the applicant which shall have been taken within 60 days immediately prior to
the date of filing of the application. The photographs shall measure two inches by two inches and
show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; and
Proof of insurance coverage for comprehensive general liability insurance with a minimum
coverage of $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregates for personal injury and
property damage combined, automobile liability insurance for owned, nonowned and hired
vehicles, with limits of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence, and $2,000,000 in the aggregate
annually for bodily injury and property damage combined. Such general liability shall name the
Town of Putnam as an additional named insured and shall include a provision prohibiting
cancellation of said policy except upon 30 days' prior written notice to the Town. Certificates of
coverage as required by this subsection shall be delivered to the Town before issuance of a
license. The required coverage limits may be adjusted as required by the Town's insurance carrier.
§ 250-5. Fees.
At the time the application is filed with the Town Clerk, each applicant shall pay a fee to cover the
cost to the Town of processing each application and investigating the facts stated therein in the
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 104/167
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
amount of $50 payable to the Putnam Police Department.
The applicant, after being notified by the Board that the application has been approved, shall pay
a license fee in the amount of $200 for each solicitor, peddler or vendor. Payment shall be payable
to the Town of Putnam.
§ 250-6. Application review and permit issuance.
Upon receipt of an application, the Town Clerk shall transmit the application to the Director of
Public Safety, or authorized representative, who shall review the application as deemed necessary
to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare.
If the Director finds the application to be satisfactory, the Director shall endorse his approval of the
application and return it to the Town Clerk, who shall notify the applicant that upon payment of the
prescribed fee, the required permit is available to the applicant at the Town Clerk's office.
The permit shall show the name, address and photograph of the permittee, the class of permit
issued, the kinds of goods or services to be sold or delivered, the date of issuance, and the length
of time that the permit shall be in effect. The permit shall also show the permit number and
identifying description of any vehicle to be used in carrying on the business for which the permit is
issued.
A record of all permits issued shall be maintained by the Town Clerk for a period of two years.
All applications shall be submitted with all required supporting data and fees at least 30 business
days prior to the proposed date of issuance of the permit.
§ 250-7. Denial of permit.
Upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Safety following their review of the application,
the Town Clerk may refuse a permit to the applicant under this chapter for any of the following
reasons:
The location and time of solicitation or peddling would endanger the safety and welfare of the
solicitors, peddlers, vendors, or their customers;
An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application;
The applicant has been convicted of a felony misdemeanor or violation involving a sex
offense, trafficking in controlled substances, or any violent acts against persons or property,
such conviction being entered within the five years preceding the date of application;
The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or conviction for, fraud,
deceit or misrepresentation has been entered within the five years immediately preceding the
date of the application;
There is no proof as to the authority of the application to serve as an agent to the principal; or
The applicant has been denied a permit under this chapter within the immediate past year,
unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the Director that the reasons for
such earlier denial no longer exist.
The Director's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and
the applicant shall be notified that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued.
Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form, or at the
applicant's last known address.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 105/167
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 250-8. Permit expiration.
All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the year of
issue.
§ 250-9. Vending locations.
This chapter shall designate the location where vending will be allowed in the Simonzi Park
parking lot located off Kennedy Drive. There will be three designated parking spaces marked with
"Vendor Only" parking signs. No more than three vendors will be allowed in the designated area.
The Town shall maintain and make available for public inspection during regular business hours a
complete list of all permitted vending locations as designated by this policy.
Applicants filing between January 1 and March 31 will be chosen through a lottery system. On
April 1 and thereafter, applicants will be chosen on a first come, first served basis.
§ 250-10. Permitted stand designs and required stand
maintenance.
Licensed vendors must ensure that stands: are placed on the public rights-of-way; be maintained
in a neat, clean and orderly fashion, and does not interfere with anyone using the parking lot for its
normal business; have advertising and other signage limited to the name of the stand or items
sold and listing of items sold and price, as outlined in the Zoning Regulations; be readily movable
by vendor; cannot be attached to any property or affixed to the parking lot, and does not do any
damage to the parking lot or any other municipally owned property.
For stands from which are sold prepared food, produce, flowers, or any other item or items which
the Town designates as generating trash, provide, within the vendor's allotted space or above the
area occupied by a trailer hitch, at least a twenty-gallon-capacity trash storage area.
Licensees are responsible for maintaining the sidewalk and parking area within 15 feet of their
stands clean of all trash generated by their vending operations.
Licensee must take with them at the end of each day all trash, litter, garbage and refuse generated
by their vending operations. No licensee may place or deposit any trash litter, garbage or refuse
generated by his licensed operations on the sidewalk or parking area, in any public receptacle, or
on any private property without the express permission of the property owner.
Stands from which food or beverages are sold must also be in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Health and Fire Codes.
§ 250-11. Identification badge.
At the same time the permit is issued, the Department, for activities located within the Special Services
District, and the Mayor's Office, for those activities located exclusively outside the Special Services
District, shall issue to each permittee a badge, which shall be worn by the permittee in such a way as
to be conspicuous at all times while the permittee is soliciting or peddling in the Town.
§ 250-12. Permit exhibition.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 106/167
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
Every person required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall exhibit the permit
when requested to do so by any prospective customer or Department employee.
§ 250-13. Transfer prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permittee to use or wear any permit or badge issued
under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 250-14. Hours of solicitation.
No person, while conducting the activities of a peddler, solicitor or vendor, whether licensed or
unlicensed, shall engage in any activity regulated by this chapter between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m. in any public area. No person, while conducting such activities as referred to in this chapter,
whether licensed or unlicensed, shall engage in any activity regulated by this chapter on residential
property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 250-15. Permit revocation.
Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the Director of Public Safety,
after notice and hearing, for any of the following reasons:
Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit;
Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permittee in the course of conducting
solicitation or peddling activities;
Conducting peddling, solicitation or vending activities contrary to the provisions contained in the
permit;
Conviction for any crime involving moral turpitude; or
Conducting peddling, solicitation or vending activities in such a manner as to create a public
nuisance, constitute a breach of peace or endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
§ 250-16. Notice and hearing.
Notice of a hearing for revocation of a permit issued under this chapter shall be provided in writing and
shall set forth specifically the grounds for the proposed revocation and the time and place of the
hearing. Notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at the address shown on the permit
application or to the last known address of the permittee.
§ 250-17. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the Town Clerk to deny, suspend or revoke a
permit applied for under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action or
decision to a hearing officer designated by the Board of Selectmen, said appeal to be taken within
15 days after the notice of the action or decision has been mailed to the person's address as
shown on the permit application form, or his last known address.
An appeal shall be taken by filing with the Town Clerk a written statement setting forth the grounds
for the appeal.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 107/167
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The Town Clerk shall transmit the written statement to the Office of the Mayor within five days of
its receipt and the Mayor shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal.
A hearing shall be set not later than 20 days from the date of receipt of the appellant's written
statement by the Mayor.
Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as
provided for the mailing of notice of action or decision.
The decision of the hearing officer on the appeal shall be final and binding on all parties
concerned.
§ 250-18. Claims of exemption.
Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in this chapter, or from the
payment of a permit fee, shall cite to the Director of Public Safety the statute or other legal authority
under which exemption is claimed and shall present to the Director proof of qualification for such
exemption.
§ 250-19. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of any of the provision of this chapter shall be treated as a violation. The first violation of
this chapter shall be punished by a fine of $200, and each subsequent violation shall be punished
by a fine of $250. Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
Violations may also result in a license suspension of up to 30 days or license revocation. Licenses
may be revoked if any fine is not paid within 10 days of imposition by a final order from which all
appeals have been exhausted. An order of the Board of Selectmen revoking a license shall also
specify when the licensee may reapply for a license, which shall be not less than 90 days nor
more than one year from the date of revocation.
All fines are payable to the Town of Putnam.
In addition to any criminal enforcement, the Town or any individual may pursue any available civil
remedies deemed appropriate and necessary.
§ 250-20. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase
of the chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses,
and phrases of this chapter but they shall remain in effect; it being the legislative intent that this
chapter shall remain in effect notwithstanding the validity of any part.
Chapter 257. Refrigerators
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 6-8-1954 (C). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 235.
§ 257-1. Maintenance of refrigerators.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 108/167
[1]
[1]
No person shall have in his possession or custody an ice box or electric refrigerator, except when
currently used, displayed for sale, in locked or supervised storage, or when all doors have been
securely locked or removed.
§ 257-2. Abandonment; removal of doors required.
No person shall abandon an ice box or electric refrigerator, except when all doors have been removed.
§ 257-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned
not more than 30 days, or both, and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 260. Rental Property
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Registration of Landlords
[Adopted 10-3-2005 STM]
§ 260-1. Filing of residential address of nonresident landlord.
Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 05-223,[1] each nonresident owner of occupied or vacant
rental real estate located within the Town of Putnam shall maintain on file in the office of the Tax
Assessor his current residential address as specified in Section 47a-6a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, specifically including full street number, street name, city, town and state. If the owner of said
real estate is a corporation, partnership, trust or other legally recognized entity, that entity shall file the
address of its agent in charge.
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. §§ 47a-6a and 47a-6b.
§ 260-2. Change of address.
Should the address of the agent in charge or owner of the property as defined herein and as further
defined in Section 47a-6b of the Connecticut General Statutes change, an updated address shall be
filed with the Tax Assessor's office within 21 days from the date of said change.
§ 260-3. Penalties for offenses; appeals.
Any violation of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $250 for the first violation
and not more than $1,000 for any subsequent violation. A person who is assessed a civil penalty
pursuant to this section may appeal therefrom to the Superior Court within 30 days after the mailing of
notice of such assessment by filing a petition to reopen the assessment together with an entry fee as
provided in Section 47a-6b of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 260-4. Statutory provisions.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 109/167
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
It is the intention of this article to incorporate all the provisions of Public Act No. 05-223.[1]
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. §§ 47a-6a and 47a-6b.
§ 260-5. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter shall be April 1, 2006.
Chapter 264. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 143.
Nuisances — See Ch. 235.
Refrigerators — See Ch. 257.
Article I. Garbage Disposal
[Adopted 4-14-1969 (C)]
§ 264-1. Permit required to dump garbage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to gather or collect within the City of Putnam any refuse, rubbish,
garbage or waste matter of any kind, and/or to place, dump or deposit the same in or upon the City
Cemetery Landfill Refuse Disposal Area located on River Road within the Town of Putnam, without first
having secured a license or permit.
§ 264-2. Permits and fees.
[Amended 2-11-1974; 12-10-1979; 11-10-1988]
Any person using the Town sanitary landfill area shall obtain a yearly permit from the Town Clerk
in accordance with the criteria below. The use of said permit shall be in accordance with all other
provisions of this article and with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Board of
Selectmen from time to time.
Any property owner disposing of refuse by means of a private passenger car or a truck, which
refuse has been collected solely from his own private residence, shall be required to obtain a
residential permit. All residential permits shall expire December 31 of each year. Residential
permits are not transferable to another property owner, but may be redeemed at no additional
cost for another residential permit upon presentation of the voided permit to the Town.
Commercially licensed vehicles with a rated capacity of more than 3/4 of a ton; or
commercially licensed vehicles of 3/4 of a ton or less not falling under the residential permit
criteria of Subsection A(1) above shall obtain a commercial permit from the Town and pay,
based on the weight of refuse disposed at the sanitary landfill area, a per-ton fee as may be
set by the Board of Selectmen from time to time, but in no event less than $18 per ton.
Commercial permits may be issued at any time but shall expire December 31 of each year.
Commercial permits are not transferable and shall be displayed on all vehicles entering the
Town sanitary landfill area. In the event the landfill scale becomes inoperable, the Selectmen
may charge commercial permit holders a fee based on a scale outage charge policy adopted
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 110/167
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
by the Selectmen, provided that the effect of such scale outage charge policy shall be to limit
the charge to users of the landfill to no more than the current per-ton disposal rate specified in
this subsection.
Billing and accounting. Charges for weighted commercially permitted vehicles will be billed
monthly and are due and payable within 30 days. Delinquent payments will be charged interest at
the rate of 12% per year. Commercial permittees who are delinquent in the payment of monthly
bills for more than 60 days shall be suspended from all disposal privileges until full payment is
made.
Temporary use. Commercial permittees who shall be using the landfill for two months or less shall
be required to post either a surety bond or cash bond in the amount of $10,000, or an amount
equal to the estimated tonnage charges for two months, whichever is less. Such deposit or
security may be applied toward the payment of solid waste disposal bills.
[Amended 5-2-1990 STM]
Temporary suspension of residential permit requirements. For special purposes, such as disposal
of leaves, Christmas trees, or emergency cleanups resulting from severe storms, the Mayor may
suspend the requirement that residential users of the landfill display permits. The Mayor shall limit
the length of time such suspension may be in effect and may impose other reasonable rules and
regulations governing the use of the landfill during these times.
§ 264-3. Burning prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to gather or collect within the City of Putnam any inflammable matter
and to burn, cause to burn, or set fire to the same in and upon the City of Putnam sanitary land fill
refuse disposal area.
§ 264-4. Supervision and use of disposal area; penalties for
offenses.
[Amended 1-30-1992 STM]
It shall be the duty of the supervisor-operator of the City of Putnam sanitary landfill refuse disposal
area to enforce all rules and regulations regarding said sanitary landfill refuse disposal area.
In accordance with Section 22a-220a of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended, the Town
of Putnam designates the Putnam Landfill as the area where solid waste generated within its
boundaries by residential, business, commercial or other establishments shall be disposed of.
The disposal of such solid waste at any other area is prohibited, except that a municipality may
approve, in writing, disposal at another area either within or outside the boundaries of such
municipality prior to disposal. The Town of Putnam may refuse to approve disposal at another area
if such disposal would adversely affect its solid waste program.
Any collector who dumps more than one cubic foot in volume at one time in an area not
designated for such disposal by a municipality pursuant to the provisions of this section shall, for a
first violation, be liable for a civil penalty of $1,000 for each violation and $5,000 for a subsequent
violation. The Town of Putnam or the Attorney General, at the request of the Commissioner, may
bring an action under this section.
§ 264-5. Revocation of permits.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 111/167
All permits issued to any person under the provisions of this article may be revoked at any time by the
Common Council upon approval of the Sanitation Committee.
§ 264-6. Penalties for offenses.
Every person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.
§ 264-7. Ground lease.
[Added 2-10-1994 STM]
Notwithstanding any provisions of the foregoing or any other Town ordinance, the disposition of residue
in the residue facility, as the same are defined in the certain ground lease dated November 15, 1993,
between Wheelabrator Putnam, Inc. and the Town of Putnam, is hereby declared to be permissible
under Town ordinance and is hereby authorized for a period coterminous with the term of said ground
lease as it may be extended; and any restriction as to the geographic origin of materials to be
deposited shall not apply to the proposed residue facility.
Article II. Garbage, Refuse and Wastes
[Adopted 10-12-1989]
§ 264-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL USER
Any person, firm or corporation charging a fee for the collection, transportation and/or dumping of
garbage, or those who collect and dispose of refuse as a secondary aspect of other commercial or
business services, including contractors, construction companies, apartment owners and agents,
and business owners and agents, etc. If a discrepancy occurs regarding whether an applicant is a
commercial collector, such designation shall be determined by the Director of Public Works or his
representative with the consent of the Mayor.
DISPOSAL AREA
The area designated by the Town of Putnam for the dumping of garbage.
DUMPING
Includes depositing, discharging, placing and disposing of garbage.
GARBAGE
Unwanted or discarded materials, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous
materials.
RESIDENT
Those individuals who reside in the Town of Putnam or Pomfret.
§ 264-9. Restrictions on use of disposal area.
Only persons, firms or corporations whose residences or place of doing business are within the Town
limits of Putnam or Pomfret shall be eligible for a permit to use the facilities of the Town disposal area
for depositing of garbage, rubbish and other refuse originating in the Towns of Putnam and Pomfret.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 112/167
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
Municipal and commercial refuse collection services operating in the Towns of Putnam and Pomfret
are similarly eligible. No person, firm, or corporation, other than those herein designated, shall, without
written permission from the Director of Public Works and the Selectmen, enter into or upon the
disposal area. The depositing at the disposal area of any garbage, rubbish or any other refuse not
originating in Putnam or Pomfret shall constitute cause for fines and/or the suspension of the disposal
area permit.
§ 264-10. Permit issuance and revocation.
Applications for permits shall be obtained from the Department of Public Works in the Putnam Town
Hall, which office shall issue and revoke all permits authorizing the use of the disposal area, subject to
the provisions of this article and other appertaining regulations. Appeals for denial or revocation of
permits shall be made to the full Board of Selectmen. All permit stickers shall be affixed and displayed
in the lower right interior corner of the motor vehicle windshield.
§ 264-11. Enactment of regulations.
The Selectmen are hereby authorized to enact from time to time other regulations deemed in the public
interest regarding the separation, recovery, collection, removal, storage and disposition of garbage,
rubbish and other refuse, including recyclables and specially designed materials, in accordance with
Connecticut General Statutes P.A. 87-544,[1] and other applicable state regulations.
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 22a-241 et seq.
§ 264-12. Contracts for collection and disposal.
The Selectmen are authorized to employ and/or negotiate and entered into contracts with individual
persons, corporations, or governmental agencies for the separation, recovery, collection, removal,
storage or disposition of garbage, rubbish or other refuse, including recyclables.
§ 264-13. Fees.
An annual fee for the use of the disposal area by residents, contractors, collection services and other
eligible parties and for the deposit of specially designated materials (e.g., tires, machinery) will be
established by the Selectmen. Any other fees deemed necessary may be instituted by the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 264-14. Licensing of commercial collectors.
No person engaged in the business of collection or disposal of garbage shall deposit garbage in
the disposal area without first obtaining a permit from the Department of Public Works.
All permits shall be issued to expire December 31 of each calendar year. All commercial users
shall be charged a tipping fee in accordance with a schedule set by the Board of Selectmen.
The Board is authorized and empowered, prior to issuing a permit, to require evidence of liability
insurance in effect covering all vehicles to be used to transport garbage into the disposal area.
Any commercial user owning more than one vehicle and one removable body will provide a list of
all vehicles and removable bodies to the Department of Public Works. Changes in vehicles or
removable bodies used to transport garbage to the disposal area shall be provided by the
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 113/167
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
[1]
[1]
commercial users as changes occur. The list shall designate each vehicle by vehicle registration
and identification numbers.
A licensed commercial user attempting to deposit garbage in the disposal area which was
collected or generated in towns other than Putnam or Pomfret shall be ordered to remove the
vehicle from the disposal area immediately by the Director of Public Works or his representative,
notwithstanding the fact that part of said load of garbage was collected or generated in the Town
of Putnam or Pomfret.
Permits must be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle described in the permit and shall be
shown on request at the time of dumping. No commercial hauler shall be allowed to dump a load
of garbage in the disposal area if the operator of the vehicle fails to have said permit in his
possession or fails to show said permit on request. In such instances, such vehicle shall be
ordered to be removed from the disposal area immediately by the Mayor, a member of the Board
of Selectmen, the Director of Public Works or his representative.
§ 264-15. Penalties for offenses.
Except wherever otherwise specified in this ordinance, any person or permittee violating any
provision of this ordinance, or the regulations enacted hereunder, shall be subject to the following
fines and penalties:
First offense: a fine in the amount of $100 plus the suspension of all rights to use of said
landfill area for a period of time not to exceed one week.
Second offense: a fine in the amount of $100 plus the suspension of all rights to use of said
landfill area for a period of time not to exceed two weeks.
Third offense: a fine in the amount of $100 plus the suspension of all rights to use of said
landfill area for a period of time not to exceed two months.
In addition, the Town or its agent reserves the right to refuse access to the disposal area where
the provisions of this article or regulations enacted hereunder are violated.
§ 264-16. Collection and transport.
All garbage, rubbish and other refuse collected and transported from within the Town of Putnam or
Pomfret shall be collected and transported in such a manner as to prevent scattering of these materials
upon the streets and highways (covered and/or secured). All vehicles used for the collection or
transport of garbage, rubbish or other refuse within the Town of Putnam or Pomfret shall be subject to
inspection by the Director of Public Works.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 264-17. Littering; penalties for offenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, or leave any litter or rubbish in any public park,
public playground or recreation area, or public street in the Town. Such litter or rubbish shall be placed
in the proper receptacles where these are provided, and when receptacles are not so provided, such
litter or rubbish shall be carried away by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed
of elsewhere. Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $199 for each
occurrence.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 264-18. Unlawful depositing of materials.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 114/167
[1]
Except as specifically permitted by the Town, it shall be unlawful for any person to throw upon the
street, or any other property under the control of the Town, or in any catch basin, fire hole, drain, river,
or other waterway in the Town, any garbage, rubbish or other refuse.
§ 264-19. Improper storage prohibited.
No person having custody or control of residential, industrial or business premises from which
garbage, rubbish or other refuse, including recyclables, is collected for disposal in the disposal area
shall permit or cause any garbage, rubbish, or other refuse, including recyclables, within his/her control
to become a hazard to public travel, health or safety or to become a nuisance of any sort.[1]
Editor's Note: Former § 13, prohibiting the unauthorized collection of recyclables, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 264-20. Hazardous materials.
It shall be unlawful to dispose of, within the Town of Putnam, materials which are identified by the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) as hazardous materials.
§ 264-21. Enforcement.
The law enforcement agency of the Town of Putnam shall be charged with enforcement of the
provisions of this article, together with Town Constables, and any legal recourse, civil or criminal,
available to the Selectmen.
Article III. Garbage Pickup System
[Adopted 1-21-1998 STM, approved at referendum 1-29-1998]
§ 264-22. Authority to establish system.
The Mayor and Board of Selectmen are hereby authorized to create, implement and maintain a "pay
by the bag" garbage pickup system for the Town and to execute such contract or contracts as may be
in the best interest of the Town to implement such system. Included in this system shall be authority to
adopt and implement a sticker or "pay by the bag" system which shall be designed to control the
character and amount of solid waste to be covered by the curbside pickup program. The Board of
Selectmen are specifically authorized to set such fees for a sticker or bag system as they deem proper
and expedient to encourage proper disposal of all wastes and to encourage recycling.
Chapter 269. Street Naming and Numbering
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 175.
Driveways — See Ch. 187.
Article I. Street Naming and Numbering
[Adopted 7-18-1988 STM]
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 115/167
[1]
§ 269-1. Purpose.
For the purpose of creating order in the streets of the Town of Putnam, to ensure that the Town has
proper and useful planning, to promote public safety and convenience and to ease and speed essential
emergency services, the Town adopts the following provisions.
§ 269-2. Official numbering system adopted.
The numbering system, as shown on a set of maps on file in the office of the Assessor entitled "Town
of Putnam — Street Numbering System, 1988," is hereby adopted as authorized by Section 7-148 of
the Connecticut General Statutes as the street numbering system of the Town of Putnam.[1]
Editor's Note: See also Art. II of this chapter.
§ 269-3. Designation of street names.
Furthermore, to ensure that the street numbering system is correct and understandable and that there
is no confusion in street names, the following streets and roads shall henceforth be officially
recognized by the names indicated herein:
Name of Street Description
Front Street A state highway beginning at the bridge over the Quinebaug River and
running easterly to the intersection with School Street and Oak Street,
formerly known as "Route 44"
Harrisville Road A road beginning at a point at the eastern terminus of Woodstock Avenue
and running west and south to the Woodstock/Putnam Town line
James Street East A road running from the intersection of Perry Street and through Arthur
Street and Edmond Street in an easterly direction, formerly known as
"James Street"
James Street West A road running from Eden Street in a westerly direction, formerly known as
"James Street"
Liberty Highway A state highway running from a point on the Killingly/Putnam Town line
transversing the entire length of Putnam to a point on the Thompson/Putnam
Town line, formerly known as "Route 21"
Peake Brook Road A road beginning at a point at the eastern terminus of Woodstock Avenue
and running westerly to the Woodstock/Putnam Town line
Pomfret Street A state highway running from a point on the Pomfret/Putnam Town line,
running easterly to the Quinebaug River, formerly known as "Route 44"
Providence Pike A state highway running easterly from a point at the intersection with Dewey
Street to the Town of Putnam/Rhode Island line, formerly known as "Route
44"
School Street A state highway running from Oak Street and Front Street (formerly known
as "Route 44"), easterly to a point on the Special Service District/Town line
and at an intersection with Dewey Street
Woodstock Avenue
West
A state highway running from the intersection of West Thompson Road and
Woodstock Avenue, westerly to a point on the Thompson/Putnam Town line,
formerly known as "Route 171"
§ 269-4. Acceptance of streets.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 116/167
A.
B.
C.
D.
Certain private streets, private roads, and/or nonpublic rights-of-way have been numbered under this
system for the convenience of the public and to provide for identification of each area of the Town for
access by emergency vehicles. It is expressly stated that no such designation or numbering shall, in
any way, be considered or interpreted as acceptance or recognition by the Town of Putnam of any
particular road or right-of-way designated on said plan as a Town-accepted street.
Article II. Street Numbering System
[Adopted 1-22-2013 STM]
§ 269-5. Display of street numbers.
Dwellings, buildings and structures shall be numbered in a comprehensive, uniform and logical
sequence. The owner of every dwelling, building and structure shall display the Town-assigned street
number to his/her/its property. The street number must be displayed on the building or on a post, sign,
mailbox, or other device between the building and the street. But, if a building is set back more than
100 feet from the center of the street it faces, or if the numbers would not be legible from the street
center because of an obstruction, the numbers must be placed on a post, sign, mailbox, or other
device located within 10 feet of the building's driveway entrance.
§ 269-6. Standards for street numbers.
Numbers must be at least four inches high, placed between four and 12 feet above the ground,
and placed on the exterior front of the building or on a post, sign, mailbox, or other device located
between the building and the street. The color of the numbers must contrast with the color of the
background material to which they are affixed, and they must be legible when the building is
viewed from at least one point on the street in front of the building.
For buildings containing more than three dwelling units which have entrances from interior
passageways, numerals shall be affixed within five feet of every door by which the building must
be entered. Otherwise the specifications and locations for such numerals shall be as for other
buildings.
Residential dwellings that consist of multiple units having different street numbers shall post the
range of house numbers per building at a prominent location thereon, consisting of numerals that
are not less than six inches in height and of a color contrasting with the color of the background
material to which they are affixed, such that the location is visible at least 100 feet to approaching
emergency personnel. In addition, each individual unit shall have at its front and rear entrances a
visible number consisting of three-inch numerals in contrast to the background.
Exemption. Buildings and structures not designed for human occupancy, sheds, noncommercial
garages, barns and other agricultural buildings and structures shall be exempt from the
requirements of this article, provided such structure is located on the same lot as a principal use or
structure which has an assigned and displayed number.
§ 269-7. Assignment of street number prerequisite to building
permit; display of number prerequisite to certificate of occupancy.
The Building Official shall ensure that no building permit shall be issued to a dwelling, building or
structure until a street number has been assigned to or associated with it. Further, the Building Official
shall not issue a certificate of occupancy to said dwelling, building or structure until the street number,
if one is assigned, has been displayed in a manner consistent with the requirements of § 269-6.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 117/167
A.
B.
§ 269-8. Enforcement.
Each owner, agent, or occupant of any dwelling, building and structure who shall fail to affix the
number assigned within 60 days of receiving notice shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon
conviction of such, shall be liable for the imposition of a fine not to exceed $20. Each day in which
the failure to affix a number continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Enforcement office. This article may be enforced by any police officer of the Putnam Special
Services District within the district or the State Police in the areas of Putnam outside the Special
Services District, together with the Fire Marshal, the Building Official, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer and their respective deputies.
Chapter 273. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 175.
Driveways — See Ch. 187.
Excavations — See Ch. 202.
Nuisances — See Ch. 242.
Street numbering — See Ch. 269.
Utilities — See Ch. 298.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 312.
Article I. Street Construction and Acceptance
[Adopted 6-26-1974 STM]
§ 273-1. Definitions.
For purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
APPLICANT/PERMITTEE
Any person, firm, corporation or public utility opening or causing to be opened, altered, improved
or changed any street or proposed street in the Town of Putnam.
BOARD OF SELECTMEN
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Putnam or their authorized agent.
ENGINEER/SURVEYOR
A Connecticut licensed professional civil engineer or surveyor.
LEGISLATIVE BODY
The Town Meeting of the Town of Putnam.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of the Town of Putnam.
STREET
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 118/167
A.
B.
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
A.
B.
Any street, avenue, lane, road, highway, boulevard and any other public right-of-way existing or
proposed for dedication to and acceptance by the Town of Putnam for public use.
PRIMARY STREET
Any street designed to accommodate a daily traffic flow within 20 years of 1,000 or more trips
per day. It shall also include streets serving industrial and commercial properties.
SECONDARY STREET
Any street designed to accommodate a daily traffic flow of fewer than 1,000 trips.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
The current Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Putnam, as amended.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 273-2. Permit required; transfer and revocation.
No person, firm or corporation shall open or cause to be opened, altered, improved or changed any
existing or proposed street in the Town of Putnam prior to received a permit for same from the Board of
Selectmen. Said permit is nontransferable and may be revoked if any of the provisions of this article
are violated. Willful refusal of any permittee to stop construction after receiving notice of revocation
shall be deemed a violation of this article.
§ 273-3. Required plans.
Whenever any street is proposed as required by the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of
Putnam, the applicant/permittee shall present to the Board of Selectmen the following plans as
prepared by an engineer/surveyor:
Two certified copies of the street layout plan.
A road profile.
A plan or plans showing proposed utility locations, test pit data, grading, paving, curbs and
drainage areas, including storm drainage structures and specifications.
An application for a street permit on forms provided by the Board of Selectmen.
In those instances where Planning Commission approval is required, the applicant/permittee
shall certify on forms provided that said approval has been obtained prior to the Board of
Selectmen's issuance of a permit.
Building permits shall not be issued prior to issuance of a street permit by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 273-4. Bonds.
Streets and improvement bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant/permittee shall
certify that a road surety in an amount to cover all required improvements has been provided to
the Town.
Maintenance bond. Prior to the acceptance of said street by the Town, the applicant/permittee
shall provide a maintenance surety or bond which guarantees for a period of one year to indemnify
the Town against defective materials and/or workmanship the improvements installed as required
in said permit. Said surety shall be in the amount of 25% of the road construction costs. Said
surety shall be released by the Town after one year if any defects arising from said improvements
have been corrected.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 119/167
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
[1]
F.
§ 273-5. Specifications for required improvements.
Street widths.
Primary: The roadway of this design street shall be 40 feet in width minimum, centered in a
right-of-way 64 feet in width.
Secondary: The roadway of this design street shall be 26 feet in width, centered in a right-ofway
50 feet in width.
Drainage.
All areas behind curbs shall be constructed so that control of surface water is maintained.
Catch basins and pipe of a minimum diameter of 15 inches shall be installed at all intersection
corners, and catch basins constructed upon streets shall be at locations as designated by the
Board of Selectmen.
All catch basins shall be connected in such manner to cause a continuous flow of controlled
surface water and subsurface water to an ultimate destination of natural flow, pond, brook or
river.
All drainage pipe shall be, as a minimum, reinforced concrete or asphalt-coated corrugated
metal.
The depth of storm sewer pipe shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen.
Utilities. All utilities shall be in place before final grading of streets.
Paving. All streets shall be paved to the full roadway width with bituminous concrete and in
accordance with the following:
Prior to placement of the two-course bituminous concrete, the underlying base course shall
be brought to the planned proper grade and cross section and compacted with a minimum
eight-ton wheel roller.
The first course shall consist of a bituminous concrete binder course Class 1A laid in
accordance with State Highway Department specifications and compacted with a steel-wheel
roller weighing not less than eight tons.
Said first course shall be compacted to a thickness of two inches.
The second course shall consist of a bituminous concrete surface course Class 2 laid in
accordance with State Highway Department specifications and compacted to a thickness of
one inch with an eight-ton roller.
Curbing.
Bituminous concrete or its equivalent curbing shall be installed upon all streets.
Said curbing is to be installed in conformance with the standard Connecticut Highway
Department specifications.
Material specifications. Unless otherwise stated, all methods and materials shall be in accordance
with State of Connecticut, State Highway Department, Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges
and Incidental Construction, current edition.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 120/167
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 273-6. Inspection and notification.
The applicant/permittee agrees to notify the Board of Selectmen at least 24 hours in advance of
each phase of the work.
All written instructions and/or orders of the Board of Selectmen shall be complied with.
The Board of Selectmen shall have a right of inspection of and access to all phases of the work.
§ 273-7. Existing roads.
For work in existing roads, permits shall be issued as follows:
The applicant/permittee shall provide proof of insurance to the Town.
An application shall be filed on forms provided, stating the nature of the work.
The applicant/permittee shall agree to replace all materials from a paved street with those
materials and methods as required by the Town.
§ 273-8. Emergency utility repairs.
In cases involving emergency repairs to public utilities, the requirements of § 273-2 shall not apply.
In such cases, the applicant/permittee shall notify the Board of Selectmen within 48 hours of
completion of the repairs.
§ 273-9. Acceptance of streets.
Upon certification by the Board of Selectmen that the conditions of this article and other street
regulations of the Town of Putnam have been complied with, the Board of Selectmen shall
recommend acceptance to a Town Meeting.
Acceptance of streets shall be by resolution and shall be noted upon the permanent records of the
Town.
§ 273-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $100. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Article II. Gutters
[Adopted as §§ 54 and 55 (C)]
§ 273-11. Permit required for construction.
No person shall erect or construct any bridge over any gutter in and of the streets of the City, or fill up
any canal, drain, ditch or gutter made by authority, or obstruct the course of any run of water in any
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 121/167
A.
B.
C.
street or public square without permit of Common Council.
§ 273-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person offending against any of the provisions of this article shall pay a penalty of not more than
$25 for every such offense.
§ 273-13. Sidewalk grades.
Sidewalk grades hereafter given shall be to the curb grade unless otherwise ordered by the Common
Council.
Article III. Street Openings
[Adopted as §§ 151 and 152 (C)]
§ 273-14. Governing body approval required.
No street or public thoroughfare or part thereof shall be laid out or opened to public use within the
limits of said City except by the direction or with the consent of the Common Council first obtained.
§ 273-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of § 273-14 shall forfeit and pay a penalty of
$50 for each period of 10 days during which said street or thoroughfare or part thereof shall remain
open and accessible to the public, and the original opening aforesaid, and each continuing period of 10
days, as aforesaid, shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
Article IV. Sidewalks
[Adopted 5-17-2004 STM]
§ 273-16. Liability for removal of snow, ice and sleet.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13a-149 of the Connecticut General Statutes or any
other General Statutes, or any other General Statute or Special Act, the Town of Putnam shall not
be liable to any person injured in person or property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a
public sidewalk unless the Town of Putnam is the owner or the person in possession and control of
land abutting such sidewalk, other than land used as a highway or street, provided that the Town
of Putnam shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk.
The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall have the
same duty of care with respect to the presence of ice or snow on such sidewalk abutting his
property as the municipality had prior to the effective date of this section, adopted pursuant to the
provisions of Public Act No. 81-340 (C.G.S. § 7-163a) and shall be liable to persons injured in
person or property where a breach of said duty is the proximate cause of said injury.
No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property caused by the presence of ice
or snow on a public sidewalk against a person who owns or is in possession and control of land
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 122/167
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
abutting a public sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date when the injury is
first sustained.
§ 273-17. Responsibility for removal of snow, ice and sleet.
The owner of any building or land bordering on any street within the Town of Putnam where there
is a sidewalk, graded, paved or planked, shall remove or cause to be removed therefrom any and
all snow, sleet or ice to a width of at least 36 inches within 36 hours after the same shall have
fallen, been deposited, found or formed.
In case the snow, sleet or ice on such sidewalk shall be frozen so hard that it cannot be removed,
such owner of the building or lot of land, as aforesaid, shall cause such sidewalk to be made safe
and convenient or passable by covering any and all such snow, sleet or ice with sand or other
suitable synthetic materials within the time limit specified above, and shall as soon thereafter as
the weather shall permit thoroughly clean such sidewalk.
Penalties for offenses.
The owner of any building or lot of land whose duty it is to clear the sidewalk adjacent thereto
who shall violate any of the provisions of Subsections A and B, or refuse or neglect to comply
with the same, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined the sum of $25 for each offense, and each and every day thereafter shall be deemed
a separate offense.
Whenever a corporation violates the provisions of Subsections A and B, the officers and
directors of such corporation shall be personally liable to pay any fine incurred by such
corporation.
The owner of any building standing upon or so near the line of a street that snowslides or ice from
the roof may endanger public travel shall, within a reasonable time after the termination or
abatement of a snowstorm, but in any case within 36 hours, cause the snow to be removed from
the roof thereon in such manner as will not endanger travelers.
No owner, occupant, lessee, or other person in charge of any building or land abutting any street
or highway within the Town of Putnam shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow, sleet or
ice which falls upon such building or land in any portion of the traveled right-of-way of the street,
highway or sidewalk. Every person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this subsection
shall be fined not more than $50.
The appropriate law enforcement agency shall enforce the provisions of this article.
The Mayor or his designee may, but shall not be required to, cause the removal of snow, ice, sleet
and debris from any sidewalk wherein it has remained for 36 hours after the conclusion of any
storm. The cost of such removal shall be liened against the property owner pursuant to the
provisions of Section 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 273-18. Maintenance.
The Director of Public Works shall have power and authority from time to time, as public necessity
and convenience may require, to order the adjoining property owners to designate and fix the
course, width, height, and level of any and all sidewalks in and upon the Town streets and
highways and may, when the public necessity and convenience so require, procure and set in a
proper manner such curbing as may be deemed suitable and proper for the location, and shall
construct the gutters to correspond therewith, and may thereupon order the owner or owners of
the land and buildings fronting on such proposed sidewalk, at their own expense, to raise, level or
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 123/167
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
make such sidewalks on their respective frontages according to the course, width, height and level
designated as aforesaid.
Property owners may also be required to flag, concrete, or pave the same in such manner as such
Director of Public Works shall direct, provided such direction is in conformity with sound
engineering practices and the provisions of the Town of Putnam Planning and Zoning Regulations.
All persons shall maintain the sidewalk abutting or adjoining their property free of vegetation and
in a safe and passable condition free of cracks and other obstructions or dangers to pedestrians.
Chapter 285. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I. Exemption for Solar Energy Systems
[Adopted 5-9-1977 (C)]
§ 285-1. Exemption granted.
The City of Putnam hereby authorizes the property tax exemption for solar energy heating or cooling
systems set forth in Section 12-81(56)(a), (b) and (c) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Article II. Payment Due Dates
[Adopted 3-4-1980 STM]
§ 285-2. Due dates established.
The property taxes of the Town of Putnam shall be due and payable as follows:
Motor vehicle taxes shall be due and payable July 1, in full.
Real property taxes:
Real property taxes of less than $100 shall be due and payable July 1, in full.
Real property taxes of $100 or more shall be payable 50% July 1, and 50% January 1,
following.
Personal property taxes:
Personal property taxes of less than $100 shall be payable July 1, in full.
Personal property taxes of $100 or more shall be payable 50% July 1, and 50% January 1,
following.
Article III. Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 7-11-1989 STM]
§ 285-3. Exemption granted.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 124/167
Commencing with the Grand List effective October 1, 1989, and thereafter, any veteran entitled to
exemption from property tax in accordance with Subdivision (19) of Section 12-81 of the Connecticut
General Statutes shall be entitled to an additional exemption applicable to the assessed value of
property up to the amount of $1,000, provided such veteran's qualifying income does not exceed the
applicable maximum amount as provided under Section 12-81.
§ 285-4. Applicability to surviving spouse.
Pursuant to 12-81f, Subsection (b), of the Connecticut General Statutes, said additional exemption
shall apply to a qualifying surviving spouse of a veteran, and the Town of Putnam adopts, in its entirety,
the provisions of Section 12-81f.
Article IV. Waiver of Certain Taxes Due
[Adopted 8-10-1998 STM]
§ 285-5. Waiver of taxes under $5.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 12-144c of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town hereby
waives any property tax due wherein the total amount due on said property tax bill shall be $5 or less
in any fiscal year.
§ 285-6. Effective date.
This article shall be effective as of property appearing on the Grand List of October 1, 1998, and
thereafter.
Chapter 291. Town Property, Use of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 7-17-2000 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 143.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 154.
Snakes — See Ch. 162, Art. I.
Nuisances — See Ch. 235.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 242.
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 246.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 250.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 273.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 304.
Special Services District — See Ch. A350.
§ 291-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to set forth in one place a comprehensive regulation for the use and
control of all Town-owned property under the jurisdiction of the Putnam Parks and Recreation
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 125/167
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
B.
Department and the Board of Selectmen, also including those properties under the specific control of
the Putnam Board of Education, the Putnam Public Library, the Putnam Water and Sewer Authority,
and the Putnam Special Services District (hereinafter referred to as "another governmental entity"). It is
the intention of this chapter to provide for the use and enjoyment of Town facilities by all of Putnam's
citizens on a comprehensive and organized basis.
§ 291-2. Additional specific regulations.
This chapter does not purport to limit or reduce the power of the Town Parks and Recreation
Department pursuant to the provisions of Chapter VI, Section 12, of the Town Charter, or the power of
the Board of Selectmen pursuant to Chapter IV, Section 4, of the Town Charter to enact additional or
supplemental regulations not inconsistent with this chapter over property over which they may have
power or control, or the power of the Board of Education, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes,
the power of the Water and Sewer Authority, pursuant to Chapter VI, Section 16, of the Town Charter,
the Library Board, pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes, and the power of the Putnam Special
Services District, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter IX of the Town Charter.
§ 291-3. Properties under supervision and control of Parks and
Recreation Department.
Properties under the supervision and control of the Putnam Parks and Recreation Department
shall include Murphy Park, St. Marie-Greenhalgh Field, the Youth Soccer Complex, Simonzi Park,
Rotary Park, Tennis/Basketball Courts, Veteran's Park, and the Owen Tarr Sports Complex,
together with the River Trail, including Miller Park, Chase Street Playground, Kings Field, Dowell
Open Space Property, together with such additional land as may be designated by the Board of
Selectmen from time to time.
Parking areas.
[Added 4-5-2010 STM]
The Putnam Parks and Recreation Department shall have authority and control over the
parking areas associated with the facilities under the control of the Parks and Recreation
Department, specifically including control of parking at Murphy Park and the Owen Tarr Sports
Complex. The Parks and Recreation Department shall adopt such rules and regulations and
post said property with said parking rules as it deems appropriate, provided that:
[Amended 9-20-2010 STM; 12-20-2010 STM]
No semi-tractor/semi-trailer or truck exceeding five tons shall be parked in such facility
unless the Recreation Director has given a specific written permit for a vehicle associated
with a specific athletic event.
The Recreation Department shall have the right to limit the number of hours a vehicle can
be parked continuously at any of the facilities under its jurisdiction as well as the right to
limit parking to those individuals attending or associated with a specific recreational
activity or event.
The Parks and Recreation Department shall make reasonable accommodations with the
Historical Society or any subsequent lessee of the Town-owned building presently
occupied by the Historical Society at the southeasterly corner of the Owen Tarr Sports
Complex for parking for its events and activities.
In no event shall any parking area or other area maintained under the authority of the
Parks and Recreation Department be used for the storage, maintenance or repair of any
motor vehicle except vehicles owned by the Town of Putnam.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 126/167
(e)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, overnight parking of private
passenger vehicles shall be permitted during any period of snow emergency or parking
ban as designated by the appropriate Putnam governmental authority.
For the purposes of this section, the parking area associated with the Owen Tarr Sports
Complex shall include both the parking area on the westerly side of the athletic fields and
grounds and the parking area southerly of the athletic fields and grounds southerly to Bolles
Street.
§ 291-4. Properties under supervision and control of Mayor and
Board of Selectmen.
Any other Town properties not excluded as property under the control of another governmental entity
pursuant to § 291-1 of this chapter, or under the control of the Parks and Recreation Department
pursuant to the provision of § 291-3 of this chapter, specifically including all Town-maintained parking
lots, shall be considered to be miscellaneous Town property under the control of the Mayor and Board
of Selectmen (hereinafter referred to as "the appropriate governmental authority").
§ 291-5. Rules for use of facilities under Parks and Recreation
Department control.
Rules for the use of facilities under the control of the Putnam Parks and Recreation Department shall
be as follows:
All requests for the use of facilities under the charge of the Town of Putnam Parks and Recreation
Commission will be done through the Director of Parks and Recreation at least 14 days prior to the
date of requested use, but not more than 60 days prior.
All organized athletic teams and other leagues will submit a complete schedule of games to the
Director 14 days prior to the scheduled beginning of the league. All special games, playoffs and/or
tournaments will be cleared through the Director.
All requests for concessions at any facility under the charge of the Parks and Recreation
Commission will be in writing to the Director at least three days prior to the Commission meeting
which occurs immediately before the requested use date. Upon approval by the Parks and
Recreation Commission, the concessionaire will sign a concession and vending agreement in the
office of the Town Clerk. All necessary permits and certificates of insurance will be submitted
before final approval for the concession is granted.
An organization having extended use of a Town facility, such as the Putnam Little League, Inc.,
may not sublet the facility it has use of to another organization. Each user must apply to the
Director in the manner set forth above.
Any user who must postpone or cancel an event will contact the Director immediately to notify him
of the postponement or cancellation, and will request dates from the Director for rescheduling the
event.
Use of facilities under the charge of the Town of Putnam Parks and Recreation Commission will be
granted only after the above stipulations have been adhered to by the individual or organization
requesting the facility.
§ 291-6. Rules applicable to all municipal property.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 127/167
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
G.
The following rules apply to all municipal property:
The possession, sale or consumption of alcohol is hereby expressly prohibited on all Town
property, except for special events for which the Board of Selectmen have, for due cause, voted to
grant a waiver from this prohibition and to allow serving alcohol on such terms and conditions as
the Board of Selectmen may authorize for that specific event.
The Selectmen may allow the sale of liquor as part of a formal written lease with a tenant
holding a valid State of Connecticut restaurant liquor permit.
[Added 7-16-2007 STM]
The Selectmen may allow the consumption of liquor as part of a formal written lease with a
tenant who holds a special permit for patio/outside seating. If such permitted facility permits
alcohol consumption on a BYOB ("bring your own bottle") basis, alcohol consumption shall be
limited to those times when the holder of a valid State of Connecticut restaurant liquor permit
could offer liquor for sale, and under all the guidelines and requirements of the Putnam
Special Services District and the State of Connecticut Liquor Control Commission.
[Added 7-13-2009 STM]
The use of Town property for roller and/or blade skating, bicycling, and/or use for any type of
motorized recreational vehicle is hereby limited to those areas which have been specifically
designated by either the Board of Selectmen or the Recreation Commission for those specific
activities, and then only during such hours and in such portions of the facilities as may be
designated by the appropriate governmental authority.
The commercial sale of goods and/or services at any Town property is hereby expressly
prohibited, except upon such special occasions or at specific locations and under such terms and
conditions as may be authorized by the appropriate governmental authority.
The Town of Putnam's sidewalks are maintained for the convenience of its citizens and visitors
and no one shall place any object, structure or sign on the sidewalk in a manner so that it might
create a nuisance or obstruct the flow of pedestrian traffic on the respective sidewalk, or to a
motorist's sight line. No sign shall be placed or allowed to remain on any sidewalk, which is not the
subject of a duly issued zoning permit from the Town of Putnam Zoning Enforcement Officer, and
no work, specifically including the painting, construction, reconstruction, repair or painting of
goods, shall be allowed on any public sidewalk. Any failure to remove such a sign at the request of
a Putnam police officer or other enforcement agency designated by that appropriate governmental
authority shall be a violation of this chapter.
Dogs or other animals are not permitted on Town property, except for areas designated as
appropriate by the governmental authority. In any situation in which dogs or other animals are
permitted, they shall be restrained by a leash or other appropriate physical restraint, and the dog's
owner or person in possession of the dog or other animal shall be responsible for any damage
done by the dog or other animal and shall remove any organic matter left behind by the dog or
other animal.
Construction, alteration or erection of any structure on Town property is hereby expressly
prohibited without a written approval from the appropriate governmental authority.
No one shall be allowed to bring any pet onto an area owned or maintained by the Town of
Putnam which is dangerous to the general public, meaning and intending to specifically include as
subject to this regulation pit bulls and similar animals or reptiles.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 291-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 128/167
A.
B.
C.
APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY
The Putnam Parks and Recreation Commission for all of those properties under the supervision
and control of the Putnam Parks and Recreation Department, as outlined in § 291-3, and the
Mayor and Board of Selectmen as to all other nonexcluded properties.
PROPERTY UNDER THE CONTROL OF ANOTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY
All of those properties under the control of the Putnam Board of Education, Putnam Library Board,
the Putnam Water and Sewer Authority, and the Putnam Special Services District.
TOWN PROPERTY
All other property owned by the Town of Putnam not otherwise specifically excluded herein.
§ 291-8. Penalties for offenses.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the penalty for
violation of any of the rules set forth in this chapter shall be a fine of $25 for the first offense and a fine
of $50 for the second offense and a fine of $100 for a third or subsequent offense. If any violation shall
be a continuing one, each day shall constitute a separate violation for the purposes of this chapter.
Chapter 298. Utilities
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as §§ 166 through 172 (C). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 202.
Nuisances — See Ch. 235.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 273.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 312.
§ 298-1. Light and gas.
All contracts for lights for the City of Putnam shall be made by the Common Council, and no light
or gas company shall excavate in or on any street or public ground for any pipes, wells, drains,
poles or traps without a permit from the Public Works Director, and all streets or grounds
excavated by any light or gas company shall be replaced and repaired and the same left in as
good shape as the company found the same and to the full satisfaction of the Public Works
Director and the Common Council, and all such excavations shall be protected with frames,
horses, poles and lights as is provided for in other street ordinances, and said company shall not
cut any tree, shrub, fence or injure any property of the City, or any of the private grounds without
the full consent of the Public Works Director, or the consent of the parties owning the property,
which they wish to cross or use for the purpose of setting poles or running wires, and they shall
not use any buildings for their use, for running any wires or setting any wire frames on any
buildings without the full consent of the owners of the building or buildings, and they shall comply
with all other ordinances of the City of Putnam when they do not conflict with the company's
charter rights.
All poles and posts set in any City street by any light or gas company shall be kept painted in a
uniform color, and all drip from any pipes shall be carted away in a tight box or cask, and the same
shall not be pumped out on any street or public or private grounds.
All pipes laid in any streets or grounds of the City must be made water- and gastight and so the
same shall not cause any scent or smell to come from any pipes or drips, and when such fault
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 129/167
D.
E.
[1]
A.
B.
[1]
shall occur and the same companies have been notified of the same by the Public Works Director,
they shall repair same inside of a week or pay to said City a fine of not less than $25.
All light wiring, piping, meters, stop cocks and other gas work done in any house or building shall
be of the best of the several kinds and all work of setting the same to be the best and any and all
to be approved of, satisfactory to any inspection ordered by the Common Council.
Said companies shall not move any lights and light poles or set up any new lights or poles without
the consent of the Director of Public Works and approval by the Common Council.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 298-2. Telephone poles.
No telephone company shall set any poles in the City of Putnam without the consent of the Public
Works Director and the approval of the Common Council.
All telephone poles set in the City shall be kept neatly painted in a uniform color, and said
company shall not cut any trees, shrub, fence or injure any property of the City or any of the
private grounds without the full consent of the Public Works Director, or the consent of the parties
owning the property which they wish to cross or use for the purpose of setting poles or running
wires, and they shall not use any buildings for their use, for running any wires or setting any wire
frames or any buildings without the full consent of the owners of the building or buildings, and they
shall comply with all other ordinances of the City of Putnam, when the same do not conflict with
state or charter rights.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 302. Vehicles, Abandoned
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 6-2-2004 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 304.
Special Services District — See Ch. A350.
§ 302-1. Purpose.
It is the intention of this chapter to provide for the protection of the health, welfare, property and safety
of the public in general by prohibiting the existence of abandoned, wrecked, junked, inoperative,
discarded and dismantled motor vehicles left within the Town in places other than junkyards or other so
designated areas.
§ 302-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning described to
them in this section:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE
A motor vehicle which, after a good faith determination, has the appearance that the owner has
relinquished control without the intention of reclaiming it, including, but not limited to, a vehicle with
no marker plates, invalid marker plates, or one which is damaged, vandalized, dismantled,
partially dismantled, inoperative, or unusable as a motor vehicle.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 130/167
A.
B.
ANTIQUE OR COLLECTIBLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Any motor vehicle at least 25 years old which holds a distinctive value because of its style, year of
manufacture, name, place of manufacture or method of construction.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
For those areas located within the Putnam Special Services District, the enforcement officer for
this provision shall be the Putnam Police Department; and for those areas outside the Special
Services District, the enforcement officer shall be designated by the Mayor and Board of
Selectmen.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Any vehicle which, due to the mechanical condition thereof, cannot be operated upon the public
roadway without major repair, or cannot be legally registered with the Connecticut Department of
Motor Vehicles in its current condition.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE
Any vehicle unregistered by the Department of Motor Vehicles as defined in the above definition,
which is determined to be inoperable.
MOTOR VEHICLE
Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include but
not be limited to automobiles, buses, motor bikes, vans, motorcycles, motor-scooters, trucks, gocarts,
golf carts, campers and trailers.
§ 302-3. Storage restrictions; nuisances; exceptions.
No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing, or leaving of any motor vehicle of
any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or partially
dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any public or private property within the Town
for a period of time in excess of 30 days. The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled,
inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public
property, is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. Further, one motor vehicle is exempted from the provisions of this
chapter if it is fully covered by a tarpaulin or other opaque covering and set back at least 40 feet
from any road or property line. In order for such a vehicle to be exempt, the cover must be intact
and the vehicle must be rendered safe, locked and inaccessible to children and should be free of
jagged, sharp, or protruding metal or glass parts which could constitute a danger or a nuisance.
This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any
vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise duly licensed by the Connecticut Department
of Motor Vehicles and properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning
laws of the Town, or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for
operation on drag strips or raceways, or any vehicle retained by the owner for antique collection
purposes.
§ 302-4. Notice to remove.
Whenever it comes to the attention of the Town that any nuisance as defined in this chapter exists, a
notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in case
there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying him of the
existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal within 30 days. The enforcement officer shall also
comply with any publication requirements set forth in Section 14-150a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, or otherwise for additional notices which may be legally required.
§ 302-5. Responsibility for removal.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 131/167
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located,
either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal.
§ 302-6. Notice procedure.
The enforcement officer shall give notice to remove to the owner or occupant of the private property
where the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle is located, at least 30 days before
the time of compliance. A copy of the notice sent by registered mail to the owner or occupant of the
private property at his last known address, together with such additional notices as may be required by
law, shall constitute sufficient notice.
§ 302-7. Contents of notice.
The notice shall contain the request for removal within the 30 days specified in this chapter, and the
notice shall advise that failure to comply with the notice to remove shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
§ 302-8. Request for hearing.
The persons to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized agents, may file a written
request with the Mayor's office for a hearing before the Mayor or his designee, within the thirty-day
period of compliance prescribed in § 302-6 for the purpose of defending the charges made by the
Town.
§ 302-9. Hearing procedure.
The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request and the persons to
whom the notices are directed shall be advised of the time and place of said hearing at least seven
days in advance thereof. At any such hearing the Town and the persons to whom the notices have
been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems necessary.
§ 302-10. Failure to remove vehicle from property.
If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the thirty-day period of
compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing is held, and the
existence of the violation is affirmed by the Mayor or his designee as hearing officer, and the vehicle is
not removed within one week from notice of the Mayor's decision, such failure shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
§ 302-11. Penalties for offenses.
Each vehicle maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation of this
chapter. The penalty for each violation shall be $100 per day, which may be assessed against the
record owner of the real estate upon which the vehicle is located, the occupant in possession of the
real estate, or the record owner of the vehicle, if the same can be determined.
Chapter 304. Vehicles and Traffic
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 132/167
[1]
[1]
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades and processions — See Ch. 242.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 302.
Special Services District — See Ch. A350.
Article I. Winter Parking
[Adopted 10-2-1972 ATM]
§ 304-1. Time limits.
No automobile, truck, vehicle or any personal property of any kind or description shall be parked,
placed, deposited, left or allowed to remain within the limits of any street or highway in the Town of
Putnam between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following morning of any day between November
15 in any year and the March 15 of the following year, so as in any way to prevent, impede, hinder,
delay or interfere with the removal of snow or the plowing of a path or paths through the snow on such
streets or highways.
§ 304-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of § 304-1 hereof shall be fined not more than
$10 for each offense.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Section 3, regarding streets under the jurisdiction of the City of Putnam, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
Article II. Traffic Regulations
[Adopted as indicated in section histories (C)]
§ 304-3. Unattended vehicles.
[Adopted 7-14-1925; amended 4-3-1928]
No vehicle shall be left standing unattended on any highway in one position or in several positions for
more than 12 hours. A vehicle standing in the highway shall be deemed to be unattended unless
occupied by a person for the purpose of operating the same.
§ 304-4. Parking restrictions.
[Adopted 12-1-1931]
There shall be no parking during school hours on the east side of School Street, from Oak Street south
to the southern boundary of the Israel Putnam School property.[1]
Editor's Note: Former § 8, prohibiting parking so as to obstruct a driveway, adopted 7-14-1925 (C),
which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 304-5. Parking in crosswalks prohibited.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 133/167
[1]
[Adopted 1-3-1933]
No vehicle shall be left standing or parked upon any area defined as a crosswalk with white lines, or
constructed as such.
§ 304-6. Permitted stopping in restricted areas.
[Adopted 1-3-1933]
Vehicles while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers, or loading or unloading
merchandise, or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or directions may stop within restricted areas
but solely for said purposes, but no such vehicle shall be left unattended.
§ 304-7. One-way streets.
[Adopted 1-3-1933]
Name of Street Direction of Travel Location
Lee Street West From Main Street
§ 304-8. Parking defined.
[Adopted 1-3-1933]
The term "parking" as used in the aforesaid article shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, upon a highway otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise, or in obedience
to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.
§ 304-9. Penalties for offenses.
[Adopted 1-3-1933[1]]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction and
fined not less than $35 nor more than $90 for each offense in accordance with the schedule of fines
established by the Superior Court.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article III. Parking of Commercial Vehicles in Municipal
Parking Lots
[Adopted 10-2-1995 ATM]
§ 304-10. Statutory authority; purpose.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-148(c)(7)(B)(i) of the Connecticut
General Statutes and for the purpose of public safety, comfort, convenience and welfare, and for the
greatest utilization of municipal parking lots by commuters and other noncommercial traffic.
§ 304-11. Restrictions.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 134/167
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any semitractor, semitrailer, or truck exceeding five tons in
the following municipal parking lots:
Name of Street Side Location
Kennedy Drive Both South of Route 44 and at Rotary Park
Main Street Adjacent to Post Office
Providence Street North
South Main Street East of railroad tracks
Union Square
§ 304-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this article shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100
for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 312. Water and Sewers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam as indicated in Part histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 175.
Excavations — See Ch. 202.
Water rates — See Ch. 206, Art. IV.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 273.
Water use restrictions — See Ch. 314.
Part 1. Water and Sewer Commission
[Adopted 12-29-1980(C)]
Article I. Commission Established
§ 312-1. Appointment; compensation.
There shall be a Water and Sewer Commission of the City of Putnam, to be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Common Council. All members of the Commission shall serve
without compensation, except for the reimbursement of necessary expenses, as authorized by a
majority of the Commission, and until their successors have been appointed and qualified.
§ 312-2. Membership; terms.
[Amended 7-13-1981]
The Commission shall consist of five members. Appointees to the Commission shall serve for
terms of five years, except that of those first appointed under the provisions of this Part 1, one
shall be appointed for a term of five years, one shall be appointed for a term of four years, one
shall be appointed for a term of three years, one shall be appointed for a term of two years, and
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 135/167
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
one shall be appointed for a term of one year. Thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint the members of
the Commission to serve for terms of five years and to succeed that member whose term then
expires.
The Water and Sewer Authority shall include, in addition to its five members authorized by Town
Charter, three alternate members. Said members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen,
initially one member for a term of one year; one member for a term of three years and one
member for a term of five years; subsequently, each alternate position shall be filled for a term of
five years upon the expiration of the existing term. Said term shall be arranged such that terms of
the alternates expire on the same date as the regular members. In the absence of a regular
member, the chairperson of the Authority shall appoint an alternate to serve.
[Added 5-4-2015 STM]
§ 312-3. Qualifications.
No person shall be eligible for appointment to the Commission who is not at the time of his
appointment an elector and resident of the City, and any person ceasing to be an elector or resident of
the City shall thereupon forfeit his membership on the Commission. No more than three members of
the Commission shall be of the same political party. The Commission shall, by majority vote, elect a
Chairman from its membership.
§ 312-4. Responsibilities.
The Commission shall be responsible for the good conduct of operations of the Water Pollution Control
Authority, the municipal waterworks system, the sanitary sewerage system and shall also be
designated the Water Pollution Control Authority for the City of Putnam. The Commission shall have all
those powers and duties conferred and imposed upon municipal water and sewer authorities by the
Connecticut General Statutes, and such other powers and duties, not inconsistent with the City
Charter, as may from time to time be prescribed by the City Council.
§ 312-5. Rates and charges.
The Commission shall recommend to the City Council the adoption of just and equitable rates or
charges for the use of the waterworks system. Such rates or charges shall be established in
accordance with Chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
The Commission shall establish, in accordance with Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General
Statutes and 40 CFR 35.929 and 35.935-13, as amended, rates or charges for the use of the
sewerage system.
§ 312-6. Appointment of employees.
The Commission shall appoint, and may remove, subject to such rules and regulations concerning City
employees as may, from time to time, be adopted by the City, the following:
A Director of the Water Pollution Control Authority, who shall be the administrative head of the
Water Pollution Control Authority and may have such powers and duties as may be prescribed by
the Commission.
A collector of sewerage and water system connection and use charges, who shall collect such
charges in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes for the collection of
property taxes. Said collector shall have the same powers and authority as tax collectors.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 136/167
C. All other employees in the Water Pollution Control Authority.
Part 2. Use of Sewer System
[Adopted 12-29-1980(C)]
Article II. Definitions
§ 312-7. Terms defined.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Part 2 shall be as
follows:
BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)
The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN
That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from
soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning three feet (0.914 meter) outside of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER
The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER
A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewerage.
DIRECTOR
The Director of the Water and Water Pollution Control of the City of Putnam, or his authorized
deputy, agent, or representative.[1]
DRAIN LAYER or LICENSED DRAIN LAYER
Either an individual, partnership or corporation to whom the State of Connecticut has issued a
license to install building sewers during the period when such license is valid.
DOMESTIC AND SANITARY SEWAGE
The solids and liquid wastes from toilet and lavatory fixtures, kitchens, laundries, bathtubs, shower
baths or equivalent plumbing fixtures, as discharged from dwellings, business and industrial
buildings.[2]
GARBAGE
All putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of foods.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business, as distinct from
sanitary sewage.[3]
NATURAL OUTLET
Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, company, association, partnership, society, corporation, or group.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 137/167
pH
The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE
The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER
A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by
public authority.
REFUSE AND WASTES
Plastic, metal and glass food containers, dust sweepings, wastepaper, rags, wood, excelsior,
bedding, rubber, leather, rubbish, leaves, brush, small dead animals and birds, and similar waste
materials that ordinarily accumulate in and around a home or business, except building materials
and portions of trees greater than six inches in diameter.
SANITARY SEWER
A sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwaters are not
intentionally admitted.[4]
SEWAGE
A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and
industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwaters as may
be present.[5]
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT
Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.[6]
SEWAGE WORKS
All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.[7]
SEWER
A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.[8]
SHALL or MAY
"Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SLUG
Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more
than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.[9]
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "STORM SEWER")
A sewer which carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.[10]
SUSPENDED SOLIDS
The solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other
liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.[11]
WATERCOURSE
A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 138/167
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[1]
The Water and Sewer Commission appointed by the Mayor and ratified by the Common Council.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article III. Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 312-8. Unlawful deposit of solid waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the City of Putnam, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or refuse and waste.
§ 312-9. Unlawful discharges.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of Putnam, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said City, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-10. Connection required.
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation,
or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the City, is
hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Part 2, within 90 days
after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of
the property line.
Article IV. Private Sewage Disposal
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 312-11. Use when public sewers unavailable.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of Article III, § 312-10,
the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the
provisions of this article.
§ 312-12. Permit required.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 139/167
[1]
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first
obtain a written permit signed by the Public Health Officer. The application for such permit shall be
made on a form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the Public Health Officer.
§ 312-13. Inspection.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is
completed to the satisfaction of the Public Health Officer. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at
any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Public Health
Officer when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
The inspection shall be made within one business day of the receipt of notice by the Public Health
Officer.
§ 312-14. System specifications.
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the State of Connecticut. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
§ 312-15. Discontinuance.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal
system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days after notice by the Public
Health Office, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
cleaned of sludge, abandoned and filled with clear bank-run gravel within one month after being
discontinued.
§ 312-16. Maintenance.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all
times, at no expense to the City.
§ 312-17. Additional requirements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements
that may be imposed by the Director of Health.
Article V. Building Sewers and Connections
§ 312-18. Permits required; notification of new discharges.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Director. Any person proposing a new discharge into the public sewer system or a substantial change
in the volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the public sewer system shall
notify the Superintendent at least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 140/167
A.
B.
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
§ 312-19. Classes of permits; applications; fees.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (1) for residential and commercial service,
and (2) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his
agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall
be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgement of the Director. Prior to discharge or permission to discharge into the City's public
sewers, the applicant industry shall obtain written approval from the State of Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection, in the form of a permit, allowing the proposed discharge.
A permit and inspection fee as set forth in Chapter 206, Fees and Charges, Article V, for
residential or commercial building sewer permits and for industrial building sewer permits shall be
paid to the City at the time the application is filed.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-20. Liability for expenses and losses.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne
by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 312-21. Sewers serving more than one building.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
§ 312-22. Use of old sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and tests by the Director, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-23. Construction specifications.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used
in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulation of the City. In
the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
The material of all private sewers connecting with the public sewer shall be hard-burned, saltglazed
vitrified pipe not less than five inches in diameter, or of extra heavy iron soil pipe not less
than four inches in diameter, and PVC sewer pipe, ASTM D-3033 or D-3034 SDR-35 not less than
six inches in diameter.
All pipe shall be laid to true lines and grade and shall be properly bedded and jointed according to
current practices. At all angles, proper clean-outs or manholes must be furnished. Attention must
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 141/167
C.
[1]
[1]
[1]
be paid to the tightness of the joints in private sewers to prevent leakage of groundwater into the
same. All connections made to the public sewer shall be made with a "Y" connection.
No sewer from any building shall pass beneath another building unless made of extra heavy iron
pipe with leaded joints. No sewer from any building shall pass over a water line, unless the sewer
invert is at least 12 inches above the water line and the sewer line is encased in concrete for a
distance of at least two feet on each side of the water line. If the sewer line passes below the
water line, the sewer line shall be at least six inches below the invert of the water line.
§ 312-24. Elevation.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-25. Prohibited connections.
No roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater shall be connected to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 312-26. Distance from private wells.
Building sewers shall not be located within 75 feet of a private well.
§ 312-27. Conformity with Building Code.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the
State Building Code. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Director before installation.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-28. Access for testing.
Building sewers shall be installed without ninety-degree and short-body bends and shall be installed
with tees or bends so located as to afford facilities for hydraulic or pneumatic testing of the entire
sewer.
§ 312-29. Inspection; connection.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made by the contractor under
the supervision of the Director or his representative.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-30. Excavations.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 142/167
A.
[1]
B.
C.
D.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored by the contractor in a manner satisfactory to the City.
§ 312-31. Permit required for repairs.
Whenever repairs are necessary on private sewers, a permit to repair such sewers must be obtained
before any work is done.
§ 312-32. Maintenance.
All public sewers shall be under the control of and be maintained and kept clean by the City. The
expense of cleaning and repairing of any building sewer shall be paid by the owner of the premises
connected by the building sewer, and the owner will be required to deposit an amount necessary to
cover such expense before the cleaning or repairs are undertaken; provided, however, that any labor
on private sewers occasioned by defects or obstructions in the public sewer shall be paid by the City.
Article VI. Use of Public Sewers
§ 312-33. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.
§ 312-34. Permitted discharges.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as approved by the Water Pollution Control Authority. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Water Pollution Control Authority, to a storm
sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
§ 312-35. Prohibited wastes.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes
to any public sewers:
Any gasoline, benezene, naphtha, fuel oil, or flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard
in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in
excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewerage works.
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow
in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage works such as, but not
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 143/167
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. Ground garbage
will be accepted subject to the following conditions:
That only food wastes be considered as garbage;
That all ground particles be of such size that they will be carried freely under the normal flow
conditions prevailing in the sewer conduit to which they are contributory;
Installation of a garbage grinder with three-fourths horsepower (or greater) motor should be
subject to approval of the regulatory agency; and
That limitations on acceptable garbage grinder operation specify that not more than 30%, on
the dry basis, pass a No. 40 U.S. standard sieve.
§ 312-36. Restricted discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials,
waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the Water Pollution Control Authority, that such
wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect
on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.
In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Water Pollution Control Authority will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process,
capacity of the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between
32° F. and 150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.).
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage
grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Water Pollution Control Authority.
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions
whether neutralized or not.
Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic
substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Water Pollution Control Authority as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters; of any ashes, shavings or sawdust, metal,
sticks, coarse rubbish, glass, rags, tar, feathers, plastics, waste rubber, animal guts, or tissues,
entrails, blood, hair hides, wood, paunch manure, or any other substance likely to damage,
destroy or cause an obstruction to the flow in any sewer or which may interfere with the proper
operation of the sewerage works.
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the Water Pollution Control Authority in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.5 or having any other corrosive
or detrimental property capable of causing damage or hazard to the sewerage works or personnel.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 144/167
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
H.
I.
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth,
lime slurries, and lime residues) or dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate).
Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions).
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-37. Remediation of restricted discharges.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to the public sewers,
which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 312-36 of
this article, and which, in the judgment of the Water Pollution Control Authority, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewerage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Water Pollution Control
Authority may:
Reject the wastes.
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers.
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes.
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
If the Water Pollution Control Authority permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Water Pollution Control Authority, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, and laws.
§ 312-38. Interceptors.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Water Pollution Control
Authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Water Pollution Control Authority, and shall be located so as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 312-39. Maintenance of treatment facilities.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 145/167
[1]
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 312-40. Monitoring of discharges.
When required by the Water Pollution Control Authority, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling,
and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Water Pollution Control
Authority. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times. All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform
such monitoring of their discharge as the Director and/or other duly authorized employees of the City
may reasonably require, including installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping
records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the Director. Such records shall be made
available upon request by the Director to other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the
receiving waters.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-41. Determination of analyses required.
All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is
made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect
the effect of constituents upon the sewerage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life,
limb, and property. (The particular analysis involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be
taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-fourhour
composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.)
§ 312-42. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the Water Pollution Control Authority and any industrial concern whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Water Pollution Control
Authority for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern, provided that such
agreements do not contravene any requirements of existing state and federal laws and are compatible
with any user charge and industrial cost recovery SYSTEM IN effect. Notification of any such special
agreements must be given to the Common Council by the Water Pollution Control Authority.
Article VII. Protection From Damage
§ 312-43. Tampering with sewerage system prohibited.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewerage
works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 146/167
[1]
[1]
Article VIII. Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§ 312-44. Right of entry; confidential information.
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Director or
his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on
the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-45. Indemnification of property owners.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Article VIII, § 312-44, above,
the Director or duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for the injury or death
to the City employees and the City shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property
by City employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
Article VI, § 312-40.
§ 312-46. Easements.
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article IX. Penalties; Sewer Bills
§ 312-47. Notice of violations.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this Part 2 except Article VII shall be served by the
City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing 30 days for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within said 30 days, permanently cease all violations.
§ 312-48. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Article IX, § 312-47,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount of $100 for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense.
§ 312-49. Liability for City costs and expenses.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 147/167
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part 2 shall become liable to the City for any
expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
§ 312-50. Sewer bill due date.
Sewer bills are payable to the Water Pollution Control Authority within 30 days of the date shown on
the bill. A delinquent charge of 1% per month or a minimum of $2 will be charged on all bills over 30
days due.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article X. Hearing Board
§ 312-51. Composition; jurisdiction; costs.
A hearing board shall consist of the Water Pollution Control Authority as needed for arbitration of
differences between the Director and sewer users on matters concerning interpretation and execution
of the provisions of this Part 2 by the Director. The cost of the arbitration will be divided equally
between the City and the sewer user.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Part 3. Use of Water System
[Adopted 12-29-1980(C)]
Article XI. Water Use and Restrictions
§ 312-52. Right of entry.
The Director or his designated representative may enter the premises of any water taker at any
reasonable time to examine the condition of the water pipes, meters, and fixtures.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-53. Application for use of water.
All applications for the introduction and use of water must be made at the office of the Water Pollution
Control Authority. Blank forms will be furnished and must be filled out, stating truly and fully the various
uses to which the water is to be applied, and must be signed by the owner or owners of the premises
or by their duly authorized agent, before the supply will be furnished.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-54. Installation of service; liability for costs.
The water service pipe may be laid by the Water Pollution Control Authority to the inside of the cellar
wall, or other place desired, and furnished with a stop and waste value. All water service pipe within
the street limits shall be laid at the expense of the Authority, and the owners of the premises shall pay
for all that comes within the limits of their property.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 148/167
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
§ 312-55. Payment required prior to service.
All bills for water piping performed by the Authority must be paid before the water is turned on.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-56. Water supplied to multiple parties through single
service.
When water shall be supplied to more than one party through a single service, the bill for the whole
supply furnished through such service will be made to the owner of the estate.
§ 312-57. Unmetered service.
In all premises where no meter is used, every faucet, water closet, bathtub, set bowl, sink, fountain, or
any other fixture, whether used or not, will be charged for as long as it shall remain connected with the
water pipes.
§ 312-58. Prohibited conduct.
There shall be no waste of water, no concealment of the purposes for which it is used, and water shall
not be left running to prevent freezing.
§ 312-59. Prohibited connections.
The taking of water through a hose from any connection other than an outside silcock (using a hose
through a window, etc.) shall constitute a violation of Authority regulations and shall be punishable by a
fine of $100 being imposed without further notice.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-60. Notice required prior to modifications.
No alteration in water pipes or fixtures shall be made and no additional fixtures put in without previous
notice to the Water Pollution Control Authority giving the plumber's name and changes to be made.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-61. Notification of uses and fixtures.
Any person or firm shall, within one week of the completion of any work, make and file a complete
return to the Water Pollution Control Authority of all the uses to and for which water is applied, and all
fixtures altered or added to pipes supplied with the City water.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-62. Maintenance of service pipes.
All persons taking the water shall keep the service pipes within their premises in good repair and
protected from frost at their own expense, and they will be held liable for all damage which may result
from failure to do so.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 149/167
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
§ 312-63. Unauthorized use.
No consumer shall supply other persons or families with water, except for drinking on the premises, nor
shall any person take or carry away any water from any hydrant, watering trough, or public fountain,
without the consent of the Water Pollution Control Authority.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-64. Fire hydrants.
No person shall open or interfere with any of the fire hydrants without permission of the Director.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-65. Right to shut off service.
The Water and Sewer Commission reserves the right to shut off the water from any of the mains, upon
notice, while making extensions, repairs, and for all similar purposes; and furthermore, to shut off the
water without notice whenever the emergencies of the case require, and to keep it shut off as long as
may be necessary.
§ 312-66. Right to limit supply of water.
The Water and Sewer Commission also reserves the right, whenever it shall be deemed necessary to
keep up the supply for domestic purposes, to stop or limit the supply for any other purposes.
§ 312-67. Fee for shutting off or turning on service.
A charge as set forth in Chapter 206, Fees and Charges, Article IV, will be made in all cases where the
Authority is requested to shut off the supply of water. Service that has been shut off under such
circumstances will be restored at the property owner's request with an additional charge as set forth in
Chapter 206, Fees and Charges, Article IV.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-68. Discontinuance of service for delinquencies or
violations.
In case of violation by a water taker of any regulations established by the Water Pollution Control
Authority, or for nonpayment of rates, the supply may be cut off from the premises in default, and the
water will not again be turned on until all causes of complaint have been removed and dues paid, with
an additional payment as set forth in Chapter 206, Fees and Charges, Article IV, for turning on the
water.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-69. Use of outside faucets.
Other than when a water shortage emergency has been declared by the Director, the use of outside
faucets used for washing, sprinkling or watering lawns is allowable for a period up to two hours a day.
During a water shortage emergency, the use of outside faucets for washing, sprinkling or watering
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 150/167
[1]
lawns is prohibited. For violation of the rules concerning the use of hose, a fine of $100 will be
imposed, and if said fine is not paid within five days after notice the water will be shut off.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Part 4. Fats, Oils and Grease Pretreatment
[Adopted 10-21-2013 STM]
Article XII. Pretreatment Requirements
§ 312-70. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 4 is to outline the wastewater pretreatment requirements for food preparation
establishments and other commercial and industrial facilities that discharge fats, oils, and grease in
their wastewater flow. All new and existing facilities that generate and discharge fats, oils, and grease
in their wastewater flow shall install, operate and maintain FOG management equipment.
§ 312-71. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGENT
Authorized representative of the Town of Putnam.
CONTACT PERSON
The individual responsible for overseeing daily operation of the food preparation establishment
and who is responsible for overseeing the food preparation establishment's compliance with the
FOG pretreatment program as established herein.
FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG)
Animal- and plant-derived substances that may solidify or become viscous between the
temperatures of 32° F. and 150° F. (0° C. to 65° C.) and that separate from wastewater by gravity;
any edible substance identified as grease per the most-current EPA method as listed in 40 CFR
136.3.
FOG INTERCEPTOR
A passive tank installed outside a building and designed to remove fats, oils and grease from
flowing wastewater while allowing wastewater to flow through it, and as further defined herein.
FOG MANAGEMENT EQUIPMENT
Refers to properly installed and operated FOG interceptors and alternate FOG management
equipment as approved by the Town of Putnam Water Pollution Control Director.
FOOD PREPARATION ESTABLISHMENTS
Includes establishments that use food preparation processes and that are regulated by the
Northeast District Department of Health and classified as a Class III or Class IV facility or are
regulated by the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection. These facilities include but are
not limited to restaurants, hotel kitchens, hospitals, school kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias and
clubs. Industrial food processing facilities are not regulated by this Part 4.
GREASE RECOVERY UNIT (GRU)
All active indoor mechanical systems designed to remove fats, oils and grease by physical
separation from flowing wastewater, as further defined herein.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 151/167
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
NOTIFICATION OF APPROVED ALTERNATE FOG MANAGEMENT EQUIPMENT
Written notification from the Town of Putnam Water Pollution Control Director for authorization to
install and/or operate alternate FOG management equipment as defined herein.
REGIONAL FOG DISPOSAL FACILITY
A facility for the collection and disposal of nonrenderable FOG approved by the Connecticut
Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
RENDERABLE FATS, OILS, AND GREASE
Refers to fats, oils, and grease not contaminated by contact with wastewater and which can be
recycled by a rendering company. Renderable fats, oils, and grease sources include but are not
limited to fryolators, grills and exhaust hoods.
RENDERABLE FATS, OILS AND GREASE CONTAINER
Refers to a closed, leakproof container for the collection and storage of food-grade fats, oils, and
grease.
§ 312-72. Application to install FOG management equipment.
FOG management equipment shall be provided for:
All new and existing food preparation establishments, including restaurants, cafeterias,
diners, and similar nonindustrial facilities using food preparation processes that have the
potential to generate FOG in wastewater at concentrations in excess of the limits defined in
this Part 4.
New and existing facilities which, in the opinion of the Water Pollution Control Director, require
FOG management equipment for the proper handling of wastewater containing fats, oils, or
grease, except that such FOG management equipment shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units.
All new food preparation establishments which generate and discharge wastewater containing
fats, oils, and grease and which will require FOG management equipment, as determined by the
Water Pollution Control Director, shall include the design and specifications for the FOG
management equipment as part of the sewer connection application as described in Town of
Putnam Water and Sewer Ordinance.
All existing food preparation establishments which generate and discharge wastewater containing
fats, oils, and grease, and which require new FOG management equipment, as determined by the
Water Pollution Control Director, shall submit an application for the installation of new FOG
management equipment within 12 months of adoption of this Part 4. The application shall be in
accordance with appropriate sections of the Water and Sewer Ordinance. The approved FOG
management equipment shall be installed within two years of adoption of this Part 4.
Existing food preparation establishments which generate and discharge wastewater containing
fats, oils, and grease, and which have existing noncomplying FOG management equipment, may,
as determined by the Water Pollution Control Director, operate the existing FOG management
equipment. Such facilities shall submit an application for "alternate FOG management equipment"
as described in § 312-75. Such application shall be submitted within 12 months of adoption of this
Part 4.
All costs and related expenses associated with the installation and connection of the FOG
interceptor(s) or GRU(s) shall be borne by the food preparation establishment. The food
preparation establishment shall indemnify the Town of Putnam and its agents for any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly occur due to the installation of the GRU.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 152/167
A.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
A.
§ 312-73. Discharge limits.
No facility shall discharge or cause to be discharged any wastewater with a FOG concentration in
excess of 100 milligrams per liter, as determined by the currently approved test for total
recoverable fats and grease listed in 40 CFR 136.3, or in concentrations or in quantities which will
harm either the sewers or the water pollution control facility, as determined by the Water Pollution
Control Director.
§ 312-74. Management equipment requirements.
An application for the design and installation of FOG management equipment shall be subject to
review and approval by the Water Pollution Control Director per the Water and Sewer Ordinance,
and subject to the requirements of all other applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
Except as provided by § 312-75, the wastewater generated from food preparation establishments
shall be treated to remove FOG using a FOG interceptor or GRU meeting the requirements of the
Connecticut DEEP's General Permit for the Discharge of Wastewater Associated with Food
Preparation Establishments.
Every structure at the subject facility shall be constructed, operated and maintained in a manner to
ensure that the discharge of food preparation wastewater is directed solely to the FOG interceptor,
or alternate FOG management equipment. No valve or piping bypass equipment that could
prevent the discharge of food preparation wastewater from entering appropriate treatment
equipment shall be present.
The contact person at each food preparation establishment shall notify the Water Pollution Control
Director when the FOG management equipment is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the plumbing
inspector and/or agent.
All applicable local plumbing/building codes shall be followed during the installation of the FOG
management equipment.
FOG interceptor requirements.
The FOG interceptor shall be installed on a separate building sewer servicing only kitchen
flows and shall meet all the requirements of the Connecticut DEP's General Permit for the
Discharge of Wastewater Associated with Food Preparation Establishments.
The inlet and outlet piping shall be PVC ASTM D 1785 Schedule 40 with rubber compression
gaskets or solvent weld couplings. The joints must meet ASTM 3212 specifications. The
authorized agent may approve other piping materials for use. The minimum diameter of the
inlet and outlet piping shall be four inches. The inlet and outlet shall utilize a tee-pipe fitting on
the interior of the grease trap/interceptor. The tee-pipe of the inlet and outlet shall extend to
within 12 inches of the bottom and at least five inches above the liquid level of the tank.
When it is not practical for the food preparation establishment to install an outdoor inground
FOG interceptor per this section, a GRU may be utilized. The installation of the GRU must
meet the requirements as provided in the Connecticut DEP's General Permit for the
Discharge of Wastewater Associated with Food Preparation Establishments.
§ 312-75. Alternate FOG management equipment.
Other alternate FOG management equipment.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 153/167
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
F.
Other alternate FOG management equipment that does not meet the requirements of § 312-
74E may be considered for approval by the Water Pollution Control Director on a case-bycase
basis. The application shall include:
Documented evidence that the alternate FOG management equipment will not discharge
FOG concentrations that exceed the discharge limits per § 312-73.
Plans and specifications for the proposed system, including plans and profile of system
installation, manufacturer's literature, documentation of performance and any other
information detailing the alternate system.
A written operation and maintenance plan, which shall include the schedule for cleaning
and maintenance, copies of maintenance log forms, a list of spare parts to be maintained
at the subject facility, and a list of contacts for the manufacturer and supplier. Following
receipt of written notification of approved alternate FOG management equipment from
the Water Pollution Control Director, the operation and maintenance plan shall be
maintained on the premises. The plan shall be made available for inspection on demand
by the agent.
A written FOG minimization plan, which shall include procedures for all food preparation
establishment employees to minimize FOG entering the wastewater collection system.
Description of a FOG pretreatment training program for food preparation establishment
employees in minimization procedures.
A notification of approved alternate FOG management equipment may be granted for a
duration not to exceed three years, with extensions, when demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Water Pollution Control Director that the alternate FOG management equipment,
operation and maintenance plan, FOG minimization plan and FOG pretreatment training
program are adequate to maintain FOG concentration in the wastewater discharge below the
limits set in § 312-73.
§ 312-76. Pretreatment equipment maintenance.
The FOG management equipment shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation, at the food preparation establishment's expense.
The contact person shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal, by appropriate
means, of the collected material removed from the FOG management equipment.
A record of all FOG management equipment maintenance activities shall be maintained on the
premises for a minimum of three years.
Chemical and/or biological additives that could cause the fats, oils and grease fraction to be
released from the FOG management equipment are not permitted without the written approval of
the Water Pollution Control Director.
The contact person shall ensure that the FOG interceptor is inspected when pumped to ensure
that all fittings and fixtures inside the interceptor are in good condition and functioning properly.
The depth of grease inside the tank shall be measured and recorded in the maintenance log
during every inspection, along with any deficiencies, and the identity of the inspector.
The contact person shall determine the frequency at which its FOG interceptor(s) shall be pumped
according to the following criteria:
The FOG interceptor shall be completely cleaned by a licensed waste hauler when 25% of the
operating depth of the FOG interceptor is occupied by solids or a minimum of once every
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 154/167
(2)
(3)
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
three months, whichever is more frequent.
If the contact person can provide data demonstrating that less-frequent cleaning of the FOG
interceptor will not result in a grease and settled solids level in excess of 25% of the operating
depth of the FOG interceptor, the Water Pollution Control Director may allow less-frequent
cleaning. The contact person shall provide data, including pumping receipts, for four
consecutive cleanings of the FOG interceptor, complete with a report from the FOG hauler
indicating the grease level at each cleaning, and the FOG interceptor maintenance log.
A maintenance log shall be maintained on the premises and shall include the following
information: dates of all activities, volume pumped, grease depth, hauler's name, location of
the waste disposal, means of disposal for all material removed from the FOG interceptor, and
the name of the individual recording the information. The maintenance log and waste hauler's
receipts shall be made available to the agent for inspection on demand. Interceptor cleaning
and inspection records shall be maintained on file a minimum of three years.
All removal and hauling of the collected materials must be performed by a state-licensed waste
hauler. Pumped material may be disposed of at the Putnam wastewater treatment facility FOG
disposal facility. Pumping shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating
materials, wastewater and settled sludge. Decanting back into the FOG interceptor shall not be
permitted. FOG interceptor cleaning shall include scraping excessive solids from the wall, floors,
baffles and all piping.
The contact person shall be responsible for the cost and scheduling of all repairs to FOG
management equipment components. Repairs required by the agent shall be completed within 30
days after the date a written notice of violation is received by the contact person.
§ 312-77. FOG minimization.
The contact person shall make every practical effort to reduce the amount of FOG contributed to
the sewer system.
Renderable FOG shall not be disposed of in any sewer, septic tank or FOG interceptor. All
renderable FOG shall be stored in a separate, covered, leakproof, renderable FOG container,
stored out of reach of vermin, and collected by a renderer.
Small quantities of FOG scraped or removed from pots, pans, dishes and utensils shall be
directed to the municipal solid waste stream for disposal.
§ 312-77.1. Penalties for offenses.
[Added 1-7-2019 STM]
Any Class III or Class IV food preparation establishment failing to meet the requirements of this
Part within the allowed time frame shall be subject to the following:
Failure to install or maintain approved FOG management equipment.
A letter shall be sent to owner of food preparation establishment stating they are in
violation and required to start the installation of FOG management equipment within 60
days of the date of such notice or, in the case of failure to maintain such equipment, to
repair or maintain such FOG management equipment, within 30 days of the date of such
notice.
If there is no response or no action has been taken, a second letter and final warning to
the owner of the food preparation establishment shall be sent certified mail, giving a
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 155/167
(c)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
second notice of the violation and failure to comply with a thirty-day extension.
A letter to the food preparation establishment for failure to comply shall be sent by
certified mail to the owner of the establishment by the Water Pollution Control Director,
with a copy to be sent to DEEP for enforcement action, advising of the continuing
violation and failure to comply, along with a fine imposed at up to $50 per day, payable to
the Putnam WPCA, until they are in compliance with FOG regulations and this Part.
Failure to keep required inspection log on site.
A letter shall be sent to the owner of food preparation establishment setting forth a notice
of violation and providing a thirty-day period within which to come into compliance.
If after the expiration of such thirty-day period, there is still no inspection log on site, the
Water Pollution Control Director shall send a second notice of violation to the owner of
the food preparation establishment noting the violation, with a copy of such letter being
sent to DEEP for enforcement action.
Part 5. Storm Sewer Management
[Adopted 10-21-2013 STM]
Article XIII. Management of Discharges
§ 312-78. Introduction.
It is hereby determined that:
Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of
stormwater runoff contribute to increased non-point-source pollution and degradation of
receiving waters.
These nonstormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to
the municipal separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or
institutional establishments.
These nonstormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically
dispersed, small-volume, nonstormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on
receiving waters.
The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water
supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and
waters.
These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into
the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Localities in the State of Connecticut are required to comply with a number of state and
federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of
stormwater runoff quality and non-point-source pollution due to improper nonstormwater
discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Therefore, the Town of Putnam adopts this Part 5 to prohibit such nonstormwater discharges to
the municipal separate storm sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 156/167
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
dumping and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system is in the public interest
and will prevent threats to public health and safety and the environment.
§ 312-79. General provisions.
Purpose and intent. The purpose of this Part 5 is to protect the public health, safety, environment
and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This Part
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this Part are:
To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by
any person;
To prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer
system;
To prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping
or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and
To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and
enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Part.
Applicability. The provisions of this Part 5 shall apply throughout the Town of Putnam.
Compatibility with other regulations. This Part 5 is not intended to modify or repeal any other
ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this Part are in addition
to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law; and where
any provision of this Part imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or
imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.
Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this
Part 5 shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect
or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this
Part.
Responsibility for administration. The Putnam Board of Selectmen shall administer, implement,
and enforce the provisions of this Part 5. Day-to-day enforcement will be the responsibility of the
designated authorized agent.
§ 312-80. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE
A discharge prohibited by this Part which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior
to occurrence.
AUTHORIZED AGENT
The Public Works Director. The Mayor or Board of Selectmen may, in writing, designate other
employees and designees as deputy authorized agents to act through the authorized agent. The
authorized agent could include but not be limited to the Northeast District Department of Health,
the Regional Engineer, the Town Planner, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Wetlands
Enforcement Officer, as well as appropriate boards or commissions.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 157/167
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
The Town of Putnam Board of Selectmen.
CLEAN WATER ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
Activities subject to the Connecticut Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or general permit for
the discharge of stormwater and dewatering wastewaters from construction activities. These
include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not
limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
ILLEGAL CONNECTION
Either of the following:
Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system, including but not limited to any
conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such
pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved
by an authorized enforcement agency; or
Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm
sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and
approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE
Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system,
except as exempted in § 312-81 of this Part.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY
Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26 (b)(14) or C.G.S.
§ 22a-430b.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM
Any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited
to any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch
basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales,
natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures,
and which is:
Owned or maintained by the Town of Putnam;
Not a combined sewer; and
Not part of a publicly owned treatment works.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT
A permit issued by the Connecticut DEEP under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C.
§ 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the
permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE
Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 158/167
(1)
(2)
A.
Except to the extent exempted from this Part 5, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint
venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution,
utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any
other legal entity.
POLLUTANT
Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to:
paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease;
detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; nonhazardous liquid
and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution;
floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform
and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result
from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of
any kind.
POLLUTION
The contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by
the addition of any constituent, and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste,
color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive,
or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such
waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to
domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to
livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.
PREMISES
Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including
adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STATE WATERS
Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs,
wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming
a part of the boundaries of the State of Connecticut, which are not entirely confined and retained
completely upon the property of a single person.
STORMWATER RUNOFF or STORMWATER
Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural
precipitation and resulting from such precipitation.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER CONTROL
A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and
changes the characteristics of that runoff, including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the
period of release or the velocity of flow.
WASTEWATER
Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.
§ 312-81. Prohibitions.
Prohibition of illicit discharges.
No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under his/her
control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer
system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater.
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above, provided they
contain no pollutants:
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 159/167
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
Water line flushing performed by a government agency, landscape irrigation or lawn
watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air-conditioning
condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water
source not containing pollutants.
Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the
Board of Selectmen as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted
under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and
other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued
existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited.
This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection.
A person violates this Part 5 if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal
separate storm sewer system or allows such a connection to continue.
Improper connections in violation of this Part must be disconnected and redirected, if
necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer
system upon approval of the Putnam Water Pollution Control Authority.
Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and
which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or
occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the authorized agent
requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period
within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or
conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location
or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge
point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the
Board of Selectmen and Water Pollution Control Authority.
§ 312-82. Industrial, commercial or construction activity
discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial, commercial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge
permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be
required in a form acceptable to the authorized agent prior to allowing discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
§ 312-83. Access and inspection of properties and facilities.
The authorized agent shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable
times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Part 5.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 160/167
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the Board of Selectmen.
The owner or operator shall allow the authorized agent ready access to all parts of the premises
for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of
any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater.
The authorized agent shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are
necessary, in the opinion of the authorized agent, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow
discharges.
The authorized agent may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and
perform monitoring as necessary and make the monitoring data available to the authorized agent.
This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure
flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or
oral request of the authorized agent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access
shall be borne by the owner or operator.
Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized agent access to a facility is a violation of this Part.
If the authorized agent has been refused access to any part of the premises from which
stormwater is discharged, and the authorized agent is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this Part, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample
as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this Part
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and
welfare of the community, then the Board of Selectmen may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 312-84. Notification of accidental discharges and spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity
or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation, has
information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from
that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters
of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge.
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile
within no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to
the authorized agent within three business days of the phone or in-person notice. If the discharge
of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or
operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the
actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill.
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other
appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified.
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this Part.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 161/167
(1)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
B.
C.
§ 312-85. Violations, enforcement and penalties.
Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this Part 5. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions
of this Part may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be
restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the
authorized agent is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior
notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. The authorized agent is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in
§ 312-85E.
Notice of violation. Whenever the authorized agent finds that a violation of this Part has occurred,
the authorized agent may order compliance by written notice of violation.
The notice of violation shall contain:
The name and address of the alleged violator;
The address, when available, or a description of the building, structure or land upon
which the violation is occurring or has occurred;
A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this Part
and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person
to whom the notice of violation is directed; and
A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Board of
Selectmen by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of the notice of
violation.
Such notice may require, without limitation:
The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections;
That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and
The implementation of pollution prevention practices.
Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the
determination of the authorized agent. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from
the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Board of Selectmen or its
designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The
decision of the Board of Selectmen or its designee shall be final.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 162/167
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 10 days of the
decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the authorized agent, then
representatives of the Board of Selectmen may enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises
to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for
the purposes set forth above.
Costs of abatement of the violation. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of
the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property
owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment
within 30 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the
notice or, if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for
the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part 5 shall
become liable to the Town of Putnam by reason of such violation.
Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the
notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within 10 days, or such
greater period as the Board of Selectmen shall deem appropriate, after the Board of Selectmen
has taken one or more of the actions described above, the Board of Selectmen may impose a
penalty not to exceed $25 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation
remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation.
Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties
provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Part
is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a
nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law.
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this Part are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and the Board of Selectmen may seek
cumulative remedies.
Chapter 314. Water Use Restrictions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of Putnam 9-20-2010 STM. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and sewers — See Ch. 312.
§ 314-1. Authority.
The Town of Putnam, under its powers pursuant to state law, has adopted this chapter to protect public
health and welfare. This chapter implements the Town of Putnam's authority to impose water use
restrictions, either conditioned upon a state of water use restrictions or a declaration of public drinking
water supply emergency issued by the Department of Public Health pursuant to C.G.S. § 25-32b, as
well as general nonemergency restrictions designed to preserve and maintain the public water supply.
§ 314-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, preserve and maintain the public health, safety and welfare
whenever there is in force a state of water use restriction or state of public drinking water supply
emergency by providing for enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or
conditions imposed by the municipality or by the State of Connecticut.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 163/167
§ 314-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGRICULTURE
Farming in all its branches as defined in C.G.S. § 1-1(q).
MUNICIPALITY
Any town, consolidated town and city, consolidated town and borough, city, borough, and village.
OUTDOOR WATERING
Any watering of decorative lawns, trees or shrubbery by water users.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, association, firm, limited-liability company, corporation or other entity,
except a municipality, and includes the federal government, the state or any instrumentality of the
state, and any officer or governing or managing body of any partnership, association, firm or
corporation or any member or manager of a limited-liability company.
STATE OF PUBLIC DRINKING WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY
A state of public drinking water supply emergency declared by the Department of Public Health in
consultation with the Department of Environmental Protection and the Department of Public Utility
Control under C.G.S. § 25-32b.
STATE OF WATER USE RESTRICTION
A state of water use restriction declared by the Town of Putnam pursuant to § 314-4.
WATER COMPANY
The Water Division of the Putnam Water Pollution Control Authority (WPCA), together with any
party obligated to supply water to the Putnam Water Pollution Control Authority by contract or
otherwise.
WATER USERS
All persons or municipalities using water from any public water source irrespective of that person's
responsibility for billing purposes for use of the water.
§ 314-4. Declaration of state of water use restriction.
The Mayor of the Town of Putnam, upon the recommendation of the water company or water
companies, as may be appropriate, may declare a state of water use restriction. Such a declaration
should be, where appropriate, conditioned on the identification of a water shortage or threatened water
shortage by the water company, the local health department, a state agency or the Governor which
could also include or be limited to the restrictions listed in § 314-5. Public notice of a state of water use
restriction shall be given under § 314-6 of this chapter before it may be enforced. After implementation
of any state of water use restrictions, the Department of Public Health and the Department of
Environmental Protection should be notified in writing within 14 days of the implementation of
restrictions. These restrictions can be phased-in to tailor them according to the severity and nature of
the water supply shortage.
§ 314-5. Restricted water uses.
A declaration of a state of water use restriction shall include restrictions consistent with the response
measures indicated in the individual water supply plans of the water company and the Connecticut
Drought Preparedness and Response Plan, as appropriate. These may include one or more of the
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 164/167
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
following restrictions, conditions, or requirements limiting the use of water as necessary to protect the
water supply except as provided in § 314-10. The applicable restrictions, conditions or requirements
shall be included in the public notice required under § 314-6. Please note, the following restrictions are
listed to serve as examples of the types of water use restrictions that may be implemented.
Automatic sprinkler use. The use of automatic sprinkler systems is prohibited, except lawn
watering is permitted in order to establish and maintain newly laid sod or newly seeded grass
associated with new construction, and the testing of a customer's newly installed or newly repaired
sprinkler system by a commercial enterprise engaged in the installation or repair of lawn irrigation
systems is permitted.
Car washing. Car or vehicle washing is prohibited, except for the washing of vehicles performed
by a commercial enterprise engaged in car washing.
Loss of water from customer's service line. The loss of water through breaks or leaks within the
customer's service line, private distribution system or plumbing for any substantial period of time
within which such break or leak should reasonably have been discovered and corrected. It shall be
presumed that a period of 72 hours after the customer discovers such a break or leak or receives
notice from the water company of a break or leak is a reasonable time within which to correct such
break or leak or, as a minimum, to stop the flow of water from such break or leak.
Off-peak outdoor watering. Outdoor watering is permitted only during daily periods of low demand,
to be specified in the declaration of a state of water use restriction and public notice thereof. For
example, limit outdoor watering to between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on not more than three days
per week. Houses with house numbers ending in an odd number shall water on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday; houses with a house number ending in an even number shall water on
Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. (In general, restricting outdoor water use to between sunset and
early morning is best for turf needs and coincides with off-peak hours. Municipalities may choose
to restrict water use to one or two days per week during specified hours.) During a declared water
supply emergency, outdoor watering may be entirely prohibited.
Other outdoor uses. The use of private wells or other outdoor uses not addressed in this chapter
that are, in the determination of the Director of Health, wasteful are prohibited.
Outdoor watering ban. Outdoor watering is prohibited, except the watering of agricultural products,
sod at commercial sod farms, and the watering of nursery stock at nurseries or retail outlets is
permitted.
Outdoor watering method restriction. Outdoor watering is restricted to bucket, can or hand-held
hose, or soaker hose watering with an automatic shutoff nozzle.
Swimming pools, wading pools, hot tubs, spas, and Jacuzzis. Filling and topping off of swimming
pools, wading pools, hot tubs, spas, and Jacuzzis are prohibited, unless newly constructed or
installed swimming pools, wading pools, hot tubs, spas, and Jacuzzis may be filled once upon
completion of construction or installation.
Use of water for fire-fighting, health, sanitation, and medical purposes. The use of water for firefighting,
health, sanitation, or medical purposes shall not be restricted. However, domestic water
use conservation practices should be implemented wherever possible.
Washing impervious surfaces. The washing or cleaning of streets, driveways, sidewalks or other
impervious areas is prohibited.
In any month that the WPCA is purchasing water from a public water system pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-348, or otherwise, the WPCA will enforce water
restrictions in the same manner as the public water system when necessary in accordance with
the emergency contingency provisions of the public water system.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 165/167
A.
B.
§ 314-6. Notification.
State of water use restriction. The Putnam Water Pollution Control Authority shall provide
notification of any provision, including any restriction, requirement or condition imposed by the
municipality as part of a state of water use restriction, which shall be published by the municipality
in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality, or by such other means reasonably
calculated to reach and inform all users of water of the state of water use restriction. Notification of
the state of water use restriction shall also be provided to the Connecticut Department of Public
Health, Department of Public Utility Control, and Department of Environmental Protection at the
same time that notification is given.
State of Public drinking water supply emergency. When a state of public drinking water supply
emergency is declared by the Department of Public Health, the water company shall follow those
procedures outlined in its approved emergency contingency plan. In the event water use
restrictions are necessary, the water company shall contact and consult with the affected
municipality(ies), in accordance with the approved emergency contingency plan. The
municipality(ies) would then declare a state of water use restriction in accordance with § 314-4 of
this chapter. Appropriate notice to the public shall be provided in accordance with this section.
§ 314-7. Termination of state of water use restriction; notice.
A state of water use restriction may be terminated upon a determination by the Water Pollution Control
Authority that the water supply shortage no longer exists. Public notification of the termination of a
state of water use restriction shall be given in the same manner as is required for notice of the
municipality's declaration of its state of water use restriction pursuant to § 314-6.
§ 314-8. State of public drinking water supply emergency;
compliance with DPH or DEP orders.
Upon notification to the public that a state of public drinking water supply emergency has been
declared by the Department of Public Health in consultation with the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Department of Public Utility Control, no person shall violate any provision,
restriction, requirement, or condition of any order approved or issued by the DPH for the purpose of
bringing about an end to the State of public drinking water supply emergency.
§ 314-9. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
The Town of Putnam, through the Director of the Water Pollution Control Authority, Building Inspector,
and the Police Department of the Putnam Special Services District, or, outside of the Putnam Special
Services District, the Connecticut State Police may enforce all the provisions of this chapter. Any
person violating this chapter shall be liable to the Town of Putnam in the amount of $100 for the first
violation and $200 for the second violation. In extreme cases, the Water Pollution Control Authority
may curtail water service to a violator. If water curtailment is found to be necessary, consideration shall
be given to customers that have multiple tenants or medical risk individuals.
§ 314-10. Exemptions; application for waiver.
Any such water users that consider the restrictions, as imposed, to adversely affect their livelihood,
health or sanitation may make written application for a waiver. Any such application should be directed
to the attention of the WPCA. The WPCA will verify that the applicant is a user within the system and
then forward the application, within three days, to the Director of Public Health, who then makes the
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 166/167
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
determination whether a waiver should be granted. This decision shall be made within three days of
receipt of the application by the Director of Public Health. For the purposes of this chapter, the Director
of Public Health shall be the Executive Director of the Northeast District Department of Health or that
individual's designee. If the Executive Director of the Northeast District Department of Health neglects
or refuses to act, then the application for exemption shall be referred to the WPCA Board for formal
action by the Board.
§ 314-11. Seasonal water restrictions.
The following water restrictions are applicable from June 30 until November 1, regardless of water
restrictions:
Hand watering or using soaker hoses is permitted at any time, except during a water restriction or
emergency.
No sprinklers shall be used to water driveways, sidewalks or streets.
Runoff into a street or other drainage area shall not be allowed.
Sprinklers shall not be used during periods of precipitation.
Automatic shutoff nozzles must be used on outside hoses.
§ 314-12. Dissemination of information.
It is the public policy of the Town of Putnam to encourage conservation through educational
materials, and the Water Pollution Control Authority shall make available through newspaper
articles, mail materials and website information the best methods for water conservation.
The Town of Putnam and the Water Pollution Control Authority (WPCA) shall use their best efforts
to provide all appropriate conservation materials to the local media, encourage municipal and
WPCA employees to submit ideas for water conservation relative to their work as well as
encourage the general public to conserve water.
The WPCA shall make available water savings kits, upon request, to interested customers and
shall work with the Building Department to coordinate the installation of water-saving fixtures in
compliance with The American Society of Mechanical Engineers or Underwriters Laboratories for
new and renovated construction.
§ 314-13. Phase I water supply emergency.
The WPCA, acting by and through its Director, shall declare a water supply emergency exists if
during a 24 hour period the water demand exceeds the legally authorized water withdrawal supply.
This shall be referred to as a Phase-I water supply emergency.
During a Phase I water supply emergency:
All unnecessary water usage shall be banned.
The WPCA Director shall contact all state and local agencies concerning initiation of a Phase
I water emergency.
There shall be a fifteen-percent reduction in usage for the average water usage from the
month in question averaged over the previous five years.
11/3/2019 Town of Putnam, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/PU2092?guid=14624263,14624265&children=true 167/167
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
The Director of the WPCA shall confer with the Connecticut Department of Health in
accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes Section 25-32b as to whether or not a
public drinking water supply emergency exists.
The WPCA, acting by and through its Director, shall prepare weekly water supply status
reports for in-house evaluation and distribution to all state and local officials.
The Director shall notify the media, set up a hot line and post notices in prominent locations in
an effort to notify all customers.
The Director shall notify the Putnam Police Department and Troop D, the State of Connecticut
Police in Danielson, Connecticut, of the existence of the water supply use restrictions.
§ 314-14. Phase II water supply emergency.
Should the water supply emergency continue for a period of seven days, a Phase II water supply
emergency shall be declared and the following additional restrictions shall be implemented:
The targeted reduction for the average water usage from the month in question averaged over the
previous five years.
The water supply status report for in-house evaluation and distribution to all state and local
officials shall be prepared twice weekly.
Notification to all customers through a press release and other appropriate media and website
information providers shall be implemented.
To the extent practical, all large commercial and industrial account holders shall be contacted
personally or by e-mail.
A drought hazard rationing plan shall be prepared in concert with all relevant state and local
agencies and the Connecticut Water Company.
An investigation of alternate means of obtaining additional emergency water supplies shall be
implemented as well.
§ 314-15. Phase III water supply emergency.
Should the WPCA water supply emergency continue for an interrupted period of 14 days, a Phase III
water supply emergency shall be declared. Under those circumstances, the following steps shall be
taken:
The WPCA Director shall, in conjunction with all state and local officials, implement a water
rationing plan, if necessary. The plan shall provide for the bare essentials for life sustenance as
long as possible, as well as consideration of medical needs and fire protection. A predetermined
amount of water shall be held in reserve for fire protection.
The Putnam Special Services District and state and local police shall be notified of the existence
of a Phase III water emergency and their cooperation shall be solicited in the strict enforcement of
the mandatory water rationing.

ZONING COMMISSION  
 
ZONING REGULATIONS  
 
Public Hearing May 28, 2014 
Approved June 18, 2014 
Effective July 17, 2014 
(Amended through September 11, 2015) 
 
 
Table of Contents 
     
            Page 
 
Article I 
General and Administrative        1 
 
Section 101 – Purpose             1 
Section 102 – Zoning Commission           2 
Section 103 – Regulations, General           2 
Section 104 – Basic Requirements           3 
Section 105 – Application of Regulations          3 
Section 106 – Fees             4 
Section 107 – Interpretation             4 
Section 108 – Severability            4 
Section 109 – Effective Date             4 
Section 110 – Administration and Enforcement          5 
Section 111 – Amendments            6 
Section 112 – Referrals             7 
Section 113 – Zoning Permit Application Process and Requirements     8 
Section 114 – Special Permits            17 
Section 115 – Certificate of Occupancy/Use         25 
Section 116 – Expiration of Permits and Approvals      26 
Section 117 – Amendments of Permits and Site Plans      26 
 
 
  
                   Page 
Article II 
Zoning Board of Appeals       27 
 
Section 201 – Establishment          27 
Section 202 – Powers of the Board         27 
Section 203 – Right to Appeal: General        27 
Section 204 – Grounds for Granting an Appeal       27 
Section 205 – Variances: General         27 
Section 206 – Findings           28 
Section 207 – Grounds for Granting a Variance       28 
Section 208 – Application Procedure        29 
Section 209 – Hearings           29 
Section 210 – Automotive Sales, Service, Autobody Repair,      29 
 Automotive Service Garage, Gasoline/Automotive Fueling Stations 
 
             
Article III 
Districts and Uses         33 
 
Section 301 – Establishment and Purposes of Districts      33 
Section 302 – District Boundaries          53 
Section 303 – Federal or State Owned Property       54 
Section 304 – Schedule of Uses and Districts       54 
 Table III-1 – Schedule of Uses and Districts       55   
Section 305 – Accessory Uses          65 
 
 
         Page 
Article IV   
Height and Area Regulations       66 
 
Section 401 – Schedule of Dimensional Requirements        66  
 Table IV-1 – Schedule of Dimensional Regulations        66 
Section 402 – Number of Residential Structures Per Lot         68 
Section 403 – Height Limitation of Fences and Walls        68 
Section 404 – Exceptions to Height Regulations         68 
Section 405 – Building Separation           68 
Section 406 – Authorized Departures from Yard Requirements      69 
Section 407 – Minimum Livable Floor Areas         69 
Section 408 – Utility Substations           70 
Section 409 – Corner Vision Obstruction          70 
Section 410 – Dimensional Standards for Certain Special Permit Uses     70 
Section 411 – Minimum Lot Requirement with Respect to Sewage Disposal   71  
Section 412 – Kennels and Veterinary Hospitals         72 
Section 413 – Horse and Pony Farms, Riding Academies, or  Boarding Stables   72 
Section 414 – Livestock              73 
Section 415 – Industrial District Bulk Requirements        74 
Section 416 – Rear Lot             74 
  
                Page 
Article V 
Nonconforming Uses, Structures, Lots, and Off-Street Parking   76 
 
Section 501 – Nonconforming Uses                76 
Section 502 – Nonconforming Structures             77 
Section 503 – Nonconforming Lots                    77 
Section 504 – Nonconforming Off-Street Parking             78 
 
Article VI 
Town-Wide Requirements            80 
 
Section 601 – Parking and Loading                80 
 Table VI-1 – Parking Schedule                 82  
 Table VI-2 – Parking Dimensions                84 
 Table VI-3 – Loading Space Dimensions               86 
Section 602 – Signs                   88 
Section 603 – Landscaping              100 
Section 604 – Lighting               102 
Section 605 – Floodplain              105 
Section 606 – Erosion and Sedimentation Control          106 
Section 607 – Excavation              109 
Section 608 – Performance Standards            115 
 Table VI-4 – Maximum Permissible Sound-Pressure Levels        117 
 Table VI-5                 118 
 Table VI-6                119 
 
Article VII 
Special Requirements            121 
 
Section 701 – Residential Conversions        121 
Section 702 – Multi-Family Housing         121 
Section 703 – Condominiums          124 
Section 704 – Active Adult Housing         127 
Section 705 – Open Space Residential Development Subdivisions    129 
Section 706 – Customary Home Occupation       137 
Section 707 – Adult-Oriented Establishments       139 
Section 708 – Sale of Alcoholic Beverages        141 
Section 709 – Outdoor Dining Permits         141 
Section 710 – Residue Facilities         143 
Section 711 – Trailers, Motor Homes, Boats and Recreational Vehicles   145       
Section 712 – Wireless Communication        146 
 
 
Article VIII 
Definitions                154  
 
 
Appendix A 
Table of Amendments       179      
 
 
 
Article I 
General and Administrative 
 
Section 101 – Purpose 
 
These Regulations are adopted in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, for the following purposes: 
 
A. To promote and to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of Putnam, Connecticut, and of the public generally; 


 
B. To facilitate adequate transportation, water, sewerage, stormwater, schools, parks and other public benefits; 


 
C. To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town, thereby conserving the value of properties; 


 
D. To regulate the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of the area of the lot that may be occupied; the size of yards, courts and other open spaces; and the height, size and location of advertising signs; 


 
E. To regulate the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, agricultural, residence or other purposes; 


 
F. To divide the municipality into Districts of such number, shape and area as may be best suited to carry out the purposes of these regulations;  


 
G. To regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or use of buildings or structures and the use of land in such Districts; 


 
H. To permit certain classes or kinds of buildings, structures or uses of land within the Town only after obtaining a special permit; 


 
I. To lessen congestion in the streets; 


 
J. Aid in bringing about the most beneficial relation between land use and the circulation of traffic throughout the Town, having particular regard to traffic to and from the expressways and the provision of safe and convenient access appropriate to the various land uses; 


 
K. To secure safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers; 


 
L. To provide adequate light and air; 


 
M. To prevent the overcrowding of land; 


 
N. To further the policies of the Putnam Plan of Conservation and Development; 


 
O. To guide development in a manner which values and protects the importance of the natural environment; 


 
P. To guide development which minimizes impacts to wetlands, watercourses, flood prone areas, hillsides, surface water and groundwater resources and other sensitive and significant features of the natural landscape; and 


 
Q. To encourage the preservation and protection of historic structures and neighborhoods. 


 
 
Section 102 – Zoning Commission 
  
A. In accordance with Chapter 124, Section 8-1 of the General Statutes of the State of  Connecticut, as amended, there is established a Zoning Commission, hereinafter known as the Commission.  


 
B. In accordance with Chapter 124, Section 8-2 through 8-4 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, the Commission shall have the power: 


 
1. To establish and amend Zoning Regulations and districts; 


 
2. To enforce the provisions of the Zoning Regulations; 


 
3. To hear and decide upon all applications for Special Permits.  


      
 
Section 103 – Regulations, General 
 
Once established, the regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in the Zoning Regulations may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented or repealed by the Commission in accordance with the General Statutes either on the initiative of the Commission or by petition from property-owners, interested parties, Town of Putnam, or residents of the Town of Putnam. 
 
 
 
 
Section 104 – Basic Requirements    
 
A. No land, building, structure, or portion thereof shall hereafter be used, and no building, structure or portion thereof shall be constructed, reconstructed, located, extended, enlarged or substantially altered, except in conformity with these regulations.  


 
B. These regulations are intended to state the uses of land and/or buildings and structures which are permitted within the Town.  Uses not stated are not permitted. 


 
 
Section 105 – Application of Regulations 
 
A. No conveyance of land shall be made that reduces the remaining land of the grantor below the applicable minimum area, frontage, bulk and yard requirements. No building permit, zoning permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued for the erection or occupancy of a building or structure on land conveyed in violation of this Section. 


 
B. No building, structure or land shall be used, designed for any use or changed to any use, other than is permitted in the District in which such building, structure, or land is located except in conformance with these Regulations.  No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, enlarged, moved, or maintained except in conformance with these Regulations. 


 
C. No building structure or land shall be erected, enlarged, relocated, structurally altered or used in whole or part until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is issued stating that the proposed use conforms to the requirements of these Zoning Regulations.  All applications for Certificates of Zoning Compliance shall be made in writing on the form furnished by the Town and shall include all information necessary to enable the Agent to ascertain compliance with these Zoning Regulations including, unless waived by the Commission or its Agent, a plan prepared by a Connecticut licensed land surveyor, showing the proposed locations and dimensions of all permanent structures and yards required by these Regulations.  The Certificate shall be issued on the basis of the application for a Building Permit and accompanying plans and shall authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in approved plans and applications.  Any use, arrangement or construction contrary to that authorized under this Section shall be deemed in violation of this Section. 


 
D. In order to allow the Agent determine that compliance with these Regulations has been met, as-built site plans prepared by a Connecticut licensed land surveyor demonstrating that any new principal structure is in compliance with these Regulations shall be filed with the Agent prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.  It is suggested that foundation as-built plans are submitted to the agent as well prior to further construction, in order to avoid further non-compliance, if any, of any such new principal structure prior to finished construction. 


 
E. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be required prior to any of the following:  


 
1. Use and occupancy of any building or other structure hereafter erected or altered.  


 
2. Change in use of any building or structure; 


  
3. Use of land or change in the use thereof, except cultivation of vacant land.  


 
4. Change in use or extension of a nonconforming use.  


 
 
Section 106 – Fees 
 
Fees for building permits, special permit uses, variances or appeals, zoning amendments and zoning permits shall be in accordance with the ordinance adopted at a Special Town Meeting held April 1, 1985, and as amended from time to time.  Fees shall be made payable to the Treasurer of the Town of Putnam. 
 
 
Section 107 – Interpretation  
 
In interpreting and applying these regulations, the regulations shall be considered as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. When these regulations impose a greater restriction on the use of buildings or require larger yards, courts or other open spaces, or require a greater percentage of lots to remain not built, or impose other standards higher than those imposed by any law, Regulation, regulation or private agreement, these regulations shall control. When restrictions are imposed by any law, Regulation, regulation or private agreement which are greater than those required by these regulations, such greater restrictions shall not be affected by these regulations. When one Section of these regulations imposes standards greater than those of another Section, the standards of the more restrictive Section shall control.   
 
 
Section 108 – Severability 
 
If any section, clause, provision or portion of these Zoning Regulations shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the whole  Regulation or any other section, clause, provision or portion other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.  
 
 
Section 109 – Effective Date  
 
This amendment to the Zoning Regulation of the Town of Putnam and any future amendments shall take effect upon their passage in accordance with the General Statutes and shall take precedence over any other prior regulation or parts of prior regulations which are inconsistent. 
 
 
Section 110 – Administration and Enforcement  
 
A. These Regulations shall be administered and enforced by the Commission or its duly appointed agent. 


 
B. The Commission shall designate a person hereinafter known as the Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall have all the powers, duties, and responsibilities assigned these regulations and in the Connecticut General Statutes. 


 
1. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, as authorized, to enforce the provisions of these regulations. 


 
2. The Zoning Enforcement Officer, as authorized, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or removal of any building or structure, or the unlawful use of land; to restrain, correct or abate any violations of these regulations; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or, to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in, on or about the premises, or to cancel any zoning permit for cause. Whenever such acts shall be in violation of the provisions of these regulations, penalties shall be as provided by the General Statutes. 


 
 The Commission or the Agent shall have the authority to: 
 
1. Inspect or examine any building, structure, place, premise, or use; 

  

2. Order the correction of any building, structure, place, premise, or use; 

  

3. Order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings or structures; 

  

4. Order removal of illegal buildings or structures or illegal additions or structural alterations; 

  

5. Order discontinuance of any illegal work being done; 

  

6. Take other action authorized by these Zoning Regulations to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation(s) of these Zoning Regulations.  This may include the issuance of and action on building and zoning permits, Occupancy Certificates and similar administrative duties as are permitted; or 

  

7. Perform other duties and exercise other powers as are authorized by these Zoning Regulations. 



 
The Commission or its agent shall cause all violations of these Regulations to be prosecuted as provided by the provisions of Chapter 124, Section 8-12 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, or seek any other remedy provided by law. 
 
The Commission or Agent shall issue appropriate permits for application for compliance with these regulations.  If the Commission or Agent determines that an application is not in conformance with these regulations, said application shall be rejected.  The applicant shall file an appeal in accordance with the provision of Sections 203 and 204 of these Zoning Regulations with the Zoning Board of Appeals.  
 
 
Section 111 – Amendments 
 
A. In accordance with the provisions of Section 8-3 of the Connecticut General Statutes, these Regulations and/or the Zoning Map may be amended either on the initiative of the Commission or by petition from property-owners, interested parties, or residents of the Town of Putnam.  


 
B. Application for a change in these Regulations and/or Map shall be filed with the Commission on the form provided with the fee required in Section 106. 


 
1. For a change in the Regulations, the required form shall be accompanied by a copy of all sections affected, placing in brackets all language to be deleted, modified or replaced and underlining all language to be added, including reference to appropriate section numbers.  


 
2. For a change in the Zoning Map, the applicant shall submit six (6) copies of a plot of the property in question bearing the stamp of a registered engineer or surveyor affirming that the boundaries of the property have been surveyed and closed and containing the following information: 


 
a. The shape, dimension and area of the lot in question and of abutting property within five hundred (500) feet, excluding the width of any public rights-of-way. 


 
b. The location, size and use of all existing buildings and structures on the lot of premises in question and the general location, of any streets and other right-of-way. 


 
c. The location of all present and proposed zoning district boundary lines as they affect the lot of premises and the proposed zoning district designation.  


 
d. Such other information that may be necessary. 


 
3. Said petition shall be accompanied by a written statement identifying and/or substantiating the motives and reasons prompting the particular change.  


 
C. The Zoning Regulations and Map shall not be adopted, amended or repealed until after a public hearing, in accordance with Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, has been held by the Commission. 


 
1. By resolution adopted at a regular or special meeting, the Commission shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed change, amendment or repeal and cause notice of the hearing to be given.   


 
a. In the event of urgent circumstances, the Chair of the Commission may fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed change, amendment or repeal and cause notice of the hearing to be given, and may establish a special meeting of the Commission for the purpose of conducting said hearing.   


 
2. Upon receipt of a petition, duly signed and acknowledged, requesting an amendment, change or repeal of any of the regulations or restrictions prescribed by these Regulations, or a change or modification of the Zoning Map, the Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon and cause notice thereof to be given in the manner prescribed in this Section and to act upon said petition in accordance with Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of Connecticut as amended.  


 
D. The required notice shall be given as follows: 


 
1. By publishing a notice of the hearing in a newspaper of substantial circulation in the Town, as required by Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.  The notice shall state the general nature of the proposed change, amendment or repeal.  


 
2. A copy of said proposed change, amendment or repeal shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk as required by Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of Connecticut and shall consist of the following documents: 


 
a. A letter or memorandum describing the general nature of the proposed change, amendment or repeal, listing the Articles and Section numbers of the Regulation which are affected or involved, and indicating how the proposal affects the Zoning Map. 


 
b. A copy of all material required by this Section. 


 
3. Full opportunity to be heard will be given to any citizen and all parties in interest attending such hearing. The Commission shall act upon said proposed change, amendment or repeal in accordance with Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of Connecticut as amended. 


 
 
Section 112 – Referrals 
 
The Commission shall refer petitions or proposals for change to these Regulations or the Zoning Map to the Putnam Planning Commission in accordance with Chapter 124, Section 8-3a of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.  Any proposed change within five hundred (500) feet 
of the Town line shall be referred to the Northeastern Connecticut Council of Governments in accordance with Chapter 124, Section 8-3b of the General Statutes. 
 
Section 113 – Zoning Permit Application Process and Requirements 
 
A.  Pre-Application Plan  
 
1. The preparation of a pre-application plan is strongly recommended, but not required, to facilitate general consideration of factors and issues before the applicant proceeds with the official application and preparation of maps, plans and documents required for formal consideration by the Commission.  


 
2. Neither the pre-application plan nor the informal consideration by the Commission, however, shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal procedure of applying for and approving a Site Plan as contemplated herein or under the provision of the General Statutes. 


 
B. Permits 
 
1. Except for necessary routine maintenance and for repairs or replacement to existing buildings, as defined in the basic Building Code of the State of Connecticut, no land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, moved, enlarged or extended until a Zoning Permit and Building Permit for the proposed work or use has been issued by the Commission or the Agent in accordance with the requirements of the State of Connecticut Building Code. 


 
a. It shall be the responsibility of the Applicant to obtain all permits required by other agencies, if applicable, including other local authorities such as Northeast District Department of Health, the Inland Wetlands Commission, Aquifer Protection Commission, and any department or agency of the State or federal government. The applicant shall provide evidence of application to such agency or agencies, and no Zoning Permit shall be issued until evidence of application for all other permits has been submitted; provided, however, that the Commission may waive this requirement if the applicant provides evidence that the filing of the application with such agency or agencies requires preceding approval of the subject Zoning Permit by the Commission. 
 
C.  Application and Site Plan Requirements  
   
1.  Applications for Zoning Permits shall be filed with the Commission or its authorized agent by the owner or its authorized agent on a form provided by the Commission. If the applicant is not the owner of the property on which the activity is proposed, the relationship of the applicant to the owner shall be described on the application form.  The application shall contain a signed written statement by the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent giving consent for the Commission or its agent to inspect the property.  Five (5) copies of each application shall be submitted.   In all cases, the Commission or its agent may require the following: 
 
a.  A certified plot plan prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor in accordance with their area of licensure. 


 
b.  The location of any required setback or yard lines. 


 
c.  A computation of lot and building coverage. 


 
d.  The names of all owners of record of any land abutting the lot to which the zoning permit would apply. 


 
e. The location and name of any Town or State street, road or highway that passes through or adjoins the lot or, if so such street, road or highway passes through or adjoins the lot, the entire route of vehicular access to the lot from such a street, road or highway. 


 
f. The locations and numbers of any utility poles within one hundred (100) feet of the lot or, if there are no such utility poles, the location and number of the utility pole nearest to the lot. 


 
g. In areas not served by public water or sewers, the location of proposed septic system and reserve leaching area and location of proposed well in conformance with Public Health Code 19-13-B20. 


 
h. The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be used; provided, however, that if the lot is substantially larger than the area to be developed the Commission may allow the applicant to submit a site plan showing the lot in an inset map at a different scale from the scale of the remainder of the site plan. 


 
i. The exact size and location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, loading areas and parking, adjacent land owners, buildings or structure on abutting land within fifty (50) feet of all lot lines. 


 
j. Building or structural plans to scale, specifications and such other information as may be required by the Commission or its agent to determine that the proposed building or structure complies with all local and state codes and ordinances. 


 
k. The location of any existing or proposed driveway. (A driveway permit is required before any driveway may be constructed or altered.) 


 
2. For uses other than single-family and two-family dwellings and accessory buildings or expansions of or additions to such buildings, applications shall be accompanied by five (5) copies of a site plan in ink at scale of one (1) inch equal to no more than forty (40) feet.  Such plan shall conform to Class A-2 standards for accuracy in accordance with the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, Connecticut General Statutes Section 20-300b-1 through 20-300b-20 or as amended. The purpose of a site plan is  to provide the Commission with information that will enable it to determine that the proposed buildings and uses shall be arranged in a manner that enhances the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Putnam and shall be of such character as to harmonize with the neighborhood, to accomplish a transition 
in character between areas of unlike character, to protect property values in the neighborhood, to preserve and protect natural resources and the appearance and beauty of the community and to avoid undue traffic congestion.   
 
a.  Approval of a site plan shall be presumed unless a decision to deny or modify it is rendered by the Commission within 65 days after the date of receipt, except that such time period may be extended for not more than one (1) additional period of 65 days, with the consent of the applicant. 
 
b. A copy of any decision by the Commission on a site plan shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.  
 
3. Site Plan Requirements. Site plans shall be drawn at a scale of at least one inch equals forty feet (1” = 40’) and shall be on sheets either 36 x 24 inches or 18 x 12 inches and, in addition to the information referenced above in this Section, site plans  shall clearly show, to the satisfaction of the Commission, the following information: 
 
a. Name and address of applicant; 


 
b. Address of property and name of owner of record; 


 
c. Scale, north arrow, date of drawing or its revision, and name of person preparing the site plan; 


 
d. Property boundaries, dimensions and area; 


 
e. Locations of all existing and proposed buildings and uses including but not limited to signs, sidewalks, driveways, parking and loading areas, and abutting streets; poles, hydrants, and other utility appurtenances; areas to be used for exterior storage and the type of screening to be provided; 


 
f. Dimensions of all yards, as required by these Regulations; 


 
g. Locations and descriptions of water supply and sewage disposal facilities; 


 
h. Contour lines at two foot (2’) intervals or at other intervals as may be determined by the Commission to be sufficient to clearly show natural drainage; if grading is proposed, the existing and proposed contours will be shown; 


 
i. Existing and proposed drainage structures on the property and those off the property that may be affected by the proposed building or use.  In order to minimize impact to downstream drainage facilities, increase the environmental quality of stormwater runoff, and to provide for water conservation and increased groundwater recharge measures, Low Impact Development (LID) methods as defined in 


the latest edition of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as may be amended from time to time (or its successor), shall be incorporated into the stormwater design;  


 
j. Proposed landscaping, including the type, size and location of proposed plantings;  


 
k. The parking and/or loading space layouts;  


 
l. Location and configuration of all driveways;  


 
m. Where sidewalks are not in place, a five-foot wide sidewalk along the lot frontage within the public right-of-way, for the distance of the lot frontage, the construction of which shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen for public roadways that are under the control of the Town of Putnam, and subject to the approval of the Connecticut Department of Transportation for public roadways or highways that are under the control of the State of Connecticut, or, if construction within the public right-of-way is not feasible, along the interior side of the lot frontage; and 


 
n. Location and stonewall type for boundary stonewalls and stonewalls on the road frontage including the proposed existing/new location, construction details, and typical cross-sectional dimensions of any stonewalls that are to be rebuilt or relocated.  


 
4. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half (1/2) acre pursuant to Section 606 of these Regulations. The soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control” (1985) as amended, available from the Natural Resources Center of the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection. Alternative principles, methods, and practices may be used with prior approval of the Commission.  
 
a. After review of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan by the Commission or its designated agent, the Commission shall vote to certify, modify and certify, or deny that the soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with these Regulations.  A vote of the Commission to approve a site plan shall mean certification of the erosion and sediment control plan as well. Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the Commission may be reviewed by the Eastern Connecticut Conservation District which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such plan by the District. 


 
b. The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, may be covered in the financial guarantee or other assurance acceptable to the Commission in accordance with the provisions specified under these Regulations.  


 
c. The Commission or its designated agent shall periodically conduct inspections to verify compliance with the certified plan and that control measures are properly performed or installed and maintained. The Commission may require the applicant to submit progress reports which show that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being correctly operated and maintained.  


 
5. Waivers. The Commission may, upon written request by the applicant, waive one or more of the site plan element requirements if the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the Commission that the information is not needed to reach a decision on the application.  
 
6. Site Plan Evaluation. The Commission shall determine the following in its review of a site plan:  
 
a. Any proposed building or structure shall be so designed, and located on the site so that there will be adequate access for emergency vehicles; 


 
b. The streets serving the proposed use shall be adequate to safely carry the vehicular traffic generated by the proposed activity, and there will be provision for entrance and exit points which will not create a traffic hazard or undue traffic congestion;  


 
c. All proposed traffic access ways are adequate but not excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility; not located too near street corners or other places of public assembly; and other similar safety considerations; 


 
d. Adequate off-street parking and loading spaces are provided to prevent parking in public streets of vehicles of any persons connected with or visiting the use and the interior circulation system is adequate to provide safe accessibility to all required off-street parking; 


 
e. All playground, parking and service areas are reasonably screened at all seasons of the year from the view of adjacent residential lots and streets and the general landscaping of the site is in character with that generally prevailing in the neighborhood. Preservation of existing trees over twelve (12) inches in diameter to the maximum extent possible shall be encouraged; 


 
f. Lighting from the installation of outdoor flood or spot lighting and illuminated signs will be properly shielded so that such lighting will not adversely affect any abutting property or public street; and 


 
g. The character and appearance of the proposed use, buildings, and/or outdoor signs will be in general harmony with the character and appearance of the surrounding neighborhood and that of the Town of Putnam and will not adversely affect the general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town.  


 
 
 
 
7. Site Plan Improvements and Financial Guarantee 
 
a. Completion of Improvements – All applicants shall be required to complete all improvements as specified in the approved site plan or as required in these regulations, and to dedicate public improvements to the Town, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. 



 
b. Financial Guarantee – In order to secure the completion of the construction of public improvements and the approved soil erosion and sediment control plan as depicted on the approved site plan, the applicant shall post a financial guarantee for the construction of such improvements before site plan approval is granted for a Zoning Permit, or in the case of a Special Permit  before the final site plan is endorsed by the Chairman or Secretary and filed on the land records with the Special Permit Document, in an amount established by the Commission based on an estimate provided by the applicant through his/her/its certified professional engineer, scientist, or other appropriate professional. This financial guarantee shall be in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit, a cash deposit with the Town, a bank passbook or statement savings account payable to the Town, or other financial guarantee as authorized by state statute.  If a letter of credit is used, it shall be satisfactory to the Town Attorney.   



 
The financial guarantee shall be accompanied by a written and executed agreement which shall be satisfactory to the Town Attorney. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be incorporated in the financial guarantee agreement and shall not in any event exceed the timeframe required by these Regulations. 
 
c. Failure to Complete Site Plan – Where a financial guarantee for the construction of improvements has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the time specified by the Commission the Town may thereupon declare the financial guarantee to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed. If necessary the Town shall, in addition to call the financial guarantee, proceed against the individual developer and/or owner of said premises. The continued maintenance of any agreed financial guarantee for the construction of improvements is a condition of approval of all site plans and the lapse or failure of such security financial guarantee prior to final release by the Commission shall be grounds for revocation of the site plan approval.  


 
d. Certificate of Satisfactory Completion – The  Commission will not recommend acceptance or dedication of required public improvements, nor release a financial guarantee for the construction of such improvements until all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Commission, through submission of detailed "as-built" survey plans of the site plan, that the layout of soil erosion and sediment control improvements are in accordance with approved site plans and, in the case of public improvements, have been constructed in accordance with the approved site plans and are ready for dedication to the local government. Upon such approval and recommendation, the Town may thereafter accept the public improvements for dedication.  


 
e. In the event that certain improvements may not be installed at the time of occupancy of a site or building due to weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the applicant, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may issue a temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance at the time of the application for a Certificate of Occupancy, provided that the applicant shall insure the completion of such 


improvements not more than six (6) months following such occupancy. If said improvements are not completed within the six month period, the temporary occupancy certificate shall become invalid, and the permanent occupancy certificate shall not issue until all of the improvements depicted on the site plan have been completed. 


 
f. All financial guarantees posted in accordance with these Regulations shall be effective at least until the completion of the activity or development which they serve to guarantee. No such financial guarantee shall require the Town or any agency thereof to incur any expense or enter into any contract prior to payment of the obligation which such financial guarantee secures.  


 
8. Amendments to Approved Site Plan filed or Approved Special Permit Site Plan pursuant to Sections 113 and/or 114.  The agent designated by resolution of the Commission may approve a one (1) time administrative approval of the original Approved Site Plan filed or Special Permit Site Plan previously approved by the Commission, without public hearing, any proposed expansion, reduction of or enlargement of an existing building or the addition of a building or buildings that is/are necessary to the principal building and use provided:   
 
a. Such reduction of or enlargement of accessory building or buildings, individually or cumulatively, do not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of the principal building’s approved footprint, or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less.  


 
b. Any proposed reduction of or expansion or enlargement of an existing building or the addition of an accessory building or buildings shall conform to all of the requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located.  


 
c. No site work is required. “Site work” shall include additional parking spaces, storm drainage, or site disturbance of more than one quarter (1/4) of an acre, but shall not include the excavation or grading necessary and incidental to the construction of the new or expanded building or structure itself. 


 
d. Whether filed as a single application or as multiple applications, the reduction of or expansion or enlargement of an existing building or the addition of an accessory building or buildings which exceed, individually or cumulatively, the limitations of this administrative permit procedure shall require Special Permit or site plan review by the Commission in accordance with Sections 113 and/or 114 of these Regulations, as the case may be. 


 
e. The applicant shall file a detailed site plan and narrative explaining the proposed building reduction or expansion or proposed accessory building addition with the Commission’s designated agent for review. The agent shall determine whether or not the proposed reduction or expansion satisfies the criteria to be permitted administratively or whether the expansion requires formal Special Permit or site plan review by the Commission. No such amendment shall be approved that substantially alters the uses, density, building coverage, or other elements of an approved Special Permit. 


 
 
9.  Minor Site Plan Amendments to Previously Approved Zoning Permits or Special Permits. An applicant may submit an application for a minor site plan amendment of an existing approved site plan as a Zoning Permit Application subject to established fees before the Commission. The Commission will review the proposed changes compared to the original approval and determine whether the scope of these changes would require a new permitting procedure including but not limited to application fees, new site plan documents and new public hearing. If the proposed changes in site plan are deemed by the Commission to be minor or allowable within the original scope of the permit, then the modifications may be made by administrative letter to file, reviewed by the Commission’s designated agent and signed by the Chairman on behalf of the entire Commission. 
 
D.  Exemptions  
 
1. The Commission may waive any of the requirements found in  this Section if the following conditions exist or are met: 


 
a. The proposed activity does not involve the construction, erection, alteration, enlargement, removal or other modification of a principal building or structure; 


 
b. The proposed activity will not require the use of wells or sewage disposal facilities; and 


 
c. The Commission determines that the requirements sought to be waived are not reasonably necessary to a proper disposition of the application. 


 
2. No waiver under this Section shall be granted unless the applicant submits to the Commission, in writing, at the time of and together with the submission of its application, a request for a waiver specifying the requirements that the applicant seeks to have waived and the reasons why the applicant believes those requirements should be waived.  The Commission shall act on such request no later than thirty-five (35) days after the submission of the application, and written notice of any decision shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant.  The failure of the Commission to act on any request for a waiver within such time shall be deemed to be a denial of the request. 


 
3. The following structures shall not require the issuance of any permit under these regulations: 


  
a. Fences, or walls used as fences, that are no more than six (6) feet in height. 



 
b. Mailboxes. 



 
E.  Additional Application Information   
 
1. The Commission may, within thirty-five (35) days after the day of receipt of any application, require the applicant to submit additional information if the Commission finds that such information is necessary or would be helpful in determining whether the proposed building, 


structure or use conforms to these regulations.  For the purpose of this Section, the day of receipt of an application shall be deemed to be the earlier of (1) the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the submission of the application to the Commission or its authorized agent, or (2) thirty-five (35) days after such submission.  Such additional information may include, but is not limited to, the following: 


 
a. Existing and proposed (finished grade) contour lines at an interval of no less than two (2) feet and no more than ten (10) feet over the entire site plan or so much thereof as the Commission may prescribe. 


 
b. The nature and amount of any hazardous materials or wastes to be produced, used, stored, or disposed of on the lot, and the manner in which such production, use, storage or disposal will be carried out. 


 
c. The nature of existing land uses on abutting properties.  


 
d. The location of natural features including, but not limited to, rock outcroppings, slopes in excess of fifteen (15) percent, soil types, forested areas and vegetation types. 


 
e. A description of any measures to be used to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation. 


 
f. The location and a description of any proposed surface or subsurface drainage improvements, facilities or structures. 


 
g. The location of soil test pits and test borings and a description of the soils encountered in such pits or borings. 


 
h. Outside lighting for non-residential and multifamily uses will require a lighting plan showing: 


 
2. If the applicant elects to furnish the additional information required by the Commission, the applicant shall file with the Commission a written consent to the extension of the time within which the Commission would otherwise be required to act upon the application.  The extension shall be sufficiently long to provide the commission with sixty-five (65) days following the receipt of the additional information which to act upon the application.  If the applicant declines or fails to provide additional information, the Commission shall proceed to act upon the application pursuant to these regulations. 


 
F.  Rendering the Decision  
 
1. The Commission shall render a decision on any application pursuant to the time limits set within set within state statute. 





 
 
 
G. Notice of Decision 






 
1.  A copy of any decision on an application shall be sent by the Commission by certified mail to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.  The Commission shall publish notice of the approval or denial of such application in the newspaper having a general circulation in the Town of Putnam. 
 
H.  Final Site Plan 
 
1. Any application approved by the Commission without modifications or conditions shall become the final site plan.   If the Commission approves an application with modifications or conditions, a final site plan that incorporates such modifications or conditions must be submitted to the Commission by the applicant within sixty-five (65) days of the date of approval. For good cause shown, the Commission may extend the time for filing the final site plan.  If a final site plan is not filed within such sixty-five (65) day period or within any period of extension, the approval of the application for a zoning permit shall be void. 


 
2. The Commission shall certify its approval of any application submitted in accordance with these regulations.  The certificate of approval shall state that the approval will automatically expire five (5) years from the date of approval or such timeframe as referenced inn state statute and shall specify such expiration date.  The Commission shall issue no zoning permit until the final site plan has been approved by the Commission.  The applicant shall file the final site plan and certificate of approval in the office of the Putnam Town Clerk and shall pay all required filing fees.  No site plan and no zoning permit issued in connection with an application shall be effective until the Commission has certified its approval of the final site plan and have been filed in the office of the Putnam Town Clerk. 





 
 
Section 114 – Special Permits 
 
A.  Purpose 
 
1.  The Commission may hear and decide on applications for a Special Permit.  





 
2.  The purpose of the special permit regulations is to provide a comprehensive review of the proposed plan for the layout of the building(s), structure(s) or use(s) in relationship to the topographical, geological and other natural features of the land, and of the impact of the use(s) upon environment, health, safety, welfare and convenience of the members of the community.  It is intended to insure that the design and layout of the site and the proposed use(s) will constitute suitable and appropriate development in character with the neighborhood and will not result in a decrease in property values or a detriment to the present and potential use of the area in which it is to be located.  Special permit procedures are also intended to assure that proposed buildings, structures and uses will provide for the maintenance of air, surface-water and groundwater quality and will not be detrimental to existing sources of potable water or other natural or historic resources. 





 
B.   When Required 
 
A special permit must be issued by the Commission before any person may establish or change any land use, or use, erect, construct, move, enlarge, or alter any building or structure, in whole or in part, if the use, structure or building resulting from such activity is listed as a Special Permitted Use under Section 304 of these regulations for the zone in which it would be located.  The issuance of a special permit under this Section of these regulations fulfills the requirement for the issuance of a zoning permit under Section 113.   
 
 
C.   Applications 
 
1. Applications for special permits shall be filed with the Commission on a form provided by the Commission.  Five copies of each application shall be submitted, accompanied by three (3) copies of a site plan in ink at a scale of one inch equal to no more than forty (40) feet and showing: 


 
a. All the information specified for a site plan under Section 113 of these regulations. 


 
b. The nature and amount of any hazardous materials or wastes to be produced, used, stored or disposed of on the lot, and the manner in which such production, use, storage or disposal will be carried out.  


 
c. The nature of existing land uses on abutting properties. 


 
d. The names of all owners of record of property abutting or within one hundred (100) feet of the lot to which the special permit would apply. 


 
e. The location of rock outcropping slopes in excess of fifteen (15) percent, soil types and forested areas on the lot. 


 
f. The location and description of any measures to be used to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation. 


 
g. The location and a description of any proposed surface or subsurface drainage improvements, facilities or structures.  


 
h. The location of soil test pits and test borings and a description of the soils encountered in such pits or borings. 


 
i. The location of any areas subject to flooding during a 100-year flood, as shown on the most recent Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 


 
j. The location and nature of any proposed landscaping, buffer areas or screening, and any existing or proposed fences or walls. 


 
The filing of a site plan subject to the application for a special permit under this Section 114 shall supersede and alleviate the need to file a separate site plan application under Section 113 of these regulations. 
 
2. Each application for a special permit shall also be accompanied by three (3) copies of: 


 
a. A traffic report indicating existing traffic conditions at normal and peak travel times for, at a minimum, any road abutting or passing through the lot affected by the application and any road within the area directly impacted by the traffic generated by the proposed use of such lot, and also indicating the projected impact of the proposed use on such traffic conditions. 


 
b. The schedule for any construction or other development activities, including, but not limited to, erection of or other work on any buildings or structures, grading, removal of vegetation, landscaping and drainage improvements.  


 
D.   Waiver of Certain Requirements for Special Permits 
 
1. The Commission may waive any of the requirements for site plans under Section 113 of these regulations if the Commission determines that the requirements sought to be waived are not reasonably necessary to a proper disposition of the application. 


 
2. No waiver under this Section shall be granted unless the applicant submits to the Commission, in writing, at the time of and together with the submission of the application, a request for a waiver specifying the requirements that the applicant seeks to have waived and the reasons why the applicant believes those requirements should be waived.  The Commission shall act on such requests no later than thirty-five (35) days after the submission of the application, and written notice of any decision shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant.  The failure of the Commission to act on any request for a waiver within such time shall be deemed to be a denial of the request. 


 
E. Additional Requirements for Applications 
 
1. The Commission may, within thirty-five (35) days after the submission of an application for a special permit, require the applicant to submit additional information if the Commission finds that such information is necessary or would be helpful in determining whether the proposed buildings, structures or uses conform to these regulations.  Such information may include, but is not limited to, the following: 


 
a. Chemical analyses of existing surface water and groundwater. 


 
b. Hydrological analyses of runoff and peak flows, both before and after development 


 
c. Analyses of local air quality, both before and after development. 


 
d. Depths to seasonal high groundwater levels and bedrock. 


 
e. Analyses of wildlife habitats on the near the site and the impact of the proposed use on such habitats. 


 
f. A description of vegetation types, including any rare or endangered species, on the lot to be used under the application. 


 
g. A list of other federal, state or municipal permits or licenses that the applicant will need to implement the uses applied for the status of any applications for such permits or licenses. 


 
h. Architectural drawings of any proposed buildings or structures. 


 
i. Existing and proposed (finished grade) contours at intervals of no less than two (2) feet over the entire area of the lot that would be built upon, graded, altered or otherwise affected by the proposed use, and within one hundred (100) feet of that area, and existing contours at intervals of no less than ten (10) feet over the remaining area of the lot. 


 
2.   If the applicant elects to furnish the additional information required by the Commission, the applicant shall file with the Commission a written consent to the extension, for an additional period of thirty-five (35) days of the time within which the Commission would otherwise be required by law to commence a public hearing.  If the applicant declines or fails to furnish the additional information, the Commission shall proceed to act upon the application pursuant to these regulations. 
 
F.  Criteria for Evaluation 
 
1.  In deciding upon any application for a special permit, the Commission shall consider the following criteria in addition to the other applicable criteria set forth in other sections of these regulations:  
 
a. The size and intensity of the proposed use and the impact of such use on neighboring property. 


 
b. The potential for creation of a nuisance to neighboring properties, whether by noise, air or water pollution, offensive odors, smoke, dust, vibrations or other effects of the proposed use.  


 
c. The convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement on the site, and the impact of the proposed uses on existing local traffic. 


 
d. Accessibility of emergency vehicles, e.g. police, fire and emergency transportation vehicles. 


 
e. The adequacy of proposed methods for disposal of wastes, particularly with regards to any materials that could use an adverse effect on ground water or wetlands. 


 
f. The potential for, and the adequacy of measures for the prevention of surface water and ground water pollution, soil erosion and sedimentation, increased runoff, and changes in  groundwater levels. 


 
g. Measures for dealing with runoff and surface pollutants from driveway and parking areas. 


 
h. The compatibility of the design, layout and operation of the proposed buildings, structures or uses with nearby properties and the impacts on the enjoyment, usefulness and value of nearby property. 


 
i. The degree of population concentration and building density resulting from the proposed uses and the availability and adequacy of existing fire and police protection, transportation, water, sewage, facilities, schools or other public facilities to meet the needs  of the uses. 


 
j. The impact of the proposed uses on existing or potential local water supplies and recharge areas.  


 
k. The existence and protection of important natural and historic resources. 


 
l. The impact of the proposed uses on wildlife and plant habitats. 


 
G.  Conditions 
 
1.   The Commission may place on any special permit whatever conditions the Commission may reasonably deem necessary to assure that any proposed building, structure or use (1) will conform to the standards and limitations set forth in these regulations; (2) will protect the rights of individuals  and the health, safety, welfare and convenience of local residents and the community; (3) will protect local property values; and (4) will meet the specific standards set forth in this Section and, where applicable, any special permit criteria that may be required to meet the conditions of other sections of these regulations.  The conditions may relate to, without limitation, the architectural and spatial design and layout of buildings, structures and uses; provisions for lighting, parking, loading, surface and subsurface drainage, sanitary facilities, waste disposal, vehicle and pedestrian circulation, landscaping, screening, and protection of the environment and of natural and historic resources; construction or other development schedules; and hours of operation of the proposed building, structure or use.  The Commission may also condition the issuance of any special permit on the posting of a bond or other security, in an amount and with surety satisfactory to the Commission, to secure the performance of all conditions and the completion of all improvements required under such special permit. 
 
2. All buildings, structures and uses for which a special permit is required under these regulations must meet the applicable standards set forth throughout these regulations and, in addition, the following standards: 
 
a. Preservation of landscape.  The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as practicable by minimizing grading and the removal of vegetation and soil.  Where vegetative cover does not exist, or has been removed, new plantings may be required.  Finished site contours shall depart only minimally from the character of the natural site and the surrounding properties.  


 
b. Relation of Buildings to Environment.  The proposed project or development shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to the use, scale and siting of existing buildings in the vicinity of the site.  All buildings and other structures shall be sited to minimize disruption of the topography.  Strict attention shall be given to the proper functional, visual and spatial relationships of all structures, buildings, landscaped elements and paved areas.  


 
c. Buffer Areas.  All buffered and/or screened areas, including setback areas (landscaped and usable), shall be so designed as to be consistent and compatible with any residential uses in the vicinity. 


 
d. Circulation.  With respect to vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including entrances, ramps, walkways, drives and parking, special attention shall be given to the location and number of access points to the public streets, width of interior drives and access points, general interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, access to community or public facilities, and arrangement of parking areas that area safe and convenient and, insofar as practicable, do not detract from the use and enjoyment of proposed buildings and structures and the neighboring properties. 


 
e. Surface Water Drainage.  Special attention shall be given to proper surface drainage so that surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties or public storm drainage facilities, will not obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and will not create standing water in paved or pedestrian areas.  All surface water drained from roofs, streets, parking lots and other site features shall be disposed of in a safe and efficient manner that will not create problems of water runoff or erosion on the site or on neighboring sites or pollution of surface water or groundwater.  Insofar as possible natural drainage courses and swales shall be properly stabilized and drainage-impounding areas shall be used to dispose of water on the site through natural percolation to a degree equivalent to that prior to development.  Also appropriate erosion control measures shall be employed, including slope stabilization measures and the seeding of exposed areas to replace vegetative cover. 


 
f. Ground Water Recharge and Quality Preservation.  Ground water recharge shall be maximized and ground water quality shall be protected.  Various techniques may be required to maximize recharge, such as perforated drainpipes, pervious pavement, reduction of structure area, or reduction of lot coverage.  Where ground water elevations are close to the surface, extra site grading precautions may be required to maintain the protective function of the overburden. 


 
g. Utilities.  The placement of electric, telephone, or other utility lines and equipment shall be underground where possible, so located as to provide no adverse impact on groundwater levels, and coordinated with other utilities.  


 
h. Other Site Features.  Exposed storage or utility areas, exposed machinery installations, and service areas shall be designed with screen plantings, fencing or other screening methods to be compatible with the environment and the surrounding properties.  


 
i. Safety.  All open and enclosed spaces shall be designed to facilitate evacuation and maximize accessibility by fire, police and other emergency personnel equipment. 


 
j. Neighboring Properties.  The proposed uses shall not adversely affect the enjoyment, usefulness and value of the properties in the general vicinity thereof, or cause undue concentration of population or structures.   


 
k. Natural and Historic Resources.  The proposed uses shall not unreasonably destroy, damage or threaten locally significant natural or historical resources. 


 
H.  Public Hearing Required 
 
A public hearing in accordance with Section 8-3c of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut shall be held prior to issuing a decision on a special permit application within sixty-five (65) days after its receipt of an application for a special permit, the Commission shall start a public hearing on the application.  For the purposes of this Section, the day of receipt of an application shall be deemed to be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission of the application to the Commission or its authorized agent, or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner.  The hearing may be continued one or more times, but it must be concluded no later than thirty-five (35) days after the date of commencement. 
 
1. No Special Permit shall be granted until a public hearing in relation thereto has been held at which parties in interest and citizens shall have the opportunity to be heard.  


 
2. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the town at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days, nor less than ten (10) days, the last not less than two (2) days prior to the date of such hearing, and by sending a copy thereof by certified mail to the applicant.  


 
3. All applicants or their agents requiring a public hearing under the provisions of these Regulations shall be responsible for notifying owners of property located within 100 feet of the subject property. With the submission of any such application to the Commission, the applicant shall provide: 


 
a. A list of the names and addresses of owners of property located within 100 feet of (including directly across any street(s), watercourse or waterbody from) the subject property. The latest records of the Putnam Tax Assessor shall be utilized to determine the owner of each property. 


 
b. Notices from the applicant to the surrounding property owners shall be sent via Certified U.S. Mail.  


 
4. Prior to the date of the Commission's Public Hearing, the applicant shall submit: 


 
a. The Certificate of Mailing; and 


 
b. A list of the property owners to whom the notices were sent. 


 
I. Decision 
 
Within sixty-five (65) days after the completion of the public hearing, the Commission shall either: (1) approve the special permit and the site plan as submitted; (2) approve the special permit with conditions or modifications, as provided under these regulations; or (3) deny the special permit.  The Commission shall state the reasons for its decision on its records.  Notice of decision shall be published in the form of a legal advertisement in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town of Putnam, and addressed by certified mail to the applicant, under the signature of the clerk or secretary of the Commission in any written, printed, typewritten or stamped form, within fifteen (15) days after the decision has been rendered. 
 
J.  Extensions of Time 
 
The applicant may consent to extensions of the time period for (1) commencing a public hearing after the receipt of an application; (2) concluding a public hearing; and (3) rendering the decision.  The total extension of any such period shall be no longer than the original period as specified in these regulations. 
 
K.  Filing and Recording of Special Permits 
 
Any special permit issued under these regulations shall not become effective until copies of the permit are: (1) filed in the office of the Putnam Town Clerk; and (2) recorded in the Putnam Land Records.  The copy of special permit to be filed and recorded in the Putnam Land Records shall be certified by the Commission and shall: (1) contain a description of the premises to which it relates; (2) specify the nature of the special permit; (3) state the regulation under which the special permit is issued; and (4) state the names of all owners of record of the premises.  The applicant or record owner shall be responsible for filing and recording the special permit and shall pay all filing and recording fees. 
 
 
Section 115 – Certificate of Occupancy/Use 
 
A. No permanent certificate of occupancy/use shall be issued for a building, structure or use subject to these regulations until the Commission or its authorized agent certifies in writing that the building, structure or use is in conformity with these regulations and with any required zoning permit or special permit or is a valid nonconforming use under these regulations.  Before issuing such certification, the Commission or its authorized agent may require a written certification, certified as-built, or other appropriate documentation from an architect, engineer, and/or surveyor properly licensed by the State of Connecticut, demonstrating that the building, structure or use as developed or established fully conforms to the provisions of any zoning permit or special permit. 


 
B. The following provides general standards for all as-built plans required by the Zoning Commission.  Plans that do not meet the standards of this Section will not be accepted. 


 
1. The final as-built plan submitted for approval shall be paper copies at a scale of not less than 1”=40’.  Final as-built shall be submitted as required by the Commission and approved before a “Certificate of Occupancy” is issued. 


 
2. All existing improvements (building, structures, fences, walls, driveways, walks, etc.) will be shown. 


 
3. All buildings shall include exterior wall dimension, first floor elevations and garage elevations. 


 
4. All underground utilities, well and septic system locations shall be shown. 


 
5. Minimum zoning setbacks shall be shown and the distance of all buildings/structures to property lines shall be shown (nearest tenth of a foot). 


 
6. Elevations, in the form of “spot elevations” taken as part of the final actual field survey. 


 
7. Any easements and/or right-of-ways shall be shown. 


 
8. Plan shall show lot dimensions, bearings or angles, and lot area. 


 
9. All as-built plans shall meet the standards set forth in the “Standards for Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut,” prepared and adopted by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors, Inc. September 26, 1996, as amended. 


 
C. A temporary certificate of occupancy/use may be issued for a period of no more than one year if all work under the zoning permit, special permit or final site plan has been completed with the Permit of one or more plantings.  No such temporary certificate shall be valid after said one-year 


period.  Failure to obtain a permanent certificate of occupancy/use within the one-year period shall result in the expiration of all existing permits and approvals. 


 
D. No permanent certificate of occupancy/use shall be issued until all documents required under the zoning permit or special permit that grants easements or other rights to the Town of Putnam have been recorded in the Putnam Land Records and/or filed with the appropriate agencies and proof thereof has been submitted to the Commission. 


 
Section 116 – Expiration of Permits and Approvals 
 
A zoning permit shall expire one year following its issuance if the construction, development or other activity allowed under such permit has not been actually commenced.  A zoning permit shall expire two years following its issuance if the construction or development allowed there has not been completed.  The Commission, upon written request and for good cause shown, may extend either or both of these periods one or more times, but the total period of such extension or extensions shall not exceed one additional year.  Site preparation alone shall not be deemed to be the actual commencement of the construction, development or activity under this Section. 
 
 
Section 117 – Amendments of Permits and Site Plans 
 
A. Following the issuance of a zoning permit or a special permit or the approval of a final site plan by the Commission, no changes or alterations, except as provided for in Sections 113 and 114, may be made in such permit or site plan except by approval of the Commission upon written applications as provided in this Section. 
 
1. If the Commission determines that the requested change or alteration is minor, it may issue an amended permit or approve an amended final site plan without the need for further procedures under Sections 113 and/or 114 of these regulations.  For the purposes of this Section, “minor changes or alterations” shall not include any change or alteration that would result in an increase or decrease in the dimensions of any building or a change in the location of any building on a lot. 


 
 
 
Article II 
Zoning Board of Appeals 
 
 
Section 201 – Establishment 
 
There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals, hereinafter called the Board, in conformance with Chapter 124, Section 8-5 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
 
 
Section 202 – Powers of the Board 
 
A. Hear and decide appeals of the decisions of the Commission or the Agent in the enforcement of these Regulations. 



 
B. Grant variances as authorized.  



 
 
Section 203 – Right to Appeal: General 
 
Any person or persons aggrieved by an action of the Commission or agent may appeal such action to the Board or to the courts in accordance with Chapter 124, Section 8-7 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended.  
 
 
Section 204 – Grounds for Granting an Appeal 
 
The Board may grant an appeal if the applicant can demonstrate that the Commission or agent erred in enforcing these Regulations.  
 
 
Section 205 – Variances: General 
 
A. The Board may grant variances from the terms of these Regulations, where exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship would result to the owners of the premises from a strict application of these Regulations because of the shape, size or topographic features of the lot, or other unusual situation or condition of the land or structure.  Such variance may be granted, provided, substantial impairment of the intent, purpose and integrity of these Regulations and of the Plan of Conservation and Development for the Town does not result. 



 
B. The Board shall not grant a variance for the use of land not permitted by these Regulations within the district involved. 



 
 
Section 206 – Findings 
 
In granting a variance, the Board: 
 
A. Shall grant the least variance required to relieve the undue hardship involved. 



 
B. Shall find that the variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of these Regulations. 



 
C. Shall find that the variance will not adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, welfare, and property values. 



 
D. Shall find that if the owner complies with these Regulations, he/she would not be able to make any reasonable use of his/her property. 



 
E. May impose such special conditions as are deemed necessary to maintain harmony with other lots in the same or abutting districts and to promote the objectives of these Regulations.  



 
The Board’s findings shall be part of the written record of the case.  
 
 
Section 207 – Grounds for Granting a Variance 
 
A. The applicant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Board, that the requested relief will not be contrary to the public interest and that because of special or peculiar conditions, enforcement of the provisions of the Regulation would result in unnecessary hardship. 


 
B. The unnecessary hardship, which an applicant seeks to avoid, shall not have imposed by any prior action of the applicant or previous owner.  Such hardship shall arise only from special or peculiar site conditions or features of the land or structure in question and not from physical infirmities of the applicant or merely from the desire to realize greater financial gain. 


 
C. Nonconforming use of neighboring land, structures or buildings in the same district and permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in an adjacent district shall not be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.  


 
D. The Board shall consider any application for variance in the light of the Plan for Development and shall consider the effect of the variance on the future development of the Town. 


 
 
Section 208 – Application Procedure 
 
Application for a variance or appeal of the decision of the Commission or its agent shall be made on the prescribed application form.  The application shall be made in accordance with the rules of the Board and with Section 8-7 of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State or Connecticut.   
 
 
Section 209 – Hearings 
 
The Board shall hold a duly advertised public hearing in accordance with Chapter 124, Section 8-7 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended before acting on an application for a variance or an appeal.  In accordance with 8-7 the Board will notify, by mail, persons who are owners of land which is adjacent to the land which is subject of the hearing. 
 
 
Section 210 – Automotive Sales, Service, Autobody Repair, Automotive Service Garage, Gasoline/Automotive Fueling Stations 
   
A.  The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby designated as the agency for the Town of Putnam charged with the authority to grant a certificate of approval for the location of the following uses, as required in Sections 2-4 of Public Act No. 03-184 of the State of Connecticut, as amended: 
 
1. the dealing in or repairing of motor vehicles, as required for obtaining a license from the Commissioner of Consumer Protection; 


 
2. the establishment, operation or maintaining of a motor vehicle recycler’s yard or motor vehicle recycler’s business; and, 


 
3. the sale of gasoline or any other product under the provisions of §14-319 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as required for obtaining a license from the Commissioner of Consumer Protection. 


 
Notwithstanding the above, the granting of a certificate of approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not in any way abrogate or annul other regulatory and administrative provisions of these Regulations pertaining to said uses. 
 
 
 
 
  
B.  Applicability 
 
1. As of the effective date of these Regulations, no person, firm or corporation shall establish, expand or alter in use or structure any business concerned with sale, repair, or servicing of automobiles, gasoline, sales, or bulk oil storage unless said business or use is developed in accordance with the requirements of this Section and other applicable controls in these Regulations.  


 
2. Such uses legally developed prior to the effective date of these Regulations may continue, without meeting in the provisions of this Section. 


 
3. No such use, legally established, shall become nonconforming by reasons of development of park, playground, school, college, church, public library, or dwelling subsequent to the establishment of the use.  


 
C.  Issuance of Permits  
 
 No permit shall be issued for the establishment, expansion, or alteration of any such use or structure until approved by the Board after a duly advertised public hearing. 
 
D.  Required Finds.   The applicant shall demonstrate to the Board that: 
 
1. The location is suitable for the use or business intended; 


 
2. There is no adverse impact on intersecting streets, traffic conditions, width of highway, and effect of public travel; 


 
3. Such use or business shall not imperil the safety of the public;  


 
4. The proposed use is at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any entrance to a public park or playground, school, college, place of worship or public library.  


 
E. General Requirements. 


 
1. The Performance Standards set forth in Section 608 of these Regulations shall be adhered to. 


 
2. Safeguards shall be provided against surface and subsurface leakage of gas and oil.   


 
3. All applications to the Board shall include a report from the Agent confirming that the site can be adequately drained and that the proposed drainage system is suitable. 


 
4. All applications to the Board shall be accompanied with plans showing information as detailed in Section 113 of these Regulations.  


 
5. Off-street parking shall meet the requirements of Section 601 of these Regulations.  


 
6. There shall be at least ten (10) feet of landscaped area along the frontage of the premises and where adjacent to paved areas and service roads, said areas shall be clearly defined by curbing.  


 
7. There shall be a buffer zone/strip of at least twenty-five (25) feet between any of the uses or buildings described in this Section that are proposed to be adjacent to lots zoned for or in residential use. Said 25 foot buffer zone shall be planted in accordance with Section 603 of these regulations. 


  
8. There shall be no exits or entrances closer than two hundred (200) feet to any road intersection; nor shall there be any business or uses referred to in this Section located within two hundred (200) feet of any residential dwelling which is situated in a residential district.  


 
9. Except for new or used auto sales operations, vehicles parked or stored on the premises for periods exceeding ten (10) days, and all damaged vehicles on the premises shall be housed within a fenced or obscured enclosure at lease six (6) feet in height. 


 
10. A pump, light standard, air tower, water outlet, or similar installation of a gasoline filling station may be placed within the required front yard but in no case closer to a street line than fifteen (15) feet.  


 
11. Corner lots as defined in Section 401 Table IV-1 and in Article VIII of these Regulations shall meet minimum frontage for each street frontage as set forth in Subsection F. of this Section, below.  


  
F. Lot Requirements.  The minimum lot size, frontage and yard for such uses shall adhere to the following:  


 
Minimum 
Special   Min.    Setback 
Type   Lot  Min. Lot From St. Minimum Minimum 
Business   Area  Frontage Line  Sideyard Rearyard 
 
Auto Sales   
New and/or used  1 Acre  200 FT  75 FT  50 FT  40 FT 
 
Auto Repair 
Garage or Shop  1 Acre  200 FT  75 FT  50 FT  40 FT 
 
Gasoline Sales  1 Acre  200 FT  85 FT  50 FT  40 FT 
 
 
The Board may impose such additional conditions upon each use as it finds necessary to protect the public safety, convenience and property values notwithstanding the requirements of this Section. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article III 
Districts and Uses 
 
Section 301 – Establishment and Purposes of Districts  
 
For the purposes of these regulations, the Town is divided into the following districts: 
 
A. Residential 


 
1. Agricultural District (AG2) – These are primarily rural areas not served by public water and sewer.  These areas are characterized by low-density residential development, agricultural and certain low intensity non-residential activities incidental to a rural environment.  The purpose of the AG-2 Agricultural District is to maintain the rural nature of the Town consisting primarily of scattered residential, agricultural, and related uses, open space, low intensity recreational activities, and other uses that will retain the rural character and natural beauty of the Town consistent with the Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development, as amended.  


 
2. Rural Residential District (R40) – These are low-density residential areas in which certain utilities are lacking, but which are suited for larger-lot single-family developments.  The purpose of the R-40 Rural Residential District is to provide an area of town conducive to single-family homes. 


 
3. Residential District (R20) – These are medium-density residential areas within the Town, where development trends have concentrated and are expected to continue.  The purpose of the R-20 Residential District is to provide an area of town conducive to single-family homes. 


 
4. Residential District (R10) – These are moderately high-density residential areas with public water and sewer. The purpose of the R-10 Residential District is to provide moderately high-density residential areas served by municipal water and sewerage facilities. 


 
5. Residential District (R7) – These are high-density residential areas with public water and sewer.  Selected public, semi-public and limited commercial uses are allowed in these areas.  The purpose of the R-7 Residential District is to provide high-density residential areas served by municipal water and sewerage facilities and where appropriate, Special Permit uses which allow for transitional commercial uses. 


 
B. Business/Mixed 


 
1.  Highway Commercial District (HC) – The Highway Commercial District is intended primarily for retail uses which are high traffic generators that typically are associated with substantial expanses of on-site parking areas.  Included are such uses as shopping centers, open lot sales including sales of motor vehicles, department stores/“big box” retailers, and wholesale business. 







2.  General Commercial District (GC) – The General Commercial District is intended primarily for retail trades and convenience services, providing retail-shopping accommodations.  Products for retail are normally convenience and compulsive purchases with little comparison shopping and are generally foods and beverages for human consumption; soft goods such as clothing and shoes; drugs and cosmetics; printed materials; notions; hardware and paint; kitchenware; toys and sporting goods; jewelry, gifts and novelties; flowers, tobacco products; photographic equipment; antiques; artist and hobby supplies; music supplies and medical supplies. 







 
3.  Neighborhood Commercial District (NC) – The purpose of the Neighborhood Commercial District is to provide a mixed-use, architecturally compatible environment of residential and commercial uses in proximity to the center of Putnam.  







 
4.  Putnam Downtown District (PD) – The Putnam Downtown District is established to preserve the traditional focal point in the community for cultural, civic and commercial activities; to promote pedestrian friendly development; and to aid in the preservation and restoration of its architectural assets while providing for an environment that fosters economic growth and diversity. 







 
5.  Medical/Office Development District (M/OD) – The Medical/Office Development District is to provide for the continued growth and development of Day Kimball Healthcare, and to provide areas for medical and professional offices, in a manner compatible with the surrounding uses.  Hospital facilities shall be designed within the capacity of the infrastructure necessary to support such operations. 







 
6.  Industrial District (I) – The purpose of the Industrial District is to provide for orderly development of manufacturing, assembling, warehousing and other industrial facilities in a unified campus style setting.  The intent is to promote the municipality’s economy and to protect public health and welfare in accordance with the Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development. 






 


C. Park/Other Public Lands 
 
1. Park District (P) – This district is comprised of publicly owned areas devoted to park purposes and privately owned areas that may remain vacant or may be developed so as to provide natural, passive or active recreation or educational facilities to meet the needs of the Town. 


 
2. Waste Water Treatment Facility District (WWTF) – This district compromises those lands on which the Water and Sewer Authority operates a Waste Water Treatment Facility which are situated off of Quinebaug Avenue and Kennedy Drive, and more particularly described in a Quitclaim Deed from Frank O. Davis to the City of Putnam, dated August 13, 1910, and recorded in Putnam Land Records Volume 28, Page 51, which description is incorporated herein by reference.  


 
D. Overlay Districts 
 
1. Industrial Heritage Overlay District (IHOD) – This overlay district consists of designated properties which (1) contain historic river mills aged one hundred (100) years or greater from the effective date of these Zoning Regulations and (2) are eligible for the inclusion of 
residential uses by an IHOD Special Permit. It is a special district to protect and maximize the economic potential of several river mill structures important to the Town’s history, character, and landscape. The IHOD shall apply to the following river mills locations: 
 
. Monohansett Mill (83 Canal St., Assessors Map 15, Lot 140) 

. Cargill Falls Mill (52 Pomfret St., Assessors Map 15, Lot 81 and 58 Pomfret St., Assessors Map 15, Lot 127) 

. Morse Mill (241 Morse St., Assessors Map 11, Lot 62 and 245 Church St., Assessors Map 11, Lot 18) 

. Belding Mill (107 Providence St., Assessors Map 7, Lot 331) 

. Nightingale Mill (350 Kennedy Dr., Assessors Map 11, Lot 65) 

. Rhodes Mill (328 Kennedy Dr., Assessors Map 11, Lot 133) 

. Whipple & Gilpatrick Mill (51 Pomfret St., Assessors Map 15, Lot 58) 


  
All maps and lots listed above are as shown on Assessors Maps in effect as of May 28, 2014. 
 
Industrial Heritage Overlay District Regulations 
 
A.  Statement of Purpose.  The Town seeks to protect its remaining historically and architecturally significant structures and, in doing so, to require consideration of the physical, architectural and cultural context of such structures before approving redevelopment proposals which would alter such structures to add residential uses. Industrial Heritage Overlay Districts are intended to encourage renovation and/or adaptive re-use of Putnam’s historic river mills, retain the potential for commercial and industrial development while permitting residential development, and preserve historic architectural design elements while adapting obsolete or underutilized structures and appurtenances to 21st Century needs. Factors to be considered by the Zoning Commission (the “Commission”) in approving an IHOD Special Permit include: 
 
1.  To the maximum feasible extent, preservation of buildings and building elements possessing historic or architectural significance. Building additions shall be architecturally compatible with existing historic structures and the neighborhood (when feasible), and respect exterior attributes of such structures and neighborhood. 





 
2.  Adaptive re-uses that promote and incorporate a mix of uses in a proportion and in a scale which promotes physical and economic compatibility and that enhance the opportunity for creative development provided that residential living units shall not exceed 75% of the total square feet of re-use. The type, density and placement of each proposed use shall be indicated in the IHOD Application. 





 
3.  Compatibility with neighboring land uses, safe site access and egress for vehicular traffic, promotion of pedestrian safety, and provision for adequate parking. Adverse impacts to the surrounding neighborhoods, such as excessive lighting or noise, shall be avoided or mitigated. 





 
4.  Promotion of the vitality of the town’s riverfront, including to provide for the public’s use and enjoyment, preserve the scenic quality of wetland habitat, promote river related recreation, and provide for the protection of the river bank. New uses locating in the Industrial Heritage Overlay District should be of pedestrian scale and orientation; ensure the public’s visual access and enjoyment of the river; evoke a feeling of the industrial history of the area; include design orientation both to the river and to the public way; and integrate public outdoor activities.  




B. Non-Residential Mixed-Use Projects. In the IHOD, an IHOD Special Permit shall not be required for projects which do not include residential uses. Regulations for the underlying zoning district shall govern such non-residential mixed-use projects. 

C. IHOD Conceptual Development Plan.  Applicants are strongly recommended to initiate a pre-application meeting(s) with the Commission to allow informal discussion(s) between the applicant and the Commission of an IHOD Conceptual Development Plan.  This process is intended to provide the Applicant with the Commission’s input on the proposed project, which the applicant can then utilize in preparation for the detailed engineering work necessary to prepare the formal submission of the IHOD Special Permit application and its accompanying Final Development Plan, thereby minimizing delay, expense, and inconvenience to all interested parties.  To facilitate productive discussion on the project, the IHOD Conceptual Development Plan should include all of the following exhibits: 


 
1.  Executive Summary: A summary description of the proposed project which includes a section proposing plans or reports to be included in the Final Development Plan. 



 
2.  Existing Site Conditions Plan. A submittal in the form of a map or an annotated aerial photograph showing property lines, the approximate location of existing site conditions and structures. 



 
3.  Preliminary Circulation Plan. A submittal in the form of a map or an annotated aerial photograph showing the approximate locations of all access and egress points and preliminary locations of internal circulation routes, including roads, drives, ways, pedestrian walks and paths within the proposed development. 



 
4.  Preliminary Site Development Plan. A submittal in the form of a map or an annotated aerial photograph showing approximately: (1) the approximate locations of structures to be retained, substantially rehabilitated, demolished or reconstructed, and the proposed allocation of uses therein expressed as total square feet for each use; and intended ownership of each type of proposed use. (2) The location and capacities of areas to be designated for common spaces and public spaces, including parking and service areas and areas to be landscaped (the general location for parking may be known, but total number of spaces may not be available at the Conceptual Development Plan Stage). 



 
5.  Preliminary Building Elevations Plan.  A submittal, including renderings of architectural style, showing how the proposed project fits within the surrounding neighborhood context.   



Neither the pre-application meeting(s), the informal discussion(s) of the Concept Development Plan, nor the Commission’s suggestions shall be deemed to constitute approval or denial of any portion of the IHOD special permit application. 
 
D. IHOD Special Permit Application Procedures. Projects which include residential uses within the Industrial Heritage Overlay District require approval from the Zoning Commission of an IHOD Special Permit for which an applicant must secure approval from the Commission of an IHOD Final Development Plan. Following an IHOD Special Permit application submittal, a hearing shall be scheduled with the Zoning Commission wherein the Owner/Developer presents the contents of the application and responds to questions from the Commission.  The Zoning Commission thereafter may indicate considerations, conditions, or requests for the IHOD Final Development Plan and ensure the resulting project is consistent with IHOD goals. If the Zoning Commission finds that a proposed IHOD Final Development Plan is in substantial accordance with or represents the purpose and intent of the IHOD District, and that all fee payments have been made, the Commission may then approve such IHOD Final Development Plan and cause an IHOD Special Permit to issue.  


 
E. IHOD Final Development Plan.  The IHOD Final Development Plan shall include all of the following elements: 


   
1.  Executive Summary. A summary description of the proposed project which includes a section discussing input received from the Zoning Commission in its review of the Applicant’s IHOD Conceptual Development Plan, if any, and how that input has or has not been incorporated into the IHOD Final Development Plan. 




 
2.  Final Plans or Reports. Submittals updating each of the preliminary plans / plan sheets reviewed at the IHOD Conceptual Development Plan discussion, if any, and providing the indicated additional reports, if any; plans shall be at a scale required by the Zoning Commission. 




 
3.  Final Existing Site Conditions Plan.  A map showing property lines, the location of existing site conditions and structures, including wetlands and water courses, easements, street rights-of-way, access points, trees and landscape features. 




 
4.  Final Circulation Plan. A submittal in the form of a map showing the locations of all access and egress points and all internal circulation routes, including roads, drives, ways, pedestrian walks and paths within the proposed development. If more than 15 residential units are proposed, the Final Circulation Plan shall be accompanied by a trip generation report and analysis at normal and peak conditions, prepared by a professional traffic engineer, indicating projected traffic flows, directions, and volumes both to and from the proposed development and their projected effects on major intersections within one-half mile of the nearest boundary of the IHOD, and any proposed improvements that would result in an adequate level of service at affected intersections. 




 
5.  Final Site Development Plan. A submittal in the form of a drawing showing: (1) Preliminary floor plans for each proposed use, including a notation of square footage and unit counts on each floor.  (2) the locations of structures to be retained, substantially rehabilitated, demolished or constructed, and the proposed allocation of uses therein expressed as total square feet for each use, including the specific types of proposed residential use (i.e., market-rate, affordable, or age-restricted housing); and intended ownership of each type of proposed use. (3) The location, capacities, and square feet of areas to be designated for common spaces and public spaces, including parking and service areas, areas to be landscaped, and the number of parking spaces in each area to be designated for parking. 




 
6.  Final Utilities Plan.  If underground utility line changes are proposed, a submittal shall be made in the form of a map showing the location and directional flow of existing and proposed storm drainage and sanitary sewers, and connections with existing and proposed interceptors, outlets, or trunk lines outside the IHOD. This Plan shall include a letter signed by the Town’s Water and Sewer Superintendent verifying the location, availability, and capacity of water and sewer utilities capable of serving the development, as well as letters of confirmation from other utilities proposed to be utilized in the property. 




 
7.  Final Building Elevations Plan.  If changes are proposed for a historic river mill’s exterior, or if additions or new structures or demolition is proposed, a submittal shall be made, including renderings of architectural style, materials for exterior of buildings; elevations should show how the proposed project fits within the surrounding neighborhood context. 




 
8.  Final Construction Scheduling Plan. A submittal indicating an approximate construction timetable which illustrates a schedule for the development of each phase of the IHOD. This timetable shall also include the square footage for each use in each indicated phase and the approximate location of such phases within the IHOD. 




 
9.  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A submittal with notes and detail drawings to show silt fence/hay bale and other mitigating measures. 




 
10.  Drainage Plan & Drainage Report. A submittal with notes and detail drawings showing type of drainage and water quality control systems proposed. 




 
11. Other Relevant Information. Such other relevant information as the Zoning Commission may require in order to determine whether a proposal is consistent with the objectives of the town’s “Industrial Heritage Overlay District”. The final application shall include the information required under the Conceptual Development Plan if not previously provided to the Commission.  The Commission may require additional drawings to supplement the above when more information is needed or special conditions occur. 




 
12. State Reviews. Letters of certificate from the State Highway Department and Traffic Commission, where appropriate. 




 
13. Inland Wetlands Review. A letter indicating preliminary review and approval by the Inland Wetlands Commission. 




 
14. Putnam Redevelopment Agency Review. Submittal of a written recommendation from the Putnam Redevelopment Agency indicating that it has reviewed the Applicant’s exterior plans and design drawings and concluded that they are architecturally compatible with existing historic structures and the neighborhood. 




 
15. Public Hearing Notice. A list of adjoining property owners and copy of letter notifying them of the IHOD Special Permit application and scheduling of a public hearing. 




 
16. Boundary Survey. If additions or new structures or demolition is proposed, or if new access or egress points are proposed, a survey of the proposed project shall be prepared to Class A-2 accuracy by a Connecticut licensed land surveyor. 




 
17. Design Drawings. Submittals to scale showing:  




 
a. Exterior drawings of the proposed project illustrating design details. 



 
b. Design type, style and color of materials for the building façade and roof. 



 
c. Details and descriptions of window and exterior doors. 



 
d. Details and descriptions for all architectural trim and features. 



 
e. Details and descriptions of proposed awning types, lighting, and signage. 



 
18. Landscaping and Parking Plan. A detailed plan showing all site features, landscaping, parking layout and spaces, and finished grading. 




 
F. IHOD Design and Construction Standards.  The following standards shall apply to the renovation and/or adaptive re-use of all IHOD properties: 

1. Encroachments. Adaptive re-use requires flexibility, any existing historic structures located within the IHOD District is deemed to be conforming in terms of any encroachments on front, side and rear yard setbacks, maximum height and floor area ratio. 

2. Residential Density. The following assumptions shall be used in calculating residential density: 

a. A maximum of 75% of the total floor area to be renovated and/or re-used in an existing historic structure may be used for residential living units; the remaining 25% or more of the total floor area to be renovated and/or re-used in an existing historic 




structure shall be used for permitted non-residential uses and/or residential amenities exclusive of stairways, hallways and public spaces. 

b. A living unit shall include no less than 30% of its square footage configured as sleeping space. The minimum size of the first sleeping space shall be 150 SF. The minimum permitted living unit shall be 500 SF plus 150 SF for the first sleeping space/bedroom included in a unit.  Additional bedrooms shall be a minimum of 120 SF with no wall less than 9½ feet in length. No more than sixty percent (60%) of the total number of permitted residential units on the site shall be one-bedroom or less, and no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of permitted residential units on the site shall be efficiency units.  



3. Build Out. An IHOD Special Permit shall require that no certificate of occupancy for residential units shall be issued until such time as all residential spaces and non-residential spaces have a completed weathertight shell, which shall include a completed weathertight roof, walls, floor, windows, and doors. 

4. Additions. Existing buildings may be proposed to be enlarged – provided that such addition is consistent with the structure’s exterior historic architecture and does not exceed 25% of the total square feet of existing buildings, not including unusable spaces. Non-residential auxiliary structures may be permitted if they are architecturally compatible with the primary river mill structure. 

5. Circulation and Access. 


 
a. Traffic and safety impacts to existing and proposed roads shall be minimized. 



 
b. Curb cuts shall be limited. 



 
c. Access shall be provided to the extent feasible through existing side streets or shared driveways. 



 
d. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall be separated.  



 
e. Walkways shall be provided for access to adjacent properties and between businesses. 



 
6. Parking. 


 
a. Residential off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of no less than 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit, and parking required for all non-residential uses shall be governed by Section 601 of these Regulations; provided, however, that the Commission shall determine the total parking requirement.  The Commission may consider written agreements for shared off-site parking proximate to the site provided the applicant satisfies the Commission that the agreement is legally enforceable and of sufficient duration to avoid future problems. The applicant should also provide a viable long term alternate solution if the agreement to provide off-site parking is not permanent in nature. The Commission may also consider a written on-site shared parking 



arrangement that allows a reduction in the number of required on-site parking spaces such that the peak usage periods of the various uses on the site will not occur simultaneously.  A request for such a shared parking agreement, prepared by a registered traffic engineer, shall be submitted in narrative form, and shall be graphically depicted on a separate plan sheet, which shall demonstrate the specifics of the request and the justification for shared parking for the particular project.  Any such shared parking agreements shall be approved by the Commission and shall be recorded in the Land Evidence Records of the Town.  



 
b. Parking lot design and landscaping shall conform to Section 601, and to this Section, Subsection B.8. below, where applicable.   


7. Lighting. 


 
a. Parking areas shall be illuminated to provide appropriate visibility and security during hours of darkness. 


 
b. Exterior lighting shall be architecturally integrated with the building style, material and colors. 


 
c. Exterior lighting shall be designed so that light is shielded from direct offsite viewing and is not directed off or above the site. 


 
d. Fixture mounting height should be appropriate for the project and the setting. Use of low, bollard-type fixtures, three to four (3-4) feet in height is encouraged as pedestrian area lighting. The mounted height of fixtures in smaller parking lots or service areas should not exceed sixteen (16) feet, with lower mounting heights encouraged, particularly where adjacent to residential areas or other sensitive land uses. 


 
e. Raised light pole bases shall be attractively designed and well-detailed to be compatible with the overall project. 


 
f. The use of vandal resistant well lighting is encouraged for lighting monument signs. 


 
8. Landscaping. There shall be a landscaped buffer strip of at least twenty (20) feet around any waterway or wetlands and at the outer edge of parking lots abutting property boundaries; provided, however, that the Commission may waive this requirement if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Commission that alternative landscaping in this area is more appropriate for the subject site. Screening of mechanical equipment, trash, and loading areas shall be provided through the use of walls, fences, and/or dense, evergreen plant materials. Existing trees shall be maintained as practicable and any new trees shall be carefully selected and located where they will complement the building elevation. Tree species, when additional trees are proposed, should be selected with root growth habits that will not cause damage to sidewalks, or such tree species should be sited away from such hardscape areas.  Street tree placement shall include consideration for vehicle line of sight, entrance and exit curb cuts, street light and traffic control devices, and other site specific conditions. 


 
9. Buffers.  Common walls between residential and non-residential uses shall be constructed to minimize the transmission of noise and vibration. Residential buildings to be constructed or rehabilitated shall be designed to filter out noise and vibration through construction employing, but not limited to, such techniques as applying soundproofing material between dwelling units laterally and vertically, and between different uses; employing staggered joists and insulation. Non-residential uses shall be designed and operated, and hours of operation limited where appropriate, so that neighboring residents are not exposed to offensive noise, especially from traffic or late-night activity. No amplified music shall be audible to neighboring residents. No use abutting residential use shall engage in or cause very loud activities.  Odor, dust, and fumes shall be effectively confined to the origin of its use and so disposed as to avoid air pollution and its dissemination to other uses within the IHOD and other adjacent properties. Where the IHOD abuts a residentially zoned property, a buffer strip equal to the abutting setback requirements shall be required.  


 
10. Storage. Outside storage of recreational vehicles, trailers, pleasure craft and boats shall not be permitted in an IHOD. Except as specified below, outdoor storage shall be enclosed within permanent walls or fences integrated into the design of the building and shall be screened from view from public ways and abutting properties. 


 
a. Storage of goods thereon shall not exceed the height of screening walls or fences.  


 
b. Goods shall not be displayed in landscaped areas, on exterior walls, or in parking lots, except where outdoor display areas have been delineated on the approved Final Development Plan and such displays shall not impede the normal use of sidewalks or other pedestrian walkways. 


 
c. Vending machines shall not be allowed on the outside of any buildings. 


 
d. Garbage or recycling dumpsters/compactors shall have doors or lids that shall remain closed when not being loaded or unloaded and shall be contained in enclosures. 


 
e. Racks for seasonal storage of canoes and kayaks for recreational purposes shall be permitted on the premises in selected locations approved by the Commission and shown on the IHOD Final Development Plan. 


 
11. Signage.  


 
a. All signs in an IHOD shall be architecturally integrated with their surroundings in terms of size, shape, color, texture, and lighting so that they are complementary to the overall design, scale, character, use, and heritage of the building and are not in visual competition with other signs within the IHOD. 


 
b. Signs shall not obscure the building’s architectural features or detailing. 


 
c. Sign materials should have matte or dull finish. Signs should be limited to two or three contrasting colors that are compatible to the colors on the building.  Carved wooden signs are encouraged. 


 
d. Externally lit signs, with pendant lighting fixtures are encouraged. Any external spot or flood lighting shall be arranged so that the light source is screened from direct view by passersby, and so that the light is directed against the sign and does not shine into adjacent property or blind motorists and pedestrians. 


 
e. Signs with slots for changeable letters are prohibited.  Signs with moving text or scrolls are prohibited. 


 
f. New signs proposed shall be incorporated into a signage program presenting unifying elements and providing logical, designated sign areas.  


 
g. The only freestanding signs allowed shall be three dimensional monument signs located at property entrances or exits and shall be limited to identifying the name of the property and shall not be greater than five (5) feet in height; provided, however, that the Commission may waive this requirement and wall sign requirements if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Commission that alternative signage is more appropriate for the subject site as designed in a comprehensive sign package submitted along with the special permit application.  In no instance shall a sign exceed the height of the adjacent building.  Monument sign materials shall reflect the character of the use and the building the sign identifies and shall be made of permanent, durable materials such as concrete or brick. 

12. Stormwater. Special attention shall be accorded to stormwater runoff so that the neighboring properties and/or the public stormwater drainage system are not adversely affected. Attention shall also be accorded to design features which address the effects of rain, snow, and ice, with particular attention to effects on the areas between buildings and the river, and to provisions for snow and ice removal from circulation areas. 

13. Directional Expression & Sense of Entry. Development shall be oriented so that both river and street side facades are primary. Materials on the riverside of a structure shall be of equal character and quality as those on the street side. Both facades should incorporate surfaces, colors, textures, materials, detailing and other building components that are consistent, dimensionally proportional and pedestrian friendly. 

14. Prohibited Uses.  Uses prohibited in the IHOD are indicated at Section 304 Table III-1 – Industrial Heritage Overlay District (IHOD) Special Permits.  Residential uses in the IHOD shall not include the letting of rooms which shall mean living units kept, used, advertised, or held out to be a place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to roomers or boarders, whether for remuneration or compensation or not, on a transient, non-long term leased basis, but not to include residential uses operated as hotels or elderly facilities. 


15. Other Regulations. The entire structure, and building permit plans submitted, shall satisfy all applicable building, fire, health, housing and zoning requirements and/or regulations of the town and such compliance will be a condition of the granting of occupancy permits. If required by the Building Inspector prior to the issuance of a building permit:  

a. Structural Report. A comprehensive report shall be made providing an analysis of structural issues and measures necessary to secure the structural integrity of existing structures, including the structural integrity of buildings in which partial demolition is proposed and Retaining Wall Calculations for any proposed walls (design and cross section to be shown on a plan). 



 
b. Lighting Schedule and Plan. A submittal showing existing and proposed exterior lighting, including building and ground lighting; locations, supports, mounting heights, and orientation of all luminaries and light distribution patterns. 



 
c. Remediation Plan. A submittal locating areas to be mitigated, remediation procedures, controls to ensure safety and containment during remediation, and appropriate DEEP guidelines to be followed. 


G. IHOD Administration.  

1. Third Party Consultants. The Town may, at its discretion and through the Zoning Commission, hire third party consultants to aid the Fire Marshal, Zoning Commission, Inland Wetlands Commission, and/or Redevelopment Agency in their review of any proposed alteration, demolition or redevelopment of a river mills structure or site within an Industrial Heritage Overlay District and/or in the review of plans. The Building Inspector may require the Owner/Developer’s licensed architect or engineer to inspect all work and to certify its compliance with approved plans. The fees estimated by third party consultants shall be borne by the applicant and shall be due and payable to the Zoning Commission prior to the applicant's filing of an IHOD Final Development Plan or application for an Alteration or Demolition Special Permit. 

2. Performance Security. The developer, either individually or through the general contractor, shall provide to the Commission a project Performance Security Agreement which shall guarantee, to the Commission’s satisfaction, the completion of the construction of all improvements necessary to ensure (1) the timely and adequate completion of any site improvements that will be conveyed to or controlled by the Town, and (2) the implementation of any erosion and sediment controls required during construction activities.  The Performance Security Agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the Commission and approved by the Town Attorney.  Such project security shall take the form of a Bank Deposit Escrow Agreement or a Letter of Credit.  The agreement shall reference the specific project and the construction timeline and provide that the Commission may drawdown on the performance security should the developer fail to complete any site improvements that will be conveyed to or controlled by the Town and/or to implement any erosion and sediment controls required during construction activities within the timeline specified by the Commission.  Performance security shall be in an amount equal to the anticipated actual costs for the completion of any site improvements that will be conveyed to or controlled by the Town and/or the implementation of any erosion and sediment controls required during construction activities as determined by a writing signed by the developer’s engineer, accepted by the Commission and confirmed by independent review. Said performance security shall be released upon the developer’s submittal of evidence that any site improvements that will be 




conveyed to or controlled by the Town and/or the implementation of any erosion and sediment controls required during construction activities have been completed, pursuant to the approved plans. 

3. Condominium Agreements.  If the dwelling units within the site are to be in the form of a condominium, the provisions of Section 703 – Condominiums shall be applicable. 




 
2.  Quinebaug Regional Technology Park Overlay District (TPOD) – This overlay district is intended to promote economic development, with particular attention to high-technology business, in a different manner from customary industrial development, utilizing the transportation network opportunities offered by the I-395/Kennedy Drive intersection and the readily available nearby utilities relative to certain parcels of land located westerly of Kennedy Drive noted herein, as a community of manufacturing, research and development, and service businesses located together on adjacent or common properties, or connected by a virtual network to other participating companies within the region.  This unconventional method of development is known as Eco-Industrial Development, whereby member businesses seek enhanced environmental, economic, and social performance through collaboration in managing environmental and resource issues, analogous to an ecosystem found in nature. By working together, the community of businesses seeks a collective benefit that is greater than the sum of individual benefits each company would realize by only optimizing its individual performance.  
 
Technology Park Overlay District Regulations 
 
A.   Establishment of the District 
 
The Quinebaug Regional Technology Park Overlay District (TPOD) is hereby established as an overlay district superimposed on the underlying zoning districts as shown on the map entitled “Quinebaug Regional Technology Park Overlay District (TPOD), Town of Putnam, Connecticut” dated March 2013, with additional detail and information added to said map and dated April 2013.  This map is hereby made a part of these Zoning Regulations and is on file in the Offices of the Town Clerk and of the Zoning Commission.  The TPOD is more specifically described as consisting of all or a portion of the land encompassed within the following Putnam Assessors’ Tax Parcels as in existence as of March 2013, as so indicated below: 
. Assessors Map 37, Lot 7 (portion) 

. Assessors Map 37, Lot 44 (all) 

. Assessors Map 37, Lot 54 (portion) 

. Assessors Map 44, Lot 1 (portion) 

. Assessors Map 44, Lot 6 (all) 

. Assessors Map 44, Lot 22 (portion) 


All use, dimensional and other requirements of the provisions of these Zoning Regulations governing the underlying zoning districts shall remain in full force and effect, except for a project undergoing development pursuant to this Section.  In the TPOD, regulations for the underlying zoning district(s) may remain in effect for all uses permitted in said underlying district and not otherwise allowed in the 
TPOD.  For projects developed in accordance with this Section, where the provisions of the TPOD are silent on a zoning regulation, the requirements of the underlying zoning district shall apply unless contrary to the intent of the TPOD.   
 
B.   Intention and Goal of the District 
 
The TPOD is intended to promote economic development, with particular attention to high-technology business, in a different manner from customary industrial development, utilizing the transportation network opportunities offered by the I-395/Kennedy Drive intersection and the readily available nearby utilities relative to certain parcels of land located westerly of Kennedy Drive noted above, as a community of manufacturing and service businesses located together on adjacent or common properties, or connected by a virtual network to other participating companies within the region.  This unconventional method of development is known as Eco-Industrial Development, whereby member businesses seek enhanced environmental, economic, and social performance through collaboration in managing environmental and resource issues, analogous to an ecosystem found in nature. By working together, the community of businesses seeks a collective benefit that is greater than the sum of individual benefits each company would realize by only optimizing its individual performance.  
 
The goal of the TPOD is to improve the economic performance of the participating companies by allowing them to share infrastructure as a strategy for enhancing production and minimizing costs while minimizing their environmental impacts. Components of this approach include green design of park infrastructure and plants; cleaner production; pollution prevention; energy efficiency; and inter-company partnering, by coordinating overall park maintenance, working together to follow the principles of natural systems through cycling of resources, working within the constraints of local and global ecosystems, and optimizing energy use.  Thus the TPOD offers firms the opportunity to cooperatively enhance both economic and environmental performance through increased efficiency, waste minimization, innovation and technology development, access to new markets, strategic planning, and attraction of financing and investment.  The TPOD also seeks benefits for neighboring communities to assure that the net regional impact of its development is positive.  Because the TPOD is an area that is environmentally sensitive owing to proximity to the Aquifer Protection Area (APA), uses permitted in the district are intended to provide protection to the quality of the aquifer. 
 
C.  Use Categories within the District  
1. Environmental Business 
The emphasis in the use categories established for the TPOD Overlay District, which shall apply in the zoning district as a matter of right or by special permit in accordance with uses listed in Subsections a., b., and c. below, and more specifically within Table III-1 – Schedule of Uses and Districts, is on “Environmental Business”.   The term “Environmental Business” refers to those business activities that involve pollution reduction, materials recycling, and alternative or “green” energy resources research and development, along with the manufacturing, assembly, and distribution of products emanating from these activities.  Environmental business uses involve two distinct, but sometimes related, types of land use. The first denotes process-based enterprises where 
materials are utilized to create a new value-added product, or where processes are directly applied for purposes of environmental remediation. The second denotes uses with an environmental component or components, but not with a primarily process-based orientation. Business uses that have an "environmental component" may include: (1) assembly or manufacturing of pollution reduction equipment, which may be associated with management or testing of air, soil, or water quality, or noise attenuation; and assembly or manufacturing of alternative/renewable energy products (such as solar photovoltaic panels and fuel cells); (2) technical consulting or testing firms in which environmental remediation activity takes place at on-site or off-site locations; and (3) facilities typically required for businesses with an environmental component include office operations, laboratories and equipment storage, and loading areas.   
Uses, and all related site development, shall be subject to site performance and design standards in accordance with Subsection D. of this Section, below, for the TPOD district, including standards for storage, screening and landscaping, site perimeter buffering, and all "nuisance" conditions to be controlled on-site.  
Environmental business uses may include any of the following activities: analytical services (testing and analysis of air, soil, waste, water, chemicals, and similar analytical services); production of consumer and industrial products, such as water saving devices, efficient lighting, packaging made from recycled materials, advanced industrial pumps, and similar products; research and development of energy resources, such as renewable and alternative energies, and other activities associated with alternative energy development; and manufacturing of environmental equipment, such as oceanographic instrumentation, air, soil, and water quality cleanup equipment, noise, and vibration control devices, water pollution reduction equipment, and similar manufacturing.  
The uses defined above as "Environmental Business" should not be construed as limiting the undertaking of office, research and development, and other use types that may have an environmental focus. 
a. Office  

 

Office use type refers to offices, individual firms, or organizations which are primarily used for the provision of executive, management, administrative, financial, or professional services. Offices may be of the corporate, multiple building occupancy, or free-standing type, subject to any further restrictions imposed within individual land uses in the TPOD; and other use classifications when the service rendered is that customarily associated with administrative offices.   





b. Industrial  
Industrial use type refers to on-site production or manufacturing processes.  Proper screening, buffering and site performance standards shall be required.  This use type includes warehousing and distribution facilities that may be associated with production processes and office or research facilities ancillary to the principal use. Industrial uses may include such uses as processing of locally-grown food products and high technology food production, pharmaceuticals manufacturing, manufacturing 
of alternative/renewable energy components including energy-saving controls and devices, manufacturing of energy-efficient controls and devices, and manufacture of materials and products for the green construction industry including assembly of prefabricated building components and uses of the same general type.  
Emerging industrial technologies that have come to the economic front and are projected to emerge as major activities in the future will be emphasized and encouraged. Emerging uses include: manufacturing associated with distributed computing and telecommunications; materials synthesis and processing for advanced structural materials, electronic and photonic materials, and other industrial applications; flexible integrated manufacturing, encompassing such activities as innovative machine concepts, intelligent sensors and process control techniques, computer-based tools for product or process design, manufacturing infrastructure design, and techniques for systems management; assembly or construction of state-of-the-art transportation systems, design and manufacturing of emerging alternative/renewable energy equipment, and pollution reduction and other environmental remediation equipment.  
c.  Research and Development  
Research and development use type refers to the research, development, and prototypical pilot manufacturing or limited production of products designed primarily for initial marketing of electronic, industrial, alternative/renewable energy and fuels (such as solar photovoltaic arrays, heat pumps, and fuel cells), scientific, biotechnological, and biomedical products, and applied process engineering.  Examples of uses include: biotechnology (applied molecular biology); computer-component manufacturers; distributed computing and telecommunications (information technology); transportation research; and other uses intended to create new products or to improve existing ones.  Research and development uses may vary considerably in terms of scale of operations, and may involve the continued development of improved or new products. 
2.  Conference / Cultural Uses  
The conference/cultural use types that shall be applicable in the TPOD overlay zoning district refer to educational, cultural, governmental, recreational, and other uses which are strongly vested with public or social importance.  Uses in this category include hotels with conference space, conference centers, public and private schools engaged in training in technological trades, and social clubs or similar non-profit membership organizations such as Lions, Rotary, YMCA/YWCA, Boys & Girls Club, etc., which support the tenants and employees of the technology park as well as residents of Putnam and the region. 
 
D. Site Plan / Site Performance and Design Guidelines  
 
1. For all uses applicable to the TPOD in accordance with these Regulations, applications shall be accompanied by five (5) copies of a site plan in ink at scale of one (1) inch equal to no more than forty (40) feet.  Such plan shall conform to Class A-2 standards for accuracy in accordance with the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, Connecticut General Statutes Section 20-300b-1 
through 20-300b-20 or as amended. The purpose of a site plan is  to provide the Commission with information that will enable it to determine that the proposed buildings and uses shall be arranged in a manner that enhances the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Putnam and shall be of such character as to harmonize with the neighborhood, to accomplish a transition in character between areas of unlike character, to protect property values in the neighborhood, to preserve and protect natural resources and the appearance and beauty of the community and to avoid undue traffic congestion.   
 
a. Approval of a site plan shall be presumed unless a decision to deny or modify it is rendered by the Commission within 65 days after the date of receipt, except that such time period may be extended for not more than one (1) additional period of 65 days, with the consent of the applicant. 
 
b.  A copy of any decision by the Commission on a site plan shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.  
 
2.  Site Plan Content Requirements. Site plans shall be drawn at a scale of at least one inch equals forty feet (1” = 40’) and shall be on sheets either 36 x 24 inches or 18 x 12 inches in size and, in addition to the applicable information required for the submission of an application under these Regulations as put forth in Section 113 of these Regulations, site plans submitted under this Section of these Regulations shall clearly show, to the satisfaction of the Commission, the following information: 
 
a. Name and address of applicant; 


 
b. Address of property and name of owner of record; 


 
c. Scale, north arrow, date of drawing or its revision, and name of person preparing the site plan; 


 
d. Property boundaries, dimensions and area; 


 
e. Locations of all existing and proposed buildings and uses including but not limited to signs, sidewalks, driveways, parking and loading areas, and abutting streets; poles, hydrants, and other utility appurtenances; areas to be used for exterior storage and the type of screening to be provided; 


 
f. Dimensions of all yards, as required by these Regulations; 


 
g. Locations and descriptions of water supply and sewage disposal facilities; 


 
h. Contour lines at two foot (2’) intervals or at other intervals as may be determined by the Commission to be sufficient to clearly show natural drainage; if grading is proposed, the existing and proposed contours will be shown; 


 
i. Existing and proposed drainage structures on the property and those off the property that may be affected by the proposed building or use.  In order to minimize impact to downstream drainage facilities, increase the environmental quality of stormwater runoff, and to provide for water conservation and increased groundwater recharge measures, Low Impact Development (LID) methods as defined in the latest edition of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as may be amended from time to time (or its successor), shall be incorporated into the stormwater design;  


 
j. Proposed landscaping, including the type, size and location of proposed plantings;  


 
k. The parking and/or loading space layouts; 


 
l. Location and configuration of all driveways; and 


 
m. Submission of a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan in accordance with the requirements of Section 606 of these Regulations. 


 
3.   Putnam Water Pollution Control Authority Review and Certification.  Upon submission of a site plan application, the applicant shall submit a letter or other applicable form of documentation from the Putnam Water Pollution Control Authority (WPCA) which states that the WPCA has reviewed the proposed project use for the site and has certified that there is adequate volume and capacity within the water supply system to supply the project, as proposed, with potable water, and adequate volume and pressure to provide necessary firefighting capability to the project as proposed, in accordance with existing State permits.  In appropriate circumstances the WPCA shall consult with DPH and/or DEEP if the WPCA determines there is a material issue as to capacity.   
 
4. Aquifer Protection Areas.  Where applicable in the TPOD, site development shall be subject to the “Town of Putnam Municipal Regulations Aquifer Protection Areas” as amended. 




 
5. Site Performance and Design Guidelines  




 
The site plan submitted under this Section shall be designed pursuant to the following Site Performance and Design Guidelines. 
 
a. Newly installed utility services, and service revisions made necessary by exterior alterations, shall be underground. 


 
b. A desirable streetscape and attractive landscape transitions to adjoining properties shall be provided. 


 
c. Existing trees at four (4) inches or greater caliper shall, if possible, remain on the site, and be incorporated into the site plan.  Trees to be planted shall be two inches (2”) to two and one-half inches (2 ½”) in caliper at the time of planting, the locations of which shall be depicted on the site plan.   


 
d. Utility and service equipment areas shall be screened from public view with materials that are harmonious with the building and site development. 


 
e. Signs shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates and shall be coordinated with the building architecture and site design. 


 
f. Exterior lighting, where used, shall enhance public safety, the building design, and the landscape.  Said lighting shall be consistent with the recommended standards put forth by the International Dark-Sky Association. 


 
g. No parking or loading areas shall be located within the required front yard setback area, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the Commission through a Connecticut registered engineer that such location is not feasible due to on-site conditions. 


 
h. In order to minimize impact to downstream drainage facilities, increase the environmental quality of stormwater runoff, and to provide for water conservation and increased groundwater recharge measures, all stormwater design shall be according to Low Impact Development (LID) methods as defined in the latest edition of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the Commission through a Connecticut registered engineer that LID is not feasible nor desirable due to on-site conditions.  Wherever practical, walkways shall be paved with pervious pavers to encourage groundwater recharge.  Impervious pavement should be limited to the minimum area necessary to provide for adequate traffic circulation, and for parking and loading area needs.  Low Impact Development Techniques, where appropriate onsite, may include but are not limited to the following: 


 
i. the use of pervious pavement or grid pavers (which are very compatible for parking lot and fire lane applications), or impervious pavement without curbs or with notched curbs to direct runoff to properly designed and installed infiltration areas; the use of vegetated swales, tree box filters, and/or infiltration islands to infiltrate and treat stormwater runoff (from building roofs and parking lots); 
 
ii. the minimization of access road widths and parking lot areas to the maximum extent possible to reduce the area of impervious surface; 



 
iii. if soil conditions permit, the use of dry wells to manage runoff from the building roofs; 



 
iv. the use of vegetated roofs (green roofs) to reduce the runoff from buildings; 



 
v. proper treatment of special activity areas (e.g. loading docks, covered maintenance and service areas); 



 
vi. the installation of rainwater harvesting systems to capture stormwater from building roofs for the purpose of reuse for irrigation; and 



 
vii. providing for pollution prevention measures to reduce the introduction of pollutants to the environment. 



 
i. Appropriate controls, designed to remove sediment and oil or grease typically found in runoff from parking and driving areas, shall be included in any stormwater collection system to be installed or upgraded.  Non-structural measures to dissipate and treat runoff are strongly encouraged, including infiltration using pervious paving, sheetflow from uncurbed pavement, and vegetated swales.  If a stormwater collection system must be installed, potential controls include gross particle separators, deep sump catch basins with oil-grease traps and/or detention/retention basins.  Any catch basins installed in conjunction with roadway or parking lot paving shall have deep sumps to trap sediments and hoods to trap oil and grease.  If more than one (1) acre of pavement drains to a common discharge point, a gross particle separator shall also be installed, in accordance with advanced designs for said gross particle separators incorporating cyclonic or swirl technology, that the DEEP has approved.  The appropriate variety of this type of unit with a cyclonic design shall be installed in conjunction with each outfall, depending on the size of the drainage area. Provisions shall be made for the periodic maintenance that will be required to insure continued effectiveness of these control measures. 


 
j. Buildings shall be located and oriented on the lot in a manner that best enhances solar gain and provisions for other alternative energy systems such as wind and geothermal energy.  Consequently, buildings and landscaping shall not be constructed in such a manner that excessively shades buildings on adjacent lots or inhibits predominant natural wind currents. 


 
k. The applicant shall utilize landscaping techniques to minimize or eliminate watering requirements.  The applicant is encouraged to install a non-potable well for landscaping requirements and to construct and use storage tanks/cisterns to reduce peak demands on stormwater management systems and potentially to capture rainwater for non-potable irrigation uses. 


 
6. Decision on Site Plan 
 
a. The Commission shall render a decision on any site plan application under this Section within sixty-five (65) days after the receipt of a completed application.  The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period, provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed two further sixty-five (65) day periods.  No application will be accepted unless it is accompanied by the proper application form or those forms have previously been filed with the Commission.  For the purposes of this Section, the day of receipt of an application or site plan shall be deemed to be the day of 


the Commission’s next regularly scheduled meeting immediately following the day of submission of such application to the Commission or its authorized agent, or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner. 


 
b. The Commission may either deny or approve the application as submitted, modify and approve the application, or approve the application as submitted.  A decision to deny or modify an application shall set forth the reasons for such denial or modification.   


   
 
Section 302 – District Boundaries  
 
A. The boundaries of Districts are established as shown on the “Official Zoning Map.”   


 
1. The Official Zoning Map shall be at a scale of 1” = 1000’ and identified by the signature of the Chairman of the Town Zoning Commission, and shall bear the date of the most recent zoning amendment. 


 
2. The boundaries of the Industrial Heritage Overlay District (IHOD) and the Quinebaug Regional Technology Park Overlay District (TPOD) are as established in Section 301, Subsections D.1. and D.2. respectively.   


 
3. When, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map together with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: “As amended to (date). (Such date to be that of the most recent amendment.)  The Official Zoning Map shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and an updated copy shall be displayed in the Land Use Office. 


 
B. The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the centerline of streets, watercourses, and right of way of power lines, railroads and other public utilities, or such lines extended, or lines parallel thereto.  Where the boundaries of a single district are indicated as including directly opposite sides of a street, lane, lake or watercourse, or right of way or a power line, railroad or other public utility, for any portion of its length, the district so indicated shall be construed to apply to the entire bed of such street, lane, lake or watercourse, or right of way of such power line, railroad, or other public utility lying within such portion of its length.  Where uncertainty exists as to the location of any of said boundaries as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 


 
1. Where district boundary is indicated as approximately following the centerline of a street, lane, lake or watercourse, or right-of-way of a power line, railroad, or other public utility, such centerline shall be construed to be such boundary. 


 
2. Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following a lot or other property line, such lot or property line shall be construed to be such boundary.  


 
3. Where a district boundary divides a lot or runs through undivided property, the location of such boundary shall be determined by using the scale appearing on said map, unless distances are specified on the map.  


 
4. Where distance are specified on the Map between a street and a district boundary, they shall indicate that the district boundary runs parallel to the street line at a distance therefore equivalent to the number of feet so indicated, unless otherwise specified.  Where scaled distances to not agree with such figure, the figures shall control. 


 
5. Where a District boundary divides a lot in one ownership into two or more residential Districts, the area, frontage, bulk and yard requirements for that lot shall comply with those set forth for the District which comprises a majority of the area of said lot. 


 
6. Where a District boundary divides a lot in one ownership into a residential and a nonresidential District  or into two nonresidential Districts, the area and frontage requirements for that lot shall comply with those that are more restrictive as set forth for such Districts. All other building requirements shall correspond with those of the particular District in which a use, structure or building is established or constructed. 


 
7. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground area at variance with these shown on the Official Map, or in other circumstances not covered by the above subsections, the Commission shall interpret the district boundaries.  


 
 
Section 303 – Federal or State Owned Property 
 
Whenever Federal or State owned property is included in one or more zoning districts, it shall be subject to the provisions of those Regulations only insofar as permitted by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America and of the State of Connecticut. 
 
 
Section 304 – Schedule of Uses and Districts 
 
Only those items that are specifically permitted by these Zoning Regulations shall be allowed. If a use is not mentioned in these Zoning Regulations, it is not allowed by interpretation. 
 
 
Table III-1 – Schedule of Uses and Districts:   
 
. Uses permitted in the zoning district as a matter of right are marked with a “P.”   

. Uses permitted in the zoning district as a special permit are marked with an “S.”   

. Where the letter “N” appears, the uses are prohibited in the zoning district.  


 
Table III-1 – Schedule of Uses and Districts 
 
Residential 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Accessory Living Quarters 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Bed and Breakfast 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Condominium 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Active Adult Housing 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Multi-Family Dwellings 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Single Family Detached 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Single Family Conversion 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Two-Family or Duplex 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
 
 
Agriculture, Livestock, and Domestic Animals 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Agriculture, including Farm Stands – Sale of Produce Grown on the Property by the Occupant 
     *A Farmers’ Market in which produce is grown off-site may be allowed as a matter of right in the P district. 
 P 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P* 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Commercial Kennels (See Section 412) 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Dormitories for Agricultural Laborers 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Farm Equipment and Heavy Equipment Dealers and Services 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Horticultural Nursery & Greenhouse 
 P 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 
Livestock Keeping (See Sections 413 & 414) 
 P 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Sawmill & Planing Mill 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Veterinarian and Animal Hospital (See Section 412) 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
 
 
Extractive and Non-Manufacturing Uses 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Earth Removal (See Section 607) 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 
 
 
Institutional and Education 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Adult Daycare 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Ambulatory Health Care Facility 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Assisted Living 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Cemetery  
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Church, place of worship or other religious purpose 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Community center, youth club, adult education center 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Hospitals 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Hospital Hospitality Houses 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Library and Museum 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 

Institutional and Education (continued) 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Philanthropic Uses and Charitable Institutions 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Physical Therapy and other Health Related Services 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Public or Private Daycare 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Private club or lodge operated not for profit and for members only 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Public and private schools engaged in training students for   technological trades 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Rehabilitation Center 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Rest, Convalescent, or Nursing Home 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
School, college or other institution, such as a trade, driving, music, dancing, martial arts or professional school conducted as a private gainful business providing medical, scientific, technical, and other similar types of technical instruction 
     *Less than 10,000 square feet in area 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S* 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
 
 
Public Uses 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Fire or Police Station 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Garage or Utility (Government Owned) 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Government-Owned Building (except penal institution, garage or utility) 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Municipal Schools 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Public Works 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Town Office Building 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Yard, building and structures for general public construction, maintenance, operations and equipment storage such as a highway or water department; including open air storage of motor vehicles or heavy equipment, pipes or poles, sand, gravel or other earth products, or other materials or equipment 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Water Pollution Control and Wastewater Treatment Facility  – Waste Water Treatment Facility and Public Water Supply and Service 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 
 
 
Recreational and Entertainment 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Adult Oriented Establishments subject to the provisions of Section 707 of these Regulations 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Boarding Camps 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Bowling Alleys, Billiards, and Pool 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 

Recreational and Entertainment (continued) 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Day Camps 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Exercise Center, Gymnasium, Sauna, Tanning Salon, Health Club 
     *Tanning Salon only 
     **Exercise Center only 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P* 
 S** 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Golf Course and Country Club (including banquet/special event facilities) 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Indoor motion picture theater 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Miniature Golf, Driving Range, Batting Cages 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Other Indoor Amusement or Entertainment excluding Adult Oriented Establishments  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Other Commercial Outdoor Recreation Use 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Park, playground, or outdoor recreation facility not conducted as a private gainful business 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Riding Academies and Schools 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Tennis Club 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Theatre 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Transportation 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Automobile parking area or structure owned or operated by the Town or other governmental agency 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N                       
 
Commercial off-street parking area or structure for the parking or storage on a fee basis of automobiles and light commercial vehicles with a rated capacity of 1 ton or less provided no repairs, servicing or sale of gasoline is carried on 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Motor Freight Terminal 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Passenger Station for Public Transportation 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Railroad Freight Service 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 
Taxi, Livery and Paratransit Office provided no automobile repairs, servicing or  sale of gasoline is carried on on-site (except within a facility approved for said uses), and in the AG2, R40, R20, R10, and R7 districts, no more than one off-street parking space associated with said Office is provided for the dispatcher’s vehicle only, and no more than one taxi can be parked on a lot in the AG2, R40, R20, R10, and R7 districts 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N                       
 
Off-street parking for Taxi, Livery and Paratransit vehicles in livery service, provided no automobile repairs, servicing or  sale of gasoline for such vehicles is carried on on-site (except within a facility approved for said uses)  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 

Utilities 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Hydro Power Electric Generating Station 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Residue Facility 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Radio and TV Stations 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Radio, TV, Wireless and, Electronic Transmitters and Towers 
 S 
 S 
   S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Telephone Exchange and Transfer Station 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 P 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Facilities for Essential Services 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
 
 
Storage/Distribution 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Cold Storage 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Storage of Explosive Materials 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Fuel Dealer, not including Bulk Storage 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
General Warehousing and Storage 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Open Lot Storage of Building Materials and Machinery 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Open Storage of Earth Material 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Open Storage of Earth Material, if associated with a permitted Earth Removal Operation 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 
Retail and Wholesale Distribution Establishment: 
  
 
. Under 100,000 square feet 


 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
. Over 100,000 square feet 


 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
 
 
Business Services 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Art Studio (not including body art)  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Professional Office 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Bank, credit union, trust company or similar financial institution including drive-up service 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Industrial Service or Equipment Sales 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Newspaper Office 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Photo Studio 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Personal service establishments, for example, barber shop, beauty shop, nail salon, laundry and dry cleaning pickup agency, shoe repair, self-service laundry, hand laundry, and tailoring uses 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Monuments  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Pet Grooming  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Mortuary or Funeral Home 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Recording Studio  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Travel Agency 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 

  
Business Services (continued) 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Consumer service establishments, for example, upholsterer, lawnmower or appliance repairman, or small tool and equipment rental shop 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Trade services, for example, machine shop, welding shop, plumbing, electrical or carpentry shop or similar service 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Auto body or paint shop, provided that all work is carried out inside the building 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Heavy Truck and Tractor Trailer service and repair, exclusive of bodywork and painting 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
 
 
Lodging, Dining and Conference/Banquet 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Brewpub 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Café – up to 24 persons and no alcohol 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P                                                                                                                                                                                                    
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Catering Service, Caterer  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Confectionary or Ice Cream Shop 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Conference Center  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Conference/hotel center 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Drive-In Restaurant 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Hotel – no conference center, with facilities and services for hotel room guests only  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Restaurant, Fast Food – with Drive-Up Window 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Restaurant, Fast Food – without  Drive-Up Window 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Restaurant – with Outdoor Dining 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Restaurant – without Outdoor Dining 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Tavern, Bar or Lounge 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 S 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
 
 
Retail 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Antiques and Collectables Sales 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Appliance Sales 
     *Less than 10,000 square feet in area 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P* 
 P* 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Automotive Sales (New and Used) 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Automobile Accessory Dealers – No Service 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Book Stores and Stationary Stores 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Building Materials and Home Goods Stores 
     **Less than 2,500 square feet in area 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P** 
 P** 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 

  
Retail (continued) 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Automobile washing and detailing establishment using mechanical equipment for the purpose of cleaning automobiles and other vehicles 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Clothing, Miscellaneous Apparel  and Accessories Sales  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Computers and Electronics Sales and Service, and Sales of Electronic Games and Recorded Media 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Convenience Stores  
     +Less than 5,000 square feet in area 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P+ 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Retail Bakeries 
     + Less than 5,000 square feet in area 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P+ 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Drugstores 
     *Less than 10,000 square feet in area 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P* 
 P* 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Florist 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Automobile Service Station for the retail sale of gasoline, oil and other automobile fuels, and auto accessories and minor automotive repairs and servicing such as oil changes, lubricating, tune-ups, adjusting, and repairing brakes, tire service, radiator cleaning and flushing, washing and polishing, and major and minor servicing and repair of motor vehicles including light trucks and motorcycles.  May or may not include retail sales of convenience goods. 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
General Merchandise, Department Store, Furniture, Household and Office Goods 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Grocery Stores; Meat, Fish, Fruit and Vegetable Market; Delicatessens 
     *Less than 10,000 square feet in area 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P* 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Hardware Stores 
     *Less than 10,000 square feet in area 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P* 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Heating, Plumbing and Electrical Supply and Services 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Jewelry, Watches, Clocks, and Optical Goods – sales and services 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Lawn and Garden Supply Stores, including animal feed 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Lumber and Related Building Materials 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Monuments 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Musical Instrument Shops, including music lessons 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Paint, Glues, Floor Covering and Wallpaper Stores 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 

  
Retail (continued) 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Liquor Stores (See Section 708) 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Pet Stores (no kennels or other outdoor holding facilities) 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Rental Service Stores 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Retail Printing and Copying Service 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Specialty Food Stores, under 5,000 square feet  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Supermarket 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
 
 
Industrial 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Apparel & Related Finished Product 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Bakery Products 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Concrete Products, except pre-cast concrete products 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Dry Cleaning Plant (No Pick Up) 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Electrical Machinery, Equipment & Supplies 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Electronics/Computer Components 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Electronic Information Storage or Processing 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Fabricated Metals – except Ordnance 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Flour Mills  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Food and drink preparation: bakeries, canning, freezing, refrigeration, roasting, bottling, and creameries 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Food & Kindred Products – excluding Slaughterhouses 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P  
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Light non-nuisance manufacturing providing that all resulting cinders, dust, flashing, fumes, gases, odors, refuse matter, smoke and vapor is effectively confined in a building or disposed of in a manner so as not to create a nuisance or hazard to safety or health; and further provided that no noise or vibration is perceptible without instruments at a distance greater than 50 feet 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Lumber & Wood Products 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment, or fabrication of products conducted wholly within an enclosed building as a component process in connection with the production, fabrication, and assembly of products, including: cutting, forging, stamping, casting, extruding, drilling, machining, welding, brazing, soldering, sawing, cleaning, shot and sand blasting, grinding, enameling, painting, galvanizing, finishing, heat treating and rustproofing 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Medical devices, including surgical, medical, and dental instruments and supplies 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 

Industrial (continued) 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessories -- manufacture of including mechanical, electrical and electronic parts, components and subassemblies, such as braking systems, safety devices, pollution control mechanisms, and electronically controlled fuel systems. 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Metal Alloy -- making of products from iron, brass, bronze, pewter, tin, lead or aluminum, but excluding the smelting or founding of such metals 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Nanocomposites, nanostructured surfaces and nanocomponents (electronic, optical, sensors etc.), where nanoscale particles are incorporated into a substance, material or device 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Nanotechnology manufacturing - silicon wafer fabrication, semiconductor manufacturing and similar nanoelectronics and nanotechnology manufacturing which use "clean room“ manufacturing techniques 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Pharmaceutical products; including compounding of drugs and cosmetics 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Photographic, and Optical Instruments -- manufacture or assembly of measuring, analyzing, controlling, 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Plastics: extrusion, molding, and fabricating of panels, sheets, tubes, pellets, rods, and component parts 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 
Precast Concrete Products 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Primary Metal Industries including Foundries & Steel Mills 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Printing, Publishing & Allied Industries 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Production/assembly operations: the production and/or assembly of products from materials or parts previously produced or processed elsewhere, including fiberoptics, ceramics, instruments, optical goods, computer hardware, scientific instruments, electrical and electronic equipment, motors, and related finished products 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Professional, Scientific, and Controlling Instruments 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Residue Facility (See  Section 710 ) 
 S 
 N  
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Rubber & Plastic Products 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 
Stone, Clay & Glass Products 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Stone cutting, shaping and finishing in enclosed buildings 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 
Textile Products 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Transportation Equipment 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 
Welding Shop, Sheet Metal Shop, Blacksmith 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 

Technology 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
College and university based applied research (particularly that which improves environmental quality, sustainability, and human health) 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Development of agricultural technologies with an emphasis on medical, pharmaceutical and enhanced productivity of food crops, including development and production of valued added sustainable agricultural products; and further with an emphasis on providing a location for the processing of food crops and livestock grown within the region 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
“Green” and sustainable manufacturing and research, and related environmental consulting, with the goals of improved environmental, worker health and safety, and energy performance 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Pilot plants in which prototype production processes can be tested and used for assembly of products of a technological environmentally sustainable nature 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Research and Development Facilities intended for basic and applied research, development of technology-based products and services, or testing of technology based products and services 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Research, development, experimental, or testing laboratories 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Technical offices for testing, research or development 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Technology-dependent or computer-based facilities dedicated to the processing of data or analysis of information 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Software development or production 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
 
 

  
Accessory Uses 
 AG2 
 R40 
 R20 
 R10 
 R7 
 HC 
 GC 
 NC 
 PD 
 M/OD 
 I 
 P 
 WWTF 
 IHOD 
 TPOD 
 
Any Accessory Use, incidental to main use and located on the same lot as the main use, and permitted 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
Any Accessory Use, incidental to main use permitted by Special Permit and located on the same lot as the main use 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 
Customary Home Occupations 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 
Private Day Care Incidental to Main Use – Group Day Care and Home Day Care Center 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 S 
 P 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 
Accessory storage of a recreational trailer or vehicle, registered automobile or boat, or utility trailer, provided it is not in the front yard 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Accessory structure, such as a private garage, playhouse, greenhouse, tool shed, private swimming pool, carport, or similar accessory structures not used as part of business 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Newsstand, barber shop, dining room or cafeteria, and similar accessory services primarily for occupants or users thereof within a hotel, office, institutional, educational, technological, or industrial use provided such use is conducted within and entered only from within the principal building 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 N 
 N 
 S 
 P 
 
Accessory Parking, incidental to main use (See  Section 601) 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 P 
 
 
 

 
Section 305 – Accessory Uses 
 
Accessory uses authorized in these Regulations shall include, but not be limited to the following:  
 
A.  Accessory buildings or structures include but are not limited to private garages, storage sheds, carports, garden shed, alternative energy system, television dish, gazebos, utility buildings/rooms, verandas, glass rooms, porches, screened porches or awnings, swimming pools, tennis courts, and screened enclosures. Buildings or structures secondary and incidental to agricultural uses include, but are not limited to stables, barns, paddock areas and storage areas. Accessory buildings or structures may have a full or half bath; but may not have living quarters or a kitchen. Accessory uses include a child or adult day care center accessory to a church or school, a golf driving range accessory to a golf course, and the package sales of alcoholic beverages accessory to a convenience store. Except where otherwise provided in this Section, an addition which is attached to a principal structure shall not be considered an accessory building, but shall be considered part of the principal structure. 



 
B.  Uses Accessory to Agriculture:  Greenhouses; roadside stand for sale of agricultural products produced on the premises; keeping, breeding and management of livestock and poultry; preparation of agricultural products produced on the premises for the actual disposal thereof by marketing or otherwise.  When approved by Special Permit according to Section 114, Riding Academies or Boarding Stables may, as an accessory use, operate a Tack Shop, i.e., sale of products incidental to this use. 



 
C.  Uses Accessory to Dwelling: 



 
1. Private garage, private parking space, private barn, private swimming pool, shelter for pets. 


 
2. Private greenhouses, provided that none of the products thereof may be sold or offered for sale.  


 
3. Living quarters for household employees, caretakers or watchmen.  


 
4. Office, studio or rooms for home occupation as defined in Section 706 of these Regulations.  


 
5. The renting of rooms within the dwelling in which the lessor resides, to not more than two (2) non-transient persons, with or without the provisions of table board for such persons. Uses authorized in these Zoning Regulations as accessory to a dwelling shall not be deemed to include a business or personal service shop or other than as specified above.  


 
D.  Uses Accessory to Public Park, etc.:  Customary recreational, refreshment and service uses and buildings in any public park, reservation, playground or other recreational area. 
 
 
 
Article IV 
Height and Area Regulations 
 
Section 401 – Schedule of Dimensional Requirements  
 
All buildings or structures hereafter erected or altered shall, unless otherwise stated in these regulations, shall conform to the requirements for the zone in which such building or structure is located as noted in Table IV-1 of this Section.   
 
Table IV-1 – Schedule of Dimensional Regulations 
Zoning  District              
 Use 
 Minimum Lot 
 Size 
  
Maximum  
% 
Coverage 
 Maximum Height 
of Building  
 Minimum Yard Dimensions 
 Accessory Buildings Located in Rear Yard Minimum Yard Dimensions 
 
 
  
 Area sq. ft. per dwelling 
unit or use  
 Frontage 
Width 
(ft.) 
  
 Principal 
(ft.) 
 Accessory 
(ft.) 
 Front 
(ft.) 
 Corner 
Side 
(ft.) 
 Side 
(ft.) 
 Rear 
(ft.) 
 Side 
(ft.) 
 Rear 
(ft.) 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
AG-2 
 All Uses 
Barns for Livestock as Accessory Use 
 87,120 
 250 
 10 
 35 
 22 
35 
 50 
 50 
 50 
 50 
 10 
75 
 10 
75 
 
R-40 
 All Uses 
Multi-Family Uses 
 40,000 
****  
 200 
 15 
 35 
 22 
 50 
 30 
 20 
 40 
 10 
 10 
 
R-20 
 All Uses Except Multi-Family 
Multi-Family Uses 
 20,000 
* 
 100 
100 
 20 
20 
 35 
35 
 15 
15 
 50 
50 
 30 
30 
 20 
20 
 20 
20 
 10 
10 
 10 
10 
 
R-10 
 Single-Family Detached 
Single-Family Semi-Detached 
Multi-Family 
All Other Uses 
 10,000 
** ** ** 
  90 
 50 
 90 
 90 
 30 
30 
30 
30 
 35 
35 
351 
35 
 15 
15 
15 
15 
 25 
25 
251 
25 
 25 
25 
251 
25 
 20 
20 
201 
20 
 25 
25 
251 
25 
 5 
5 
5 
5 
   5 
  5 
  5 
  5 
 
R-7 
 Single-Family Detached 
Single-Family Semi-Detached 
Two-Family Detached 
Two-Family Semi-Detached 
Multi-Family 
All Other Uses 
 7,000 
*** 
*** 
*** 
*** 
7,000 
  70 
 60 
100 
150 
100 
 50 
 30 
30 
30 
35 
30 
30 
 35 
35 
35 
35 
351 
35 
 15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
 20 
20 
20 
20 
201 
20 
 20 
20 
20 
20 
201 
20 
 15 
15 
15 
25 
251 
15 
 25 
25 
25 
25 
251 
25 
 5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
   5 
  5 
  5 
  5 
  5 
  5 
 

       * 20,000 sq. ft. of lot area per dwelling unit. 
     ** 10,000 sq. ft. of lot area per dwelling unit. 
   ***   7,000 sq. ft. of lot area per dwelling unit. 
 **** 30,000 sq. ft. of lot area per dwelling unit for such that are allowed under the provisions and conditions of Section 304 Table III-1 – Schedule of Uses and Districts. 
Table IV-1 – Schedule of Dimensional Regulations (continued) 
 
                                             
 Use 
 Minimum Lot 
 Size 
  
Maximum  
% 
Coverage 
 Maximum Height 
Of Building  
 Minimum Yard Dimensions 
 Accessory Buildings Located in Rear Yard Minimum Yard Dimensions 
 
 
  
 Area sq. ft. per dwelling 
unit or use  
 Frontage 
Width 
(ft.) 
  
 Principal 
(ft.) 
 Accessory 
(ft.) 
 Front 
(ft.) 
 Corner 
Side 
(ft.) 
 Side 
(ft.) 
 Rear 
(ft.) 
 Side 
(ft.) 
 Rear 
(ft.) 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
M/OD 
 All Uses 
 10,000 
 70 
 30 
 45 
 15 
 25 
 25 
 10 
 25 
 5 
  0 
 
NC 
 Residential 
All Other Uses 
  7,000 
 7,000 
  60 
 60 
 30 
40 
 35 
35 
 15 
15 
 20 
15 
 20 
10 
 15 
10 
 15 
20 
 5 
5 
   5 
  5 
 
GC 
 All Uses 
 10,000 
 100 
 30 
 35 
 15 
 30 
 30 
 15 
 25 
 10 
 10 
 
HC 
 Uses Without Sewers 
Uses With Sewers 
 40,000 
10,000 
 150 
 60 
 40 
40 
 354 
354 
 15 
15 
 50 
20 
 50 
20 
 25 
10 
 20 
20 
 10 
5 
 10 
  5 
 
PD 
 All Uses 
 No Requirements 
  50 
 80 
 402 
 15 
 10 
 10 
 03 
 20 
 03 
   5 
 
TPOD 
 All Uses 
 87,120 
  50 
 50 
 505 
 15 
 35 
 35 
 15 
 20 
 10 
 10 
 
I 
 Industrial 
 87,120 
  50 
 50 
 505 
 15 
 356 
 356 
 156 
 206 
 106 
 106 
 
WWTF 
 Waste Water Treatment   Facility 
 100,000 
 None 
 50 
 505 
 50 
 50 
 50 
 50 
 50 
 50 
 50 
 
IHOD7 
 All Uses 
 N/A7 
 N/A7 
 N/A7 
 N/A7 
 N/A7 
 N/A7 
 N/A7 
 N/A7 
 N/A7 
 N/A7 
 N/A7 
 

Footnotes: 
 1 Building height may be increased to fifty feet, provided that for every foot of height in access of thirty-five feet, there shall be added to each yard requirement one corresponding foot of width or depth.  
 2 Building height may be increased to sixty-five feet, provided that for every foot of height in excess of forty feet, there shall be added to each yard requirement one corresponding foot of width or depth. 
 3 When abutting a residential district, the side yard shall be ten feet. 
 4 Building height may be increased to sixty-five feet, provided that for every foot of height in excess of thirty-five feet, there shall be added to each yard requirement one corresponding foot of width or depth. 
 5 Building height may be increased to sixty five feet, provided that for every foot of height in excess of fifty feet, there shall be added to each yard requirement one corresponding foot of width or depth. 
 6 Any yard abutting a residential district, highway or major street shall be increased to one hundred feet and shall be landscaped. 
7  Not applicable: there are no specific dimensional requirements for the IHOD district because the intent of this overlay district is principally to provide for the reuse and rehabilitation of the existing mill structures found therein. 
 
A. The lot or yard areas required for any new building or use may not include any part of a lot that is required by any other building or use to comply with any provisions of these Regulations. 



 
B. Lots shall not be separated or transferred in ownership so as not to comply with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations. 



 
 
Section 402 – Number of Residential Structures Per Lot    
 
No more than one principal residential building shall be permitted on a lot except in the case of multi-family structures and as otherwise provided in these Regulations.  
 
 
Section 403 – Height Limitation of Fences and Walls 
 
A fence or wall, except a retaining wall, shall not exceed six (6) feet in height unless, that for each foot the fence or wall exceeds six (6) feet in height, the fence or wall is set back four (4) feet from the property line.  The appearance side (or good side) should face the exterior of the lot upon which the fence is erected.  Face neighboring property.  An exception to the appearance side (good side) requirement may be granted by the Zoning Enforcement Officer when the proposed fence is intended to be used for the housing of Livestock over Fifty (50) pounds (in accordance with the regulations). 
 
 
Section 404 – Exceptions to Height Regulations  
 
Greater heights for structures may be allowed for agricultural or industrial uses provided that urgent and necessary reasons are shown.  Such structures as silos, water towers and gymnasiums may exceed the limit if approved as a Special Permit by the Commission. 
 
 
Section 405 – Building Separation 
 
Each separate building on a lot shall be at least ten (10) feet from any other separate building on the same lot.  
 
 
 
 
 
Section 406 – Authorized Departures from Yard Requirements  
 
A. Waiver of Front Yard Restriction – Where lots on both sides of a vacant lot have principal buildings which are within twenty-five (25) feet of the side lot line and extend into the require front yard upon the effective date of these Regulations, the front yard requirement for the vacant lot may be the average of the front yards of the adjacent lots.  


 
B. Waiver of Front Yard Restrictions – Where a vacant lot is adjacent to an improved lot whose principal building is within twenty-five (25) feet of the side lot line, and extends into the required front yard upon the effective date of these Regulations, the front yard requirement for the vacant lot may be the average of the front yard of the adjacent improved lot and the front yard required for the district in which the vacant lot is located.  


 
C. Three Sided Lot – In the event that a lot contains only three sides, the width of the lot shall be considered to be the distance between side lot lines, measured at the required front yard depth.  The rear yard shall be measured from a line ten feet in length entirely within the lot and parallel to the front lot line. 


 
D. Irregular Lot – In the event the front yard of a lot abuts a curve, a cul-de-sac or a junction of two streets that forms an interior angle approximating 90 degrees, the width of the lot shall be considered to be the distance between the two side lot lines, measured at the required front yard depth.  


 
E. Reduction of Lot Frontage – In any “A” or “R” residential district, lot frontage may be reduced to not less than fifty (50) feet for those lots fronting entirely on turnarounds or cul-de-sacs.  In such instances, the required frontage shall be measured at the building line.  


 
F. No lot area shall be so reduced that the area of the lot, or the dimensions of the open spaces, shall be smaller than herein prescribed.  


 
 
Section 407 – Minimum Livable Floor Areas 
 
A. In residential structures, minimum livable floor areas shall be as follows: 
 
1. Single-Family Detached Structures: AG2, R40, and R20 District – 1,000 square feet; 


 
2. Single-Family Detached Structures:  R10 and R7 – 1,000 square feet;  


 
3. Two-Family Detached Structures:  850 square feet per dwelling unit;  


 
4. Modular Units to conform to the above subsections A.1. through A.3. 


 
5. Multi-Family Structures:  600 square feet per dwelling unit; 500 square feet for efficiency dwelling units. 


 
 
Section 408 – Utility Substations 
 
A  Uses shall be located no closer than twenty (20) feet of the property line within or adjacent to a residential district, or no closer than twenty-five (25) feet of any street line. 
 
B. There shall be provided a vegetative screen consisting of hardy evergreens or shrubs, not less than four (4) feet high at the time of planting, which shall provide a visual screen from adjacent residential districts and public streets.  Such screen may be located on or within the setback area required in Subsection “A.” above.  
 
 
Section 409 – Corner Vision Obstruction 
 
On a corner lot in any district no sign, fence, wall, tree, hedge, or other vegetation and no building or other structure shall exceed 2 1/2 feet in height above the plane established by the intersecting streets within the triangle formed by the lot lines abutting the intersecting streets and a line connecting points on these lot lines at a distance 25 feet form the point of intersection of the lot lines. A fence, hedge, wall, sign or other structure or vegetation may be maintained on any interior lot provided that in the front yard area, no such structure or vegetation shall be over 3 feet in height above the adjacent ground within 5 feet of the front lot line unless it can be shown that such vegetation will not restrict visibility in such a way as to hinder the safe entry of a vehicle from any driveway to the street. 
 
 
Section 410 – Dimensional Standards for Certain Special Permit Uses  
 
A. In an AG-2 district, all Special Permit industrial uses shall meet the following standards: 


 
1. Buildings shall be at least 200 feet from the side or rear lot line, and at least 300 feet from a dwelling or the adjoining premises. 


 
2. No building, except a passenger station for public transportation, shall be erected or used which is nearer the front lot line than two hundred (200) feet. 


 
3. No parking or storage of vehicles and equipment shall be allowed nearer than fifty (50) feet to any lot line, and the natural vegetation within the open space shall be maintained.  


 
4. There shall be no emission of smoke, noise, dust, odor or other disturbance than that customarily permitted in a residential district.  


 
5. All activities, other than parking, shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings, including storage of materials and equipment.  


 
6. All regulations applicable to industrial districts are adhered to except those directly in conflict with the minimum height, area, width and yard regulations specified in Section 401 Table IV-1 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations for an AG-2 district.  


 
B. Standards for boarding schools or boarding camps: 


 
1. Buildings shall be at least 200 feet from the side or rear lot line, and at least 300 feet from a dwelling or the adjoining premises.   


 
2. There shall be one-quarter (1/4) acre of land for every person, including employee residing at the school and camp.  


 
3. Structures shall be located at least seventy-five (75) feet apart. 


 
4. Driveways or parking areas shall be at least fifty (50) feet. 


 
5. The minimum overall area shall be at least fifty (50) acres. 


 
C. Standards for Golf Courses and Tennis Clubs: 


 
1. Buildings shall be at least 200 feet from the side or rear lot line, and at least 300 feet from a dwelling or the adjoining premises. 


 
2. The area of Golf and Country Clubs must be at least twenty (20) acres, and of Tennis Clubs at least four (4) acres.  


 
3. Structure shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from any highway or two hundred fifty (250) feet from any dwelling on an abutting lot.  


 
D. Cemeteries shall contain at least five (5) acres. 


 
 
Section 411 – Minimum Lot Requirement with Respect to Sewage Disposal  
 
The following regulations shall apply whenever the requirements of Section 401 Table IV-1 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations, are less restrictive: 
 
A. Septic tanks, leach fields, or any part thereof, shall be at least twenty (20) feet from any property line and seventy-five (75) feet from any well. 


 
B. Districts where there are neither sanitary sewers nor public water supply, lots shall have a minimum area of one (1) acre and a minimum lot width of one hundred fifty (150) feet, except when larger lots are required in the district. 


 
C. Districts where there are no sanitary sewers but are served with public water supply shall have a minimum lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and a minimum lot width of one hundred (100) feet, except when larger lots are required in the district.  Smaller lot sizes and widths then specified in “A” and “B” above, but not less than prescribed in the district, may be permitted when authorized as a special Permit upon submission of satisfactory evidence that the smaller lot area or width will provide safe and effective sanitary sewage disposal in the particular location.  Such evidence may include but shall not be limited to a specific recommendation from the official representative of the State Board of Health having jurisdiction. 


 
 
Section 412 – Kennels and Veterinary Hospitals  
 
Uses shall adhere to the following dimensional requirements: 
 
A. The lot in an AG-2 district shall be five (5) acres or greater; 


 
B. The building in an AG-2 district for the housing, boarding or treatment of animals shall be set back one hundred fifty (150) feet from any property or street line; 


 
C. A building housing animals shall be of solid construction, with insulation; shall have finished interior walls; all external doors shall be of solid core construction; and ceilings shall be insulated and finished with sound absorbent materials; 


 
D. Exercise runs shall have finished masonry floor with covered drains, and shall be separated by solid partitions of at least four (4) feet in height; 


 
E. The kennel rooms and exercise runs shall be provided with forced air ventilation and shall have no open windows; and  


 
F. No dogs shall be housed or exercised in outside kennels or runs.  


 
 
Section 413 – Horse and Pony Farms, Riding Academies, or Boarding Stables 
 
Uses shall adhere to the following dimensional requirements:  
 
A. There shall be two (2) acres of land for the first horse or pony on the premises and one-half (1/2) additional acre for each additional horse or pony thereafter; and  



 
B. Riding-rings, boarding stables or any similar structure for the keeping of animals shall be at least fifty (50’) feet from the property line.  The storage of fertilizer of manure shall be located at least one hundred (100’) feet from any property line, street line or lot line.  



 
 
Section 414 – Livestock 
 
A.  No pigsty shall be built or maintained on marshy ground or land subject to overflow, nor within three hundred feet of any inhabited house or public meeting house on property other than that of the proprietor of the pigsty. 
 
Keeping of livestock in other than an AG-2 District shall adhere to the following requirements: 
  
A. Large animals (over fifty pounds when mature) – two acres is required for two head of livestock, plus one-half (1/2) acre for each additional head.  


 
B. Small animals (under 50 pounds when mature) – one acre is required for six small animals, plus one-half (1/2) acre for each additional six-head. 


 
C. Fowl – one acre is required for twenty-four (24) birds, plus one-half (1/2) acre for each additional 12 birds, except for the keeping of chickens on lots of less than one acre in the R-40, R-20, R-10, and R-7 districts, which is conditional on a Special Permit from the Commission subject to the following conditions:  


 
1..  A chicken coop and enclosure (pen) shall be required on all residential properties where chickens are kept. 



   
2.  Chickens are allowed only in the chicken coop and the outdoor enclosure. 



 
3.  Roosters and free range fowl are not permitted. 



 
4.   The coop shall accommodate not more than six (6) chickens, must be located in the rear yard and shall not exceed a maximum size of eight (8) feet by six (6) feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet. 



 
5.  The outdoor enclosure shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet by six (6) feet. 



 
6.   A metal sealable food container is required. 



 
7.   Waste materials must be disposed of in a manner that will not cause odor, flies or attract vermin. 



 
8.  The coop, enclosure and storage/composting of waste must be set back a minimum of  thirty five (35) feet from all property lines and shall not be visible from the street. 



 
 
Section 415 – Industrial District Bulk Requirements 
 
A. The following structures and improvements are specifically excluded from the setback requirements: 




 
1. Steps and walks.  


 
2. Fences, except that no fences shall be placed in the front yard.  


 
3. Landscaping.  


 
4. Planters, not to exceed three (3) feet in height. 


 
5. Signs identifying the owner or occupant subject to written approval of the Commission and as regulated by these regulations. 


 
B. Building Height 




 
1. No structure shall exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height.  Building height is the vertical distance measured from the mean level of the ground within twenty (20) feet of the building to the highest point of the roof.  Chimneys, spires, towers and similar projections not intended for human occupancy shall not be governed by this height restriction.  Any building in excess of fifty (50) feet shall require a Special Permit in accordance with the Putnam Zoning Regulations.  


 
 
Section 416 – Rear Lot 
 
A. The use of an existing rear lot or the creation of one rear lot from a parcel of land undivided since May 9, 1960, or in the case of a subdivision where the unusual shape of the property would dictate that one rear lot be created to accomplish the best use of the land, may be permitted by Special Permit for residential development upon meeting the following criteria: 


 
1. The lot shall have an unencumbered access, at least fifty (50) feet wide, to a street.  This access shall not be separated from the rear lot, encumbered or sold and shall remain a private access with no Town services. 


 
2. Only one rear lot may be created for each lot in existence on the effective date of these Regulations.  For this Section, contiguous lots, as defined in Section 503, Adjacent Nonconforming Lots of Record, shall be considered one lot. 


 
3. The rear lot shall conform to the dimensional criteria of Section 401 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations for the applicable district except that the lot frontage may be reduced to fifty (50) feet as referenced in Subsection A.1. above.  In calculating lot area, the access strip shall be excluded.   


 
4. The Commission may establish more stringent requirements for the access, lot size or yard requirements because of land configuration, topography or soil conditions.  


 
5. The lot areas, frontage, yard criteria for rear lots are determined in accordance with “1.”, “2.”, and “3.” above. 


 
6. Access to rear lots shall be separated by a minimum distance.  Said minimum distance shall be the applicable lot frontage for the district.  


 
7. Only the erection of one single-family dwelling and pertinent accessory building or structure shall be permitted on a rear lot.  The owner of the rear lot shall provide and maintain the driveway, drainage and utility installations in the access area.  


 
B. The application for a Special Permit for a rear lot shall include: 


 
1. A site plan in accordance with Section 114. 


 
2. A survey of the property, stamped by a Registered Land Surveyor or Engineer. 


 
3. The statement from the applicant demonstrating that the proposed rear lot provides the best development of the land when drainage, land configuration, accessibility, topography and utilities are taken into consideration. 


 
C. The access to a rear lot may be developed as a street in accordance with the Putnam Subdivision Regulations, if a property owner wishes to further subdivide the property.  In subdividing the property, the rear lot must meet all applicable dimensional criteria. 


 
D. The use of an existing rear lot, or the creation of a rear lot from a parcel of land notwithstanding the road frontage requirement set forth in Section 401 Table IV.1. Schedule of Dimensional Regulations, shall be allowed for Residue Facility development if: 


 
1. The proposed Residue Facility has been granted a Special Permit as having met the standards set forth in Section 710 of the Zoning Regulations; and  


 
2. The rear lot and its access meet the relevant criteria therefore set forth in clauses (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) of Subsection A. above. 


Article V 
Nonconforming Uses, Structures, Lots, and Off-Street Parking 
 
Section 501 – Nonconforming Uses 
 
A. A nonconforming use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the following restrictions: 


 
1. Such use shall not be enlarged or extended beyond the existing building or structure without the granting of a Special Permit by the Commission as specified in Section 501 herein. 


 
2. Any lawful nonconforming use of a portion of a building may be extended throughout the building, and any lawful nonconforming use may be extended upon the lot occupied by such building for Commercial and Industrial Nonconforming Uses only provided that the area of such building shall not be increased by more than a total of twenty-five (25) percent of the area of such building existing on the date it first became a lawful nonconforming use, and provided further that any extension or addition shall conform with all height, area, width, yard and coverage requirements for the District in which it is located. 


 
3. Such use may occupy any parts of a structure which were designed at the time of the adoption of these Regulations. 


 
4. Such use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the land other than that occupied by such use at the time of such addition of these Zoning Regulations. 


 
5. Such use which has been abandoned and not actively used for a period of more than one year shall not be resumed. 


 
6. Any structure containing a nonconforming use which is destroyed or damaged in any manner or from any cause whatsoever, to the extent of seventy-five percent of its current market value at the time such damage, as determined by the Agent, shall not be repaired or rebuilt unless the proposed use shall be in conformance with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations. In determining restoration cost, the cost of the land or factors other than the cost of the structure itself shall not be included. The prior nonconforming use may be rebuilt if a Special Permit is granted by the Commission. The application must conform with Section 114. 


 
7. Such use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use without granting of a Special Permit by the Commission. Applicant must comply with Sections 304 and 305.  This section shall not apply to uses listed within the same category in Table III-1 – Schedule of Uses and Districts as determined by the Agent. 


 
8. Such use, if changed to a conforming use shall be properly maintained in good repair provided that such work does not enlarge or extend any nonconforming use. 


 
 
Section 502 – Nonconforming Structures 
 
A. Restrictions on Nonconforming Structures - A nonconforming structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following: 




 
1. A nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged or altered to increase its nonconformity without the granting of a Special Permit by the Commission as specified in Section 501 herein.  Any nonconforming structure may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 


 
2. A nonconforming structure which is demolished or removed in whole or in part in a lawful manner by the voluntary action of the owner or other authorized parties shall not be rebuilt or replaced unless it conforms with all the provisions of these Zoning Regulations. A residential accessory building or structure may be replaced in part or in whole if the dimensions and location are the same as the original structure and the use remains the same, i.e.: garages, decks, entryways and porches. Required means of egress structures i.e.: stairs, landings, and covering will be exempt from the setback requirements of Section 401 Table IV-1 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations as applied to existing buildings. 


 
3. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved in whole or in part unless such structure is made to conform to all of the regulations of the zone in which it is to be located. 


 
4. A nonconforming structure which is damaged by any manner or cause whatsoever in excess of ninety (90) percent of its current market value shall not be repaired or replaced except in conformity with these Regulations. The Agent shall determine the current market value of the damaged structure. In determining this value, only the cost of the structure itself shall be considered. If the extent of damage is less than ninety (90) percent, the structure may be repaired or rebuilt, provided reconstruction shall be started within six (6) months from the date of destruction; the reconstructed structure shall not exceed the height, area or volume of the damaged structure and, an application to rebuild shall be approved by the Commission or its Agent, which shall be subject to the approval of a special permit by the Commission if the footprint of the reconstructed damaged structure is changed. 


 
 
Section 503 – Nonconforming Lots 
 
A. Single Nonconforming Lots of Record 


 
A lot having a width or area which is less than required by these Zoning Regulations may be considered buildable for single family residential purposes regardless of the lot width or area, provided such lot was: (1) duly recorded prior to the effective date of these Zoning Regulations; (2) when created, conformed in all respects to the minimum requirements of the Zoning Regulations then in effect; (3) did not adjoin other land of 
the same owner on the effective date of these Zoning Regulations or at anytime after such lot or parcel of land was rendered substandard by the provisions of any prior Zoning Regulations. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as exempting single nonconforming lots of record from complying with the maximum percentage of lot coverage, maximum building heights, minimum building frontage on a Town accepted street, and the minimum building setback requirements. 
 
B. Adjacent Nonconforming Lots of Record Under the Same Ownership 


 
If two or more adjacent nonconforming lots are under the same ownership on the effective date of these Zoning Regulations, such lots shall be considered to be an undivided parcel of land for the purpose of these Zoning Regulations, and no single lot or portion thereof shall be used in violation of the requirements of Section 401 Table IV-1 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations as to lot width and area. If the total lot width or lot area of such adjacent lots of record is less than required by Section 401 Table IV-1 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations, such lots may be considered as a single nonconforming lot of record for single family residential purposes. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as exempting such adjacent nonconforming lots of record from complying with the maximum percentage of lot coverage, maximum building heights, minimum building frontage on a Town accepted street, and minimum building setback requirements for the Zoning District in which such lot is located. Any lots meeting those requirements shall be considered as a conforming lot of record for single family residential purposes. 
 
 
Section 504 – Nonconforming Off-Street Parking 
 
A. Existing nonconforming parking spaces. Any off-street parking spaces in existence on the effective date of these Zoning Regulations or thereafter established, which serve a building or use, may not be reduced or increased in number, or changed in location or design contrary to the requirements of Section 601 so as to increase the degree of nonconformity with the requirements of Section 601, except as set forth hereunder.   


 
1.  If the use of an existing structure or lot which does not have sufficient parking, including a use which has no off-street parking, is changed to a different type of use for which a different number of parking spaces is required as set forth in Section 601 and there is no increase in the Gross Leasable Area (GLA), the following rules shall apply: 




 
a. If there is a net increase in the number of required parking spaces, that net increase shall be provided, which number may include any existing parking spaces subject to the requirements of Section 601; and 



 
b. If there is a net decrease in the number of required parking spaces, the number of parking spaces available for future changes of use(s) shall be the number of parking spaces available based on the use(s) of the building immediately prior to the change of use(s) resulting in said net decrease as certified to and approved by the Town Zoning Enforcement Officer in accordance with Section 601. 



 
2.  If the use of an existing structure or lot, which has more than the allowable amount of parking pursuant to Section 601, is changed to a different type of use or is altered or expanded in a way that does not create compliance with Section 601 due to the continued existence of 




excess parking, the excess parking may remain in use but shall not be increased or altered in location or design, unless a special permit allowing the change in use requires the elimination of the excess parking.   




 
a. If it is proposed to increase the net floor area of a building, whether by addition to the exterior of the building or by internal reconstruction, and the building does not have sufficient off-street parking, full compliance with Section 601 for the entire building shall be a condition of the issuance of a building permit for the construction of the increase of net floor area; and 





 
b. An applicant seeking credit for existing parking spaces shall first submit an off-street parking plan, as provided in Section 601, certified by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer. If the existing paved area is not marked off into parking spaces or loading bays, such spaces or bays, complying with Section 601 shall be delineated on the plan. To qualify, an existing parking space shall be entirely on the lot. 





 
B. Parking requirements for a building destroyed, damaged or demolished. 
 
1. If a building, for which sufficient off-street parking is not provided, is destroyed, damaged or demolished by the owner, the building may be reconstructed or replaced, if otherwise permitted by these Zoning Regulations, without providing additional parking spaces provided the new use is the same type of use as the use before the destruction, damage or demolition, or is a type of use that requires the same or fewer parking spaces. If parking spaces were provided before the destruction, damage or demolition, at least the same number of spaces shall be provided; and 







 
2. If the new use is a different type of use, for which a greater number of parking spaces is required, or if more net floor area is to be constructed than previously existed, full compliance with Section 601 for the entire building shall be a condition of the issuance of any building permit for the reconstruction or replacement of the building. 







 
C. Repair and Reconstruction 


 
1. Continuance; repairs.  Routine maintenance and repairs are permitted to a nonconforming parking space situation to maintain it in sound condition and presentable appearance. 










 
2. Reconstruction after involuntary destruction (by right).  Any nonconforming parking space situation which is destroyed or damaged by explosion, collapse, fire, storm, natural disaster or other catastrophic event any of which is beyond the control of the owner, may be reconstructed provided there is no increase in the site coverage or the degree of nonconformity and provided that such reconstruction is commenced within one year of such damage or destruction.  










 
 
 
 
Article VI 
Town-Wide Requirements 
 
Section 601 – Parking and Loading 
 
A. General  





 
Parking and loading spaces shall be provided off the street for any use of land, buildings or other structures in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified. Off street parking and loading spaces required by this Section shall be permanently maintained and made available for occupancy in connection with and for the full duration of the use of land, buildings and other structures for which such spaces are herein required.  
 
It is the intent of these regulations that all structures and land uses be provided with a sufficient amount of off-street motor vehicle parking, while allowing for some flexibility of site design to accommodate the unique characteristics of individual properties. Additionally, it is the intent of these regulations to promote and support access by bicycle and walking throughout the community.   
 
Further, it is the intent of these regulations to incorporate Low Impact Development (LID) methods as defined n the latest edition of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as may be amended from time to time (or its successor), into the stormwater design for parking and loading areas, in order to minimize impact to downstream drainage facilities, increase the environmental quality of stormwater runoff, and to provide for water conservation and increased groundwater recharge measures.  Parking and loading areas shall be designed to the extent practicable with the goal of no-net runoff from the site. That is, the volume of runoff from the site after development shall not, to the extent practicable, exceed the volume of site run-off prior to the proposed development. In addition, the stormwater management system shall be designed, constructed, and maintained with Best Management Practices (BMPs) to minimize run-off volumes, prevent flooding, reduce soil erosion, protect water quality, maintain or improve wildlife habitat, and contribute to the aesthetic values of the project.  
 
1. No building shall be erected, substantially altered or its use changed, unless off-street parking and loading spaces have been provided in accordance with these Zoning Regulations.  In the Putnam Downtown (PD) district, on-street parking spaces or public parking lots shall be available for parking for commercial uses within existing buildings if parking is not already provided on-site. 


 
2. A site plan depicting plans and specifications for the required parking, loading facility and access drives shall be submitted at the time of application for the zoning permit for the use, which, where applicable, must be approved by the Commission under Section 113 and where applicable Section 114 of these Regulations.  


 
 
 
B. Existing Uses 
 
Any use already existing shall conform to these standards to the extent that it conforms at the time of the adoption of this Section. If any existing use of land, building or other structure is changed to a use requiring additional off-street parking and loading spaces to comply with this Section, the additional spaces shall be provided for the new use in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified. Any existing use which does not conform to the standards of this Section shall not be changed to a use which would need additional off-street parking and loading spaces to comply with the standards herein unless off-street parking and loading spaces are provided for such new use as required by this Section, except as authorized in Section 601.A.1. 
 
C.  Location  
 
Unless alternative provisions are made elsewhere in these Regulations, all parking facilities required under this Section shall be constructed on the lot containing the main use, or on abutting lot(s) which shall have the same zoning as the main lot.  No parking or loading facility, exclusive of driveways, shall be located within ten (10) feet of a street right-of-way line or five (5) feet of a sidewalk or abutting property line. 
 
D.  Parking Spaces Required 
 
Off-street parking for customers and employees, or residents where applicable, shall be provided and maintained in connection with the intensity of use of buildings or structures. The number of required spaces shall be provided using Table VI-1 in amounts per 1,000 square feet (sf) of Gross Leasable Area (GLA) unless otherwise indicated: 
 
Table VI-1 – Parking Schedule (in amounts per 1,000 square feet (sf) of Gross Leasable Area (GLA) unless otherwise indicated) 
 
Land Use  
 Minimum 
 Maximum  
 
 
  
  
 
Bank  
 2 
 5 
 
Small Commercial Centers (up to 10,000 sf)  
 3 
 7  
 
Free Standing Retail  
 2 
 5  
 
General Office Building  
 2 
 5  
 
Industrial Plant  
 1½ parking spaces for every employee (on the largest shift for which the building is designed) plus one for each vehicle maintained on the premises (minimum of four spaces); or, as determined by the Commission on a case by case basis determined by the site plan, based on a parking demand study 
 8  
 
Medical Office Building  
 2 
 10  
 
Assisted Living  
 1 space per 10 residents 
 1 space per 5 residents 
 
Restaurants  
 6 
 14  
 
Bed and Breakfast  
 1 space per room 
 1.2 spaces per room  
 
Personal Services  
 2 
 3 
 
Commercial Day Care Centers 
 1 space per 8 children at max capacity 
 1 space per 3 children at max capacity 
 
Churches and Places of Worship  
 
 1 space per 5 seats in portion of the building used for services 
 1 space per 3 seats in portion of the building used for services 
 
Museums and Libraries  
 1 
 2  
 
Social, Fraternal Clubs and Organizations  
 3 
 4  
 
Schools 
 1 space per 5 pupils 
 1 space per 3 pupils 
 
Hotels  
 1 space per room 
 1.2 spaces per room  
 
Warehouse  
 1 space per employee 
 1.5 spaces per employee 
 
Multi-Family Residences  
 1 per dwelling unit 
 2.5 per dwelling unit 
 
Automobile Sales and/or Rental  
 As determined by the Commission 
 As determined by the Commission 
 
Automobile Repair and/or Service 
 As determined by the Commission 
 As determined by the Commission 
 
Gymnasiums, Physical Fitness Centers, Health Spas, Martial Arts Centers and Dance Studios 
 2 
 10  
 
 
Indoor Recreation Facilities  
 5 
 5  
 

E.   Standards 
 
All off-street parking lots and loading spaces shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following standards: 
 
1. At least ten percent of the parking lot area shall be landscaped.  Required end islands, interior islands, corner islands, buffer strips between bays of parking and buffer strips adjacent to the building(s) shall apply towards defraying this requirement but perimeter buffer strips shall not. 



 
a. Whenever a parking or loading area is located in or adjacent to a residential district, it shall be effectively screened in accordance with Section 603 – Landscaping, of these Zoning Regulations.  In the event that the terrain and other natural features are such that the erection of fences, wall or planting screen required under said Section 603 will not serve the intended purpose, the Commission may grant a special Permit waiving this requirement. 


 
2. All parking and loading facilities required under these Zoning Regulations together with driveways, aisles, and other circulation areas shall be paved with asphalt or other non-permeable equivalent surface.  Where appropriate for seasonal, peak demand parking and to reduce storm water runoff, the use of grass/pavement block or other pervious pavement systems may be permitted. 


 
3. To reduce the mass of parking lots in front of buildings and bring buildings forward, parking should be provided to the side and rear of the building(s) to the extent that is practical. 


 
4. Parking lots shall be separated from the street right-of-way by a landscaped buffer-strip at least 10 feet wide exclusive of sidewalks or utility easements. 


 
5. Parking rows shall be terminated with landscaped end islands of at least 160 square feet in area. 


 
6. Unusable areas between parking rows that meet at an oblique angle shall contain a landscaped corner island. 


 
7. Lighting within the parking area shall be designed in accordance with Section 604 of these Zoning Regulations.   


 
8. Provide at least one tree with a minimum diameter or 2” to 2 ½” for every 10 parking stalls in a parking lot, to be planted within the perimeter of the parking lot. 


 
9. Where required, fire lanes adjacent to buildings shall be 30 feet wide. 


 
10. Dead-end parking bays longer than 25 feet in length, without a means of turning vehicles around, are prohibited. 


 
11. To prevent pedestrian traffic from cutting through adjacent residential properties, the Commission may require walls, fences, or similar architectural elements. 


 
12. Except at loading docks, building entrances and along pedestrian arcades, parking lots and driveways shall be separated from buildings by a landscaped buffer strip containing trees and shrubs. 


 
13. At a minimum, all parking lots shall:  


 
a. Have a minimum stall size of 9’ x 18’  


 
b. Have rectangular parking stalls  


 
c. Have aisle widths and parking angles in a minimum ratio as shown as follows:  


 
Table VI-2 – Parking Dimensions 
 
Parking Angle 
  Minimum Aisle Width 
 Direction of Flow 
 
45 degrees 
 12’3” 
 One way 
 
50 degrees 
 12’9” 
 One way 
 
55 degrees 
 13’3” 
 One way 
 
60 degrees 
 14’3” 
 One way 
 
65 degrees 
 15’2” 
 One way 
 
70 degrees 
 16’ 
 One way 
 
75 degrees 
 24’ 
 Two way 
 
90 degrees 
  24’  
  Two Way  
 

 
d. Have no greater than 2% slope  


 
e. Have a number and location of access drives compatible with traffic circulation patterns both within the site and on the abutting street system  


 
f. Provide sufficient stacking area (area where cars may need to wait in line to exit onto the street or to enter to circulate in the parking lot) for 2 vehicles at the outbound access drives from the site  


 
g. Minimize potential conflict points between pedestrians, bicycles, and motor vehicles.  


 
14. When a parking lot extends to a property line, sidewalk or street right-of-way, wheel blocks or other suitable devices shall be installed to prevent any part of a parked vehicle from extending beyond the parking facility setback line. 


 
15. Crosswalks, directional arrows, fire lanes, parking stalls and other pavement features shall be permanently marked on the pavement and supplemented by signs where necessary or required. 


 
16. If shopping carts are provided, shopping cart corrals shall be accessible from every parking bay serving the establishment.  


 
17. Access driveways leading to and from a public street shall be free of parking stalls and separated from parking bays by a landscaped buffer strip. 


 
18. Except for parking spaces provided in connection with a dwelling, each parking space shall be provided with adequate area for approach, turning and exit of an automobile having an overall length of 20 feet without need to use any part of a public street right-of-way. 


 
19. Points of entrance and exit for driveways onto the street shall be located so as to minimize hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the street.  No off-street loading space and no truck loading bay, ramp or dock shall be designed or arranged in a manner that trucks must use any part of a public street right-of-way for maneuvering, or for loading and unloading. 


 
20. All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper drainage of surface water in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the Town and as further required in Sections 601 and 113, and, where applicable, Section 114 of these Regulations.  
 
21. All commercial, industrial and multi-family residential uses shall provide trash and/or garbage collection areas enclosed on all four (4) sides by a solid wall or an opaque fence of at least five (5) feet in height, with a locking gate, if such area is not within an enclosed building or structure.  Provision for adequate vehicular access to and from such area or areas for collection of trash and/or garbage shall be required. 


 
22. Access driveways serving any required parking lots as a direct access drive from a street shall not be less than twelve (12) feet three (3) inches or more than sixteen (16) feet for one-way traffic (parking spaces angled at 70 degrees or less only), and not less than twenty-four (24) feet or more than thirty (30) feet for two-way traffic. 


 
F.   Loading Space Requirements and Dimensions 
 
1.  No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be erected or used for commercial or industrial purposes unless the off-street loading spaces required herein are provided.  Off-street loading spaces as specified in these Zoning Regulations shall be provided for any 





enlargement or alterations to any such existing structure or use.  In the Putnam Downtown (PD) district, off-street loading spaces shall not be required for uses within existing buildings if such loading spaces are not already provided on-site.  





 
2.  Off-street loading spaces shall be on the same or contiguous lot or parcel of land as the use or structure they are intended to serve.  In no case shall any required off-street loading space be part of an area to satisfy the off-street parking requirements.  Such space shall be located in the rear of the building. 





 
3.  A loading space shall have minimum dimensions of not less than twelve (12) feet in width, sixty (60) feet in length, exclusive of driveways, aisles, and other circulation areas, and a clearance of height of not less than fourteen (14) feet.  Off-Street loading spaces shall be provided as follows: 





 
Table VI-3 – Loading Space Dimensions 
Aggregate of Floor Area 
 Truck Loading Spaces  
 
Less than 5,000 sq. ft. 
 N/A 
 
5,000 sq. ft. – 15,000 sq. ft. 
 1 
 
15,0001 sq. ft. – 30,000 sq. ft. 
 2 
 
30,000 sq. ft. – 150,000 sq. ft. 
 3 
 
Each additional 50,000 sq. ft  
 1 additional 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
4.  All off-street loading spaces shall be located so as not to impede the flow of traffic within the parking area.  A site plan depicting the plans for off-street loading shall be submitted at the time of application for the zoning permit for the use, which, where applicable, must be reviewed and approved by the Commission under Section 113 and, where applicable, Section 114 of these Regulations.  
 
G.  Shared Parking  
 
1.  The Commission may consider written agreements for shared off-site parking proximate to the site provided the applicant satisfies the Commission that the agreement is legally enforceable and of sufficient duration to avoid future problems. The applicant should also provide a viable long term alternate solution if the agreement to provide off-site parking is not permanent in nature.  








 
2.  The Commission may also consider a written on-site shared parking arrangement that allows a reduction in the number of required on-site parking spaces such that the peak usage periods of the various uses on the site will not occur simultaneously.  A request for such a shared parking agreement, prepared by a registered traffic engineer, shall be submitted in narrative form, and shall be graphically depicted on a separate plan sheet, which shall demonstrate the specifics of the request and the justification for shared parking for the particular project. 








 
3.  Any such shared parking agreements shall be approved by the Commission and shall be recorded in the Land Evidence Records of the Town.  








 
H.  Bicycle and Pedestrian Accommodations  
 
1.  It is the intent of this Section to promote and support access by bicycle and walking throughout the community. To this end, all parking lots must be designed to provide safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access as a part of any parking lot design including safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle movement to and from public walkways and/or bikeways, streets, or transit stops.  





 
2.  Design Standards: 





  
a.  A minimum of one bicycle parking space shall be provided for each 40 off-street automobile parking spaces.  Parking lots of less than 40 parking spaces shall be provided with at least one bicycle parking space.  Within the PD district this bicycle parking requirement may be met within the public parking lots. 


 
b.  At a minimum, all bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in the form of bicycle racks with locking capability.  


 
c.  All pedestrian walkways shall be constructed to provide for: 


 
i.  safe separation of all walkways from motor vehicle traffic through the use of raised sidewalks and/or landscaping between sidewalks and parking spaces and/or driving aisles; 







 
ii.  safe, well-articulated pedestrian crossings demarcated with pavement markings, pedestrian warning signs, and lighting; 







 
iii.  a minimum of 4 feet in width; and 







 
iv.  inclusion of plantings, benches, and lighting along walkways and at all pedestrian crossings.  







 
Design, construction, and maintenance to accommodate disabled individuals shall be provided per Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. 
 
I.  Waivers and Permits  
 
1.  Except for buildings or parts of buildings used or occupied for residential use, all or part of the off-street parking requirements may be waived by the Commission where the proposed site planning, design, and construction includes one or all of the following as deemed appropriate by the Commission:  
 
a.  sufficient publicly owned parking spaces within 500 feet of the proposed development site; 









 
b.  access to a regularly scheduled transit stop within 500 feet of the proposed development, with service available during commuting hours;  









 
c.  direct access from a bikeway to the proposed development; and  









 
d.  provision of a regularly scheduled, municipally supported shuttle bus service from the development to an alternate safe, secure, and convenient parking facility. 









 
The Commission may require the submission of a parking demand analysis as part of any request for a waiver or Permit from the general parking requirements.   
 
2.  In the case that an applicant believes that the required parking amounts are in excess of what is needed for the proposed use, the applicant may submit a request with justification to the Commission for a reduction in parking space requirements. The Commission will consider and act on this request concurrent with and as part of the full development application process.   





 
3.  The Commission may approve parking lots with more spaces than the allowed maximum provided all of the spaces above the maximum number are composed of a pervious surface, and where adequate stormwater management is provided as specified in this Section and Section 113 and, where applicable, Section 114 of these regulations.  The Commission may also approve parking lots with additional impervious parking spaces above the allowed maximum spaces where the use of pervious spaces would not be environmentally sound and where a stormwater management plan is included with the application and implemented, employing, at a minimum, the stormwater management measures specified in this Section and Section 113 and, where applicable, Section 114 of these regulations.  





 
 
Section 602 – Signs 
 
A.  Purpose 
 
It is the purpose and intent of this Section to accommodate the establishment of signs necessary for identification, direction and reasonable commercial promotion while avoiding signs of a character, as well as a proliferation and extension of signs, that would be detrimental to the public health and safety, property values and the appearance and beauty of the community.  
 
1. A sign permit, issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, shall be required for all signs hereafter erected, installed, or replaced unless specifically exempted by these Regulations.  Any sign erected without a sign permit shall constitute a violation of these Regulations and shall be prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of Section 110 of these Regulations. 


 
2. All signs shall conform to the provisions hereinafter specified and to any additional conditions or limitations that may be imposed by the Commission in connection with the approval of a Site Plan or Special Permit. 


 
B.  Application for a Sign Permit 
 
1.   Application for a sign permit shall be made to the Zoning Enforcement Officer on a form provided by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall be accompanied by a filing fee. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the permit request within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete submission. 








 
2.  The following information shall be provided with the application for a sign permit:  








 
a.  the size of the proposed sign, including area, height, width, thickness, illumination and material of which it is to be constructed; 









 
b.  a detailed drawing showing the construction details of the sign, position of lighting or other extraneous devices, and support structure; and 









 
c.  a plot plan showing the location of the sign in relation to the building and all property lines and streets. 









 
d.  The Zoning Enforcement Officer may require additional information or specify the location of the sign on the lot for safety purposes. 









 
3. Except for temporary signs installed under the provisions of Section 602.F.4., the permit for a temporary sign shall be valid for no more than thirty (30) days and shall not be extended.  The sign must be removed at the expiration of the permit period.  


 
4. No permit shall be required for a mere change of copy on a sign, the customary use of which involves frequent and periodic changes of copy. 


 
C.  General Conditions 
 
1. In all districts permitted signs may be erected, altered, maintained, used, removed, or moved, only in compliance with the provisions of this Section and other regulations of the Town relating to the erection, alteration, maintenance, use, removal, or moving of signs and similar devices.  


 
2. Existing signs at the time of passage of these Zoning Regulations that do not conform to the requirements of these Zoning Regulations shall be considered nonconforming signs and once removed shall be replaced only with conforming signs; however, nonconforming signs may be repainted or repaired (including lighting) provided such repainted or repaired sign does not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign. Copy may also be changed. 


 
3. All signs must be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from all hazards and must be maintained in safe condition.  If a sign is deemed hazardous by the Agent, the Agent shall give written notice to the owner of the sign and to the owner of the land upon which the sign is erected, directing that the sign be brought into conformance or removed within thirty (30) days from the date of said notice.  


 
4. No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes with traffic through glare, through blocking of reasonable sight lines for streets, sidewalks, or driveways, through confusion with a traffic control device (by reason of color, location, shape, or other characteristic), or through any other means. 


 
5. No sign, other than official street signs, including traffic signs and similar regulatory notices, wayfinding signs, and neighborhood identification signs as provided herein, shall be allowed within street rights-of-way unless specifically authorized by other Regulations and regulations of the Town.  Neighborhood identification signs are allowed in all districts, subject to approval of sign size, location, height, materials, color, text, and overall design by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The area of such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.   


 
6. No sign shall be erected containing information on it which states or implies that a property may be used for any purpose not permitted under the provisions of these Zoning Regulations in the zone in which the property to which the sign relates is located.  


 
7. On-site signs advertising a use no longer in existence or a product no longer available shall be removed or changed to advertise the new use or product within six (6) months after cessation of the original use. Signs, including the housing for such sign, once removed shall be replaced only by signs in conformance with these Zoning Regulations.  


 
8. All signs, except temporary signs, shall be constructed of durable material and kept in good condition and repair. Electrical signs shall be subject to the performance criteria of the Underwriters Laboratory, Incorporated, or to applicable Town/State codes, whichever is more stringent.  


 
9. Signs may be illuminated by direct lighting, but shall have such lighting shielded so no direct light will shine on abutting properties or in the normal line of vision of the public using the streets or sidewalks. No flood or spotlights shall be mounted higher than twenty-five (25) feet above ground level and shall also comply with Section 604.  


 
10. If an establishment has walls fronting on two (2) or more streets, the sign area for each street may be computed separately.  


 
11. No sign except such directional devices as may be required by the Federal and State Aviation Authorities shall be placed, inscribed, or supported upon the roof or upon any structure which extends above the eave of the roof of any building.  


 
12. Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the carrying of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose, but becomes a primary purpose in itself, shall be considered a freestanding sign and, as such, be subject to the provisions regarding freestanding signs in the district in which such vehicle is located.  


 
13. Freestanding signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the front lot line. No freestanding sign in other than a Residential District shall extend within twenty-five (25) feet of any Residential District boundary line. Signs for automobile service stations shall not be located within any street right-of-way.  


 
14. Parallel or wall signs shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall to which they are mounted and shall not project more than fifteen (15) inches from its surface.  


 
15. Projecting signs shall not project more than four (4) feet from the wall or surface to which they are mounted nor in any way shall they interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic.   


 
16. All sign provisions of these Zoning Regulations shall apply to smoke stacks, water towers, and other similar structures when said structures are used as signs. 


 
17. In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public thoroughfare, highway sidewalk, or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. 


 
18. All signs shall be so designed and supported as to carry the weight of the sign, shall be secured in such a manner as to prevent significant movement due to wind, and shall comply with the local building codes in effect. 


 
19. No sign erected or maintained in the window of a building visible from any public or private street or highway, shall occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the window surface. 


 
20. No sign shall be located nearer than eight (8) feet vertically or four (4) feet horizontally from any overhead electrical wires, conductors, or guy wires. 


 
21. All signs on a lot shall be accessory to the approved or main use on the lot. 


 
22. No red or green neon signs, LED-LCD type signs, or other similar electronic type signs shall be located within 200 feet of a traffic signal. 


D.  Sign Size and Area Computation  
 
1. The size of any sign shall be computed by multiplying its greatest height by its greatest length, exclusive of supporting structures unless such supporting structure is illuminated or is in the form of a symbol or contains advertising copy. In the case of signs that have no definable edges, such as raised letters attached to a building facade, the sign size shall be that area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual message or copy area.  





 
2. The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed.  


 
3. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surface, building, wall, or window, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.  


 
4. In computing square foot area of a double faced sign, only one side shall be considered, provided both faces are identical. If the interior angle formed by the two faces of the double faced sign exceeds one hundred twenty (120) degrees, both faces shall be considered in calculating the sign area.  


 
5. The height of a sign shall be vertical distance measured from the ground at the base of the sign to the highest point of any portion of the sign or supporting structure. 


 
6. The setback for a freestanding sign shall be measured from the lot line to the outermost edge of the sign or supporting structure whichever is closer to the lot line. 


 
7. Sign size and area computation shall not apply to wayfinding signs approved by the Town. 


 
E.   Signs Not Requiring a Permit  
 
1. Exempt Signs:  The following types of signs are exempt from obtaining a permit:  


 
a.  Address/postbox numerals.  



 
b.  Government signs, flags, and standards erected by the town, state, or federal government in furtherance of their governmental responsibility. Such signs, flags, and standards may include, but are not limited to, those used for community identity, to identify facility entrances and grounds, and to provide direction to places of interest.  



 
c.  Legal notices.  



 
d.  Wayfinding signs approved by the Town. 



 
2. Provisionally Exempt Signs:  The following types of signs may be erected without a sign permit, provided that standards of this Section shall be met:  


 
a. On-Premises Parking and Traffic: These signs shall conform to the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices," as published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration. Signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area, and may be placed on private property to direct and guide traffic and parking on same private property. Such signs shall not include advertising; registered logos shall not be considered advertising.  


 
b. Flags: These shall be allowed subject to the following standards:  


 
i.  Flags of the United States of America, the State, the Town, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the United States, and any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction.  




 
ii.  One corporate flag used to display a business trademark or logo registered with the State of Connecticut shall be allowed per parcel. Such a flag shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area, and shall not be flown from a pole more than twenty-five (25) feet in height, but in no case shall the corporate flag be flown at a height greater than any flag identified in 3.a  above, located on the same parcel.  




 
c. Fuel price signs: The maximum area for fuel price display signs shall be twenty-four (24) square feet per sign face.   


 
d. "No Trespassing" or "Posted" signs: These signs shall be allowed subject to the following standards:  


 
i.  They shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area; 




 
ii.  They shall be located on private property; and  




 
iii.  There shall be no more than one (1) per one hundred (100) feet of property line.  




 
3.  Temporary signs:  
 
a. Construction site signs: Non-illuminated temporary signs not to exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in total area may be permitted on new construction sites, provided they shall be removed within seven (7) days after completion of the construction work and not more than one (1) sign shall be placed on each street frontage of the construction site.  


 
b. Garage/yard sale signs: Temporary signs advertising garage, patio, porch, and like sales are permitted, provided that:  


 
i. Allowable size shall not exceed four (4) square feet;  


 
ii. Such signs are placed only on the premises of such activity; and,  


 
iii. The signs shall be removed no later than one (1) week after the sale.  


 
c. Educational, charitable, civic, professional, religious, or like signs: Temporary signs advertising events related to these causes may be erected or displayed and maintained, provided that:  


 
i. The signs shall not be erected or displayed earlier than thirty (30) days prior to the  event to which they pertain;  


 
ii. The signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area per sign face in residential land use designations nor thirty-two (32) square feet in nonresidential land use designations;  


 
iii. The signs shall be removed no later than one (1) week after the event;  


 
iv. The placement of signs shall have the consent of the property owner.  


 
d. Political signs – subject to the following provisions:  


 
i. The signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area per sign face in residential zoning districts nor thirty-two (32) square feet in non-residential zoning districts; 


 
ii. Such signs shall be removed, by the person responsible for the placement of such sign, within ten (10) days after such election/event; and,  


 
iii. Placement of signs shall have the consent of the property owner.  


 
e. Real estate signs: One (1) on-premise sign advertising the sale, lease, or rental of property is allowed, provided that the following standards are met:  


 
i. Sign is non-illuminated;  


 
ii. Sign is removed within one (1) week after property closing, lease or rental;  


 
iii. Sign does not exceed six (6) square feet in area for each parcel, property (including subdivisions), or structure in the Residential Zones and thirty-two (32) square feet in the Commercial and Industrial Zones;  


 
iv. For nonresidential parcels abutting a roadway for at least one hundred (100) feet, the sign face area shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet;  


 
v. One (1) additional sign in conformance with this Subsection may be allowed on a site abutting more than one (1) roadway; and  


 
vi. One (1) additional sign to designate an open house, on the day of the open house and to be removed by sundown. 


 
f. Sandwich/sidewalk signs: One (1) on premise sign is allowed in compliance with the following standards:  


 
i. Sign does not stand higher than four (4) feet off the ground and must have a surface area no greater than eight (8) square feet (per side);  


 
ii. sign is constructed of durable materials;  


 
iii. Sign is professionally and/or neatly lettered;  


 
iv. Sign is removed from the sidewalk after business hours;  and 


 
v. Sign does not obstruct pedestrian/handicapped traffic and allows for at least 42” of horizontal clearance for pedestrian/handicapped traffic. 


 
g. Window/advertising posters: These include signs inside windows of buildings within commercial areas, provided that the sign area does not exceed forty (40%) percent of the individual glass area through which it is seen.  


 
F.  Prohibited Signs  
 
 The following signs shall not be permitted: 
 
1. Signs that have any visible moving parts, whether mobile, revolving or animated, which motion or animation is achieved by wind, motors or flashing lights. 


 
2. Flashing blinking, rotating, twinkling, animated, or moving signs of any type, except public service messages (including time and temperature), other than LED-LCD signs as provided in Section 602.H. 


 
3. Any sign or sign support which for any reason constitutes a hazard by obstructing the vision of a driver; detracting from the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic sign or device; obstructing free ingress or egress from a fire escape, door, window or other required exit way; or make use of words such as “stop”, “look”, “one way”, interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 


 
4. String lights, strung light bulbs, searchlights, streamers, pennants, banners, spinners, or other devices strung across, upon, over or along any premise or building in conjunction with a commercial or industrial use.  A temporary sign permit may be issued for sixty (60) days to allow such uses in conjunction with special events or holidays. No more than two temporary sign permits for every twelve-month period.    


 
5. Projecting signs which are erected so as to project approximately perpendicular from the exterior of any building, or wall and which exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area, or which project more than four (4) feet from the exterior of said building or wall or are less than ten feet above sidewalk grade.  Nothing herein shall be constructed to permit the erection of any projecting sign over a public way without the approval of the Officer. 


 
6. Signs placed, inscribed, or supported upon the roof or upon any structure which extends above the eave of the roof of any building. 


 
7. Billboards or other off-premise signs. 


 
8. Off-Site Directional Signs, unless otherwise specified in these Zoning Regulations.  This prohibition does not include wayfinding signs approved by the Town. 


 
9. Signs which in any way simulate official, functional, directional, or warning signs erected or maintained by the United States Government, the State of Connecticut, or municipality thereof, or by any railroad, or public utility, or similar agency concerned with the protection of public health or safety.  


 
10. Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors, or particles, sound, or odor.  


 
11. Signs placed in such a manner as to impair public safety. 


 
12. Rotating beacon lights are not permitted. 


 
 
 
G.  Illumination of Signs  
 
1. Signs in residential zones of a physician, dentist,  and such other person where services are considered essential in an emergency to public health, safety and welfare may be illuminated provided the light is white, is not moving, flashing, blinking, scrolling, intermittent, changing in intensity or brightness, and provided that the light is shielded and is not visible off the lot.  


 
2. Signs in residential zones of schools, churches, hospitals, sanitariums, clubs or other institutions of similar nature may be illuminated provided the light meets the provisions of Section 604. 


 
3. Illuminated signs may be lit only during hours when the business referred to on the sign is open and in actual operation. During hours of closing, such signs must be turned off; unless it can be demonstrated that such action may contribute to an unsafe condition. 


 
a. ILLUMINATION.  No sign shall be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless in the case of a business sign, the premises on which it is located are open for business.  Illuminated signage shall be allowed only as follows: 



 
i. By an external white, steady, stationary light of reasonable intensity shielded and directed solely at the sign; 



 
ii. Where not otherwise prohibited, by internal, non-exposed white backlighting of reasonable intensity; or, 



 
iii. LED-LCD and Electronic Message Signage pursuant to the provisions of Section 602.H. 



 
H. LED-LCD and Electronic Message Signage 
 
1. LED-LCD and Electronic Message Signage shall only be permitted in the following districts: PD, NC, GC, HC, only after issuance of a Special Permit subject to the conditions in this Section and the standard findings necessary for the granting of a special permit in Section 114 of these Zoning Regulations. 


 
2. LED-LCD and Electronic Message Signage shall not exceed 20 square feet in size or thirty percent (30 %) of the total sign area of the allowable square footage as specified in this Section, whichever is smaller. 


 
3. LED-LCD and Electronic Message Signage shall be set to a specific brightness level and shall automatically respond to changing light conditions (i.e., become less bright at night). Written certification shall be provided with sign permit application from the sign manufacturer that the sign will not exceed the following light level standard as measured in nits. A nit is a non-SI name used for the International System of Units (SI) in measured luminance based on candela per square meter (cd/m2): 


 
a. Maximum daytime level at 5,000 nits, or 7,500 nits if the sign is equipped with an automatic dimmer. 



 
b. Maximum nighttime level at 500 nits. 



 
4. The leading edge of any new LED-LCD and Electronic Message Signage shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the front property line and not exceed twenty (20) feet in height from the ground at any point. Such signs shall comply with all other side and rear yard setback requirements.  This setback from the leading edge of such a sign shall not be applicable to structures in the PD district. 


 
5. LED-LCD and Electronic Message Signage shall contain a default design that will freeze the display in one position or power off the display if a malfunction occurs. 


 
6. Failure of any LED-LCD and Electronic Message Signage to comply with the provisions of this Section shall cause such LED-LCD and Electronic Message Signage to become nonconforming.  


 
I.  Signs in Residential Districts 
 
1.  All signs in residential districts shall be at least five feet from the front lot line, except when the sign is located on the building; shall be placed no closer than fifteen (15) feet to a side or rear lot line; shall not extend over the public right-of-way; shall not extend more than six (6) feet above ground; and shall conform to the following regulations:  
 
a. There shall be no more than one sign for a residential lot which may identify the premises and/or identify a permitted customary home occupation or special Permit.  Such sign shall not exceed two square feet. 


 
b. The sign shall not be illuminated. 


 
c. Permanent signs identifying residential developments at major entrances are permitted but shall bear no commercial advertising and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area (per side if freestanding). 


 
J.   Signs in Non-Residential Districts 
 
1. Signs in Commercial and Industrial Non-Residential Districts may be wall-mounted, freestanding, or projecting and may be illuminated, but not flashing. 


 
2. There shall be only one sign in an M/OD and PD Commercial Non-Residential District for each principal building.  Said sign shall not exceed 20 square feet, and if free-standing, shall not be higher than 8 feet. 


 
3. In Industrial and Commercial Districts, except shopping centers (see Section 304 Table III-1 Schedule of Uses and Districts, and Article VIII Definitions) and M/OD districts, there may be two signs: 


 
a.  One wall mounted sign for each main building or use as follows: 


 
i.  In a Commercial District the area of the sign shall not exceed one square foot per linear foot of building frontage or thirty-five (35) square feet, whichever is less; or  




 
ii.  In an Industrial District the area of the sign shall not exceed one and one-half (1 ½) square feet per linear foot of frontage or two thirds (200) square feet, whichever is less; such sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height and twenty (20) feet in length.  




 
b. One freestanding sign for each main building not to exceed thirty (30) square feet per side.  The sign shall not exceed twenty feet (20) in height above the finished grade and shall be erected so that it does not impede vision or obstruct access to any street, sidewalk, driveway, off-street parking or loading facility or any other required access.  Where two or more structures are located on the same or contiguous lots, owned and operated as a unit, or where a number of commercial or industrial uses share the same entrance, a sign plaza in conformance with Subsection K. below may be required. 


 
4. Permitted signs shall be set back ten (10) feet from front, side and rear lot lines except when the sign is located on the building.  Such signs shall be located fifty (50) feet away from any Residential District boundary.  When a sign is located on the building, it shall not project more than twenty-four (24) inches over a public walkway, and the lower edge of such projection shall be not less than (10) feet above the walk level. 


 
5. Individual lots within the Putnam Downtown (PD) and Medical/Office Development (M/OD) Districts are limited to one sign with a maximum square footage of twenty (20) square feet and a maximum height of eight (8) feet. 


 
K.   Signs and Shopping Centers 
 
1. There may be one wall-mounted sign for each use not to exceed one square foot for each linear foot of the wall, of the portion of the building continuing in the use and on which the sign is located in accordance with this Section.  This measurement shall be taken along the building frontage. 


  
2. In addition to such wall-mounted signs, there shall be permitted in shopping centers one common freestanding sign identifying all uses.  Such freestanding signs shall conform to the following: 


 
Maximum Area of    Maximum Height of 
 Zoning District   Freestanding Sign      Freestanding Sign 
 
M/OD, NC            20 SF        8 FT 
 
GC             5 SF/1000 SF of Bldg.     20 FT 
(Maximum 150 SF) 
 
HC             5 SF/1000 SF of Bldg.     30 FT 
(Maximum 150 SF) 
     
3. Such signs may be illuminated in accordance with these Regulations. 


 
4. A freestanding sign shall not be erected so as to impede the vision or obstruct access to or from any street, sidewalk, driveway, off-street parking or loading facility, or any other access required. 


 
 
Section 603 – Landscaping  
 
A. Purpose 
 
These landscaping regulations are adopted for the purpose of protecting property values by: preserving existing vegetation and planting of new materials; providing privacy from visual intrusion; screening undesirable light, pollutants and noise; preventing the erosion of soil; providing water recharge areas; and improving the environmental quality and aesthetics of the Town of Putnam. 
 
B. Landscape Requirements 
 
1. The required front yard or side yard along a street of all lots shall be landscaped and surfaced either with lawn, evergreen ground cover or suitable substitute, except for driveways, walkways, bikeways, or similar uses.  In commercial and industrial uses in which parking is located within the required front yard, this landscaped area shall be at least 10’ in width. 


 
2. One or more driveways may run perpendicular – approximations expected – to the required landscaped yard setback, except that the Commission may approve the location of a connecting driveway between separate parcels within this yard. In the case of a single family 


home a turnaround area, circular driveway or area immediately adjacent to the driveway for no more than three cars may be placed in this required front yard setback. No motor vehicles shall be parked or stored on landscaped surfaces within such yard. No motor vehicles shall be parked or stored in the required front yard on a second driveway of a single family home. 


 
3. Any lot developed for commercial or industrial use shall provide a minimum 10’ landscaped area along side and rear lot lines, except for areas in which common driveways, walkways, bikeways, or similar uses are located, or, sites that consist of shared lot areas developed in tandem and so approved by the Board pursuant to Section 601 and Section 113 and, where applicable, Section 114. 


 
4. Adjacent Residential Property:  There shall be a buffer zone of at least twenty-five (25) feet between a lot with a proposed non-residential use or building and adjacent lots in a residential district. For all non-residential uses located immediately abutting to or within a residential zone, the owner of the non-residential use shall provide a buffer zone on the property line between these two uses.  Said buffer zone/strip shall be properly landscaped and planted with evergreen trees and/or shrubbery of no less than six (6) feet in height.  Planting shall be done and maintained in such a manner so as to provide year-round screening.  The required buffer may be provided by existing vegetation.  


 
a. Buffer zone areas that contain some natural growth but insufficient to provide a proper screen shall be planted with drought-resistant, non-Invasive tree and shrub species.  At least sixty percent (60%) of the plantings shall be evergreen species, and at least fifty percent (50%) of the evergreen shall be spruce or have the equivalent foliage. Evergreen trees shall be not less than six (6) feet tall and shall be planted not more than seven (7) feet apart. 


 
b. Buffer zone areas that contain little or no natural growth shall provide two (2) planted areas of trees parallel to the residential district zone line.  The spaces between the trees in one area shall be centered upon a tree in the other area.  The first planting area shall begin seven (7) feet from the residential district zone line.  Trees spaced as aforementioned may be planted anywhere within said area.  Plantings shall consist of drought-resistant, non-invasive tree and shrub species with at least sixty percent (60%) evergreen species, of which at least fifty percent (50%) shall be spruce or have the equivalent foliage.  The second planting area shall begin sixteen (16) feet from the residential district zone line.  Trees spaced as aforementioned may be planted anywhere within said area but must be spaced properly from any staggered planting in the first planting area Planting shall consist of sixty percent (60%) evergreen species, of which at least fifty percent (50%) shall be spruce or have the equivalent foliage. 


 
c. In that area of the buffer zone where the planting of trees is not required, there shall be proper ground coverage to prevent the blowing of dust, dirt or refuse, and to prevent soil erosion.  Wood chips or their equivalent shall not be used as a substitute for proper plantings in the buffer zone area. Any trees, shrubs or grasses that die or become diseased and cannot be restored to their screening function, shall be replaced. 


 
 
d. Buffer zones may also include a screened fence for the purpose of stopping debris from non-residential uses from entering the residence districts and to further screen the view. Any debris accumulating in the buffer zone shall be removed every thirty (30) days. The fence 


shall be approximately parallel to the residential district zone line, of good workmanship, and properly maintained and no signs shall be posted upon the side of the fence facing the residential district except as outlined in Section 602 of these Zoning Regulations. 


 
e. In approving a site plan, the Commission may modify, at the applicant's request, the requirements of this Subsection with respect to buffer zones, provided that such modifications are in keeping with the intent of this Section and provide adequate screening for residential uses involved, prevent the blowing of dust, dirt, and refuse, and prevent soil erosion.  


 
5. Any lot which contains parking facilities for more than ten cars shall also provide landscaped areas within the parking lot equal to at least 10 percent of the gross parking area. Gross parking area shall include the area of parking stalls, aisle-ways, and associated landscaping. This landscaped area shall require landscaped end islands and landscaped center islands within the parking area. Intermediate landscaped islands measuring 9 feet wide by 20 feet in length shall be provided in parking rows for every 16 spaces. A deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted upon each island as required by the Commission. 
 
C.   Completion of Landscaping 
 
1.  All landscaping shown on the approved plan shall be completed before issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance or a Certificate of Occupancy pursuant to Section 115 of these Zoning Regulations. 



 
2.  It is the responsibility of the property owner to replace any vegetation required by these Zoning Regulations which dies or is lost by theft. 



  
 
Section 604 – Lighting  
 
A. Purpose 
 
1.  This Section is intended to minimize the problems caused by improperly designed and installed outdoor lighting. 





 
2.  Improperly designed outdoor lighting can cause glare, defined as light emitted with an intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see and, in extreme cases, causing momentary blindness. Glare can create a nuisance or hazard for users of neighboring properties and for motorists or pedestrians on public streets. In addition, light that crosses a property boundary, particularly from a nonresidential to a residential property, can cause a nuisance by reducing nighttime privacy. These requirements are adopted to minimize glare from outdoor lighting and reduce the spillover of light beyond the area for which it is intended. 





 
B.  Applicability 
 
 The requirements of this Section apply to lighting in residential and non-residential districts, not including lighting of public streets. 
 
C.   Allowed Outdoor Lighting 
 
1.  Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be so arranged as to direct the light down, towards the parking area, and away from the adjoining lots in residential districts and any public street right-of-way.  





 
2.  Outdoor lighting shall be limited to the following types of fixtures. In these requirements, the term “lamp” refers to the component of the light fixture that produces the light. 





 
a.  Shielded Lights – Relative to  spotlights and low intensity lights as defined below, all light fixtures shall be fully or partially shielded. 






 
i.  A fully shielded fixture is constructed and installed in such a manner that no light is emitted above a horizontal plane through the lowest part of the lamp, as certified by the lighting manufacturer or a photometric test report. 
 
ii.  A partially shielded fixture is constructed and installed in such a manner that less than 2.5 percent of the light is projected above a horizontal plane through the lowest part of the lamp, as certified by the lighting manufacturer or a photometric test report. 
 
b.  Spotlights – A spotlight concentrates the light into a directed beam aimed in a particular direction. Spotlights are allowed subject to the following: 



 
i.  The light shall be directed only onto the facade of a building or sign on the same lot. 




 
ii.  Facades and signs located less than 50 feet from a residential district shall not be illuminated by a spotlight. 




 
iii.  The lamp shall be shielded on the rear and sides by a material that fully blocks light. This shield shall extend at least 6 inches in front of the lamp. 




 
iv.  The width of the front opening of the light shield shall be no more than the length of the shield. 




 
c.  Low Intensity Lights – Light fixtures with the following characteristics are permitted without cutoff shields: 



 
i.  The lamp(s) housed by the fixture do not emit a total of more than 16,000 lumens for freestanding fixtures, or 10,000 lumens for fixtures attached to structures, based on the manufacturer’s lumen rating for the initial light output of the lamp(s). 




 
ii.  The lamp is no more than 14 feet above ground level for freestanding fixtures, or 8 feet above ground level for fixtures attached to structures. 




 
iii.  For fixtures with shields or other design features to direct the light, the light is not directed toward adjacent properties or public streets. 




 
iv.  The surface of either the lamp or the fixture enclosing the lamp is frosted or translucent rather than transparent. 




 
3.  Light Trespass - Light trespass from a property subject to the requirements of this Section shall be limited as provided below. Light trespass shall be measured in vertical foot-candles three feet above ground level at the property line. 





 
a.  Light trespass onto a residential property from a PD, IHOD, I, GC, HC, M/OD, or TPOD district shall be limited to 0.1 foot candles. 






 
b.  Light trespass onto any other property zoned or used for residential purposes shall be limited to 0.5 foot candles. 






 
c.  The light trespass limits shall not apply to land within a public street right-of-way or developed for non-residential uses. 






 
D.  Approval of Alternative Lighting Plans 
 
1.  Designs or locations for light fixtures that do not comply with the requirements of Subsections C.2. and C.3. above but fulfill the purposes of this Section may be approved by the Commission. A request for such approval may be part of a Site Development Plan submittal, must indicate the type, location, lumen rating and height of the fixture, and must demonstrate how the purposes outlined in Subsection C.1. above will be met. Alternatives that may be approved as meeting the purposes of this Section include: 
 
a.  Fixtures that will not be visible at any point along the boundaries of the lot on which they are located due to the location of buildings or walls, topography, or similar visual barriers; 









 
b.  Lighting that will have minimal off-site impact due to the distance of the fixtures from roads and neighboring properties; 









 
c.  Fixtures that incorporate additional shielding or other features to prevent off-site impacts; or 









 
d.  Lighting plans demonstrating other factors that will prevent glare and light spillover. 









 
E.  Exemptions 
 
 The following types of lighting are exempt: 
 
1. Hazard warning lights required by local, state and federal regulatory agencies. 


 
2. Temporary emergency lighting for use by fire, police or other emergency service agencies. 


 
 
 Section 605 – Floodplain 
 
A.  Purpose 
 
It is the purpose of this Section to regulate land uses and activities in the floodplain in order to minimize loss of life and injury to persons and property, and to preserve the floodplains as a valuable natural resource which can accommodate flooding with minimal adverse effects. Nothing in these regulations is contrary to the minimum floodplain management requirements as contained in Section 60.3 (d) of the National Flood Insurance Act. 
 
B.  Minimum Site Development Requirements 
 
1.  Filling of land as authorized shall only be allowed as logical extensions of land lying at higher elevations. 





 
2.  Filling of land in the floodplain shall only be allowed where the resulting landscape is enhanced and where the neighborhood’s essential characteristics have not been negatively altered. 





 
3.  No structural use and no filling shall be permitted within the floodway unless permitted by the Commission as a Special Permit for such public purposes as road crossings, minor recreational improvements, or safety improvements, provided that no increase occurs in flood levels during the base flood discharge. 





 
C.  Building Floor Elevations 
 
1.  The floor elevation of all stories to be used for human occupancy in any building shall be raised above the floodplain elevation. 



 
2.  Stories used exclusively for mechanical or storage equipment may be built below the Floodplain elevation provided that: 



 
a.  the building is designed to remove the hazards of flooding; and 






 
b.   approval is granted by the Commission based upon hydrologic study and recommendation. 






 
 
 
D. Development in a Flood Hazard Area 
 
Development proposals shall be examined by the Commission to determine applicability of the Flood Hazard Regulations.  If any construction or alteration of structures are proposed in a flood prone area as shown on the Town of Putnam Flood Hazard Boundary Map, the applicant shall demonstrate to the Commission that the proposal is consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.  
 
Any development proposals which encompass five (5) acres or more shall include base flood elevation data. 
 
The Commission shall require: 
 
1. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures to have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level; 


 
2. All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures to have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or flood-proofed to or above the base flood level; and 


 
3. Pilings or columns rather than fill, for the elevation of structures within flood-prone areas, in order to maintain the storage capacity of the floodplain and to minimize the potential for negative impacts to sensitive ecological areas. 


 
In the absence of base flood elevation data from FEMA, the Commission shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize, any base flood elevation data from a Federal, State or other source, until such other data has been provided by the FEMA Administrator as criteria for requiring the provisions of Item 3 above. 
 
 
Section 606 – Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
 
A.  Purpose 
 
 To ensure that erosion and sedimentation resulting from new construction are kept to a minimum.  
 
B.   Plan Required 
 
A plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half acre. 
 
C. Exemptions 
 
 A single family dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from these soil erosion and sediment control regulations. 
 
D.  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Requirements 
 
1.  To be eligible for certification, a plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology.  The applicant shall describe, in mapped and narrative form, the measures to be taken to control erosion and sediment both during and after construction. The plan and its specific measures shall be based upon the best available technology and shall be in accordance with the principles and the minimum standards of the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Erosion and Sediment Control as amended. The narrative portion shall contain the following: 
 
a.  A description of the development project; 



 
b.  Time Schedule for all construction activities indicating the anticipated start and completion dates of the development, including creation/stabilization of disturbed areas, grading operations, and installation of erosion and sediment control measures; 



 
c.  Name, address (including email) and telephone number of person responsible for implementation; 



 
d.  The design criteria, construction details, detailed installation/application procedures, and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities design criteria; 



 
e.  A site plan map at a sufficient scale to show: 



 
i.  the location of the proposed development and adjacent properties;  




 
ii.  the existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies;  




 
iii.  Within the disturbed area, topographic contour lines at two foot intervals; 




 
iv.  the existing structures on the project site, if any; 




 
v.  the proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and if applicable new property lines; 




 
vi.  the location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities;  




 
vii. the sequence of grading and construction activities;  




 
viii. the sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures;  




 
ix.  the sequence for final stabilization of the development site; and 




 
x.  Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested by the Commission or its designated agent.  




 
E.   Procedure 
 
1.  Upon receipt of the complete Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, the Zoning Enforcement Officer will review it for compliance with these regulations. Any plan submitted may also be reviewed by the Eastern Connecticut Resource Conservation and Development Council (RC&D) under the Environmental Review Team (ERT) program.  At the request of the RC&D ERT, additional control measures shall be incorporated to the plan. All review shall be completed within thirty days of the plan's submission.  If the RC&D ERT is not readily available, the Commission may hire a qualified independent reviewer at the applicant’s expense. 





 
2.  When the Zoning Enforcement Officer is satisfied that these erosion and sediment control plan complies with these regulations, he will so certify that plan. 





 
3.  After installation, the Zoning Enforcement Officer will inspect the site to verify that all necessary erosion and sediment controls have been properly installed. When he is satisfied that they have been properly installed he will so indicate on the owner's application for a Building Permit. 





F.   Issuance or Denial of Certification 
1. The Commission shall either certify that the plan, as filed, complies with the requirements and objectives of these Zoning Regulations or deny certification when the development proposal does not comply with these regulations under the provisions of Section 113 and, where applicable, Section 114.  

2. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under Chapters 124 or 126 of the General Statutes. 


 
 
 
 
G.   Compliance 
 
1.  All erosion and sediment control measures indicated on the certified plan shall be installed and maintained as scheduled. A cash bond to guarantee completion of the control measures shall be required in an amount to be determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, in consultation with the RC&D ERT, where applicable.  If in the opinion of the Zoning Enforcement Officer the control measures have not been installed or maintained in conformance with the certified plan the property owner will be so notified by certified mail. If the problem as described in that notice is not rectified within twenty-four hours of delivery, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may take steps to correct the problem using funds from the posted cash bond. 





 
2.  Inspection shall be made by the Commission or its designated agent during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and maintained.  The Commission may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being operated and maintained.  





 
 
Section 607 – Excavation 
 
A.  General 
 
No earth, including loam, sand, gravel, clay, peat or quarry stone, shall be excavated and removed from any lot, nor shall any lot be filled, except as authorized under Section 304 Table III-1 or as authorized under an application for a Special Permit granted by the Commission under the provisions of this Section. 
 
B.  Exemptions 
 
 The provisions of this Section and the requirements to obtain a permit shall not apply to the following cases: 
 
1. Excavation and removal of less than 500 cubic yards over a period of 18 months from any single parcel of land. 


 
2. In conjunction with construction or alteration of a structure for which a building permit or zoning permit has been issued, provided that less than 1,500 cubic yards is disturbed or removed. 


 
3. The landscaping and/or improvement of an existing structure that will not adversely affect the surrounding area and the neighboring residents provided that less than 1,000 cubic yards is disturbed or removed. 


 
4. Removal from the premises of topsoil or loam provided there remains not less than four (4) inches of topsoil or loam and provided that less than 500 cubic yards is removed.  The entire disturbed area shall be left seeded or under cultivation. 


 
5. Excavation, removal, filling, or grading in conformance with an approved subdivision and/or site development plan, except as provided hereafter. When the Planning Commission or Zoning Commission determines that subdivision or site development plans include significant grade changes that require extensive excavation and grading operations in terms of time duration and/or material removed, they may require and Excavation and Grading Permit prior to commencement of construction. 


 
C.  Application 
 
 An application in writing for a special permit, submitted to the Commission by the property owner or his authorized agent, shall be accompanied by a plan of operation including maps, drawings and specifications and shall include the following: 
 
1.   Four (4) copies of maps and plans prepared by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, showing all of the following information as applicable to the particular application: 





 
a. Property lines and streets adjoining the lot and the names of owners of property adjoining the lot; 


 
b. the location and exterior limits of the area to be excavated, graded or filled; 


 
c. A grading plan at a scale of 1” equals 100 feet or less, showing existing topography in the area to be excavated and proposed future topography within the premises and within one hundred (100) feet of the area surrounding the excavation.  Contours shall be no more than five feet. 


 
d. existing and proposed drainage on the site and existing rivers, streams, water courses, ponds, swamps and wetlands on or within 200 feet of the lot; 


 
e. A statement on dust control techniques to be utilized.  Such controls shall be required on access roads to the site. 


 
f. proposed vehicular access to the lot and any proposed work roadways; 


 
g. the location on the lot of any wooded areas, rock outcrops and existing and proposed buildings, structures and processing equipment; and 


 
h. an estimate of the number of cubic yards of material to be excavated, graded or dumped. 


 
2. A written statement specifying the hours and days of the week when the operation is to be conducted, proposed truck access to the site, the number and type of trucks or other machinery to be used on the site, the type of processing or rock crushing to be used, and the location and type of any buildings to be erected.  No building shall be erected on the premises except as temporary shelter for machinery and field offices. 


 
3. Written permission for the inspection of the site at any reasonable time by the Commission or its Agent. 


 
4. The applicable fee for a Special Permit (see Section 106), plus $2.00 per acre for each application, payable to the Treasurer of the Town of Putnam. 


 
5. A soil erosion plan and a reuse plan for the land which must include a statement on the type of ground cover to be planted or applied upon completion of the earth removal operation to control wind and water erosion and a maintenance plan until the area is stabilized. 


 
6. In addition to the above requirements, the Commission may request such additional data as necessary to act on the Special Permit application. 


 
D.  Procedure 
 
1.  Within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of a completed application meeting the requirements of this Section and, where applicable, Sections 113 and 114, the Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application. 





 
2.   Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town at least twice, at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than 15 nor less than 10 days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the public hearing. After the public hearing, the Commission shall approve, modify and approve or disapprove the application. 





 
3.  The applicant may consent in writing to any extension of the time of public hearing and action on the application. Failure to submit additional information requested by the Commission under this Section, within the period for action on the application, shall be grounds for disapproval of the application. 





 
E.   Approval 
 
 The Commission may, after the public hearing, grant a special permit use to excavate or filling of a specific parcel of land for a period not to exceed three (3) years only when it is satisfied: 
 
1. That the proposed excavation will not impair or devalue the future use of the property in accordance with these Regulations, and that the slopes and banks will not impair good development and safe use of the property after excavation.  


 
2. That the premises will be excavated and graded in conformity with the plan of operation as approved, and any deviation from said plan shall be cause for the Commission to revoke the permit. 


 
3. That there will be no excavation or removal within fifty (50) feet of any property or street line except to an elevation equal to or above the established grade of the adjoining street or property; that if the excavation is below the established grade of the street or property line, no excavation shall take place within one hundred (100) feet of the property line or within two hundred (200) feet of the street line.  If valuable deposit of natural resources warrants the extractions within the buffer, the Commission may permit the extraction on the condition that the buffer is immediately replaced to conform with this requirement.  The fifty (50) foot buffer shall remain in its natural vegetative state. 


 
4. That there will be no excavation to within five feet of the water table.  The water table shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the State Board of Health for design of leach fields at the time of the first application and shall be shown on the applicant’s site plan.  Test wells shall be required on the site to determine water table.  The Commission may authorize excavation below this limitation if the applicant can demonstrate cause for said action.  


 
5. That screening, sifting, washing, crushing or other forms of processing, if conducted upon the premises, will be done in such a manner as to not unduly disturb, annoy or harm neighboring residences.  Any screening, sifting, washing, crushing or other forms of processing, if conducted upon the premises, shall be only of materials excavated on the site; no off-site earth material shall be brought onto the site and processed thereon.  No fixed machinery shall be erected or maintained within two hundred (200) feet of any property line or street line. 


 
6. That if arable soil exists within the site, the applicant has made provisions for storing and retaining within the premises at least four (4) inches of top layer of said soil for use after excavation and/or removal operations are completed, as specified herein. 


 
7. That at all stages of operation, steps are taken to insure that:  proper drainage will be provided to prevent the collection and stagnation of water; to prevent soil erosion; to prevent harmful effects upon surrounding properties; and proper slopes will be maintained to prevent dangerous overhang. 


 
8. That during the period of excavating and removal, such barricades or fences will be erected as may be necessary for the protection of pedestrians and vehicles. 


 
9. That truck access to the excavation will be arranged as to minimize the danger to traffic and nuisance to surrounding properties.  Proper provision shall be made for control of dust and that portion of the access road within the area of excavation will be provided with a dust controlled surface when necessary.  


 
10. That appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent the tracking of material onto any public way.  Such measures shall include the installation of an anti-tracking stone apron at the entrance/exit driveway to the site adjacent to any public way.  Any material tracked onto a public way will be swept up and removed on a daily basis. 


 
11. That proper measures, as determined by the Commission, shall be taken to minimize the nuisance to surrounding properties. 


 
12. That when excavation and removal operations or either of them is completed, or if a permit has expired and not been renewed, the excavation area will be graded so that the gradients in disturbed earth will not be steeper than a slope of 3-1 (horizontal-vertical) or whichever lesser slope is necessary to maintain stability under the particular soil conditions; that a layer of arable soil obtained from material stockpiled on the site, or from elsewhere if no on-site stockpile is available, will be spread over the excavated and sloped areas to a minimum depth of four (4) inches; that the area will be covered with a perennial rye grass and other equally suitable vegetation, and that it will be maintained until accepted by the Commission. 


 
13. A Special Permit use may be granted to excavate a specific parcel in a zoning district not specified in Section 304 provided that requirements of this Section are met and that there is no processing of materials on the subject parcel.  The Commission may establish other conditions they feel are required because of the nature of district in which the parcel is located  


 
14. The work shall be limited to such hours as are determined reasonable by the Commission and to such days as specified by the Commission. 


 
15. Upon completion of the work authorized, the area of excavated or otherwise disturbed ground shall be prepared or restored as follows: 


 
a. Such area shall be evenly graded to slopes not exceeding one (1) feet of rise for each three (3) feet of horizontal distance or to such lesser slope necessary for soil stability, safety and reasonable reuse and development of the lot; in addition, the area shall be evenly graded h sufficient slopes to assure adequate drainage of the area, so that stagnant pools of water will be avoided; if it can be demonstrated to the commission's satisfaction that a greater slope, not to exceed one (1) foot of rise for each two (2) of horizontal distance, can maintain stability and safety, the commission may waive the 1:3 slope requirement; 


 
b. Adequate drain-ways of gradual slope shall be provided to assure drainage; 


   
c. All loose boulders shall be buried or removed from the lot; and 


 
d. The top layer of any arable soil, to a depth of not less than four (4) inches, shall be retained in the lot and spread over the entire disturbed area with any large stones removed, and the area shall then be seeded with a perennial grass and maintained until the ground shall be completely stabilized with a dense cover of grass and there exists no danger of erosion, but this provision shall not apply to the area of ponds nor to exposed areas of ledge existing prior to the work. 


 
 
 
 
F.  Performance Bond 
  
1.   As a condition of the granting of a Special Permit, the applicant shall file a Performance Bond or other equivalent surety acceptable to the Commission with the Treasurer of the Town of Putnam.  The amount of the bond will be calculated by the applicant’s engineer on the basis of an estimate of the cost of all required restoration to the site upon completion of all excavation and earth removal activities, as specified in the special permit, and said estimate shall be prepared and submitted to the Commission for its guidance in setting the final amount of the performance bond. 





 
2.  The bond will expire no earlier than sixty (60) days after termination of the current permit. 





 
3.  The applicant’s engineer will submit as part of the plans an estimate of the amount of the bond based on the Bond Formula in Appendix 1. 





 
4.  Failure to renew the Performance Bond shall invalidate the Special Permit. 





 
G.  Time Limit 
 
1.  Each excavation Special Permit granted under this Section shall be valid for a period of three (3) years or for such shorter period as may be requested by the applicant or fixed by the Commission. 





 
2.  The Commission may by majority vote  renew the permit annually when the applicant presents copies of the approved maps and plans, prepared by and bearing the seal of a professional engineer or land surveyor, showing that the excavation and removal, or grading or dumping of earth is progressing as approved. 





 
H.   Extension or Renewal Permit 
 
The Commission shall extend its permission to carry out excavation and removal operations for a period of three (3) years provided that the applicant is able to show that the excavation and removal already completed conforms with the plan of operation as approved.  The amount of the surety bond for such extension or renewal shall be calculated pursuant to the method put forth in Section 607.F. 
 
I.   Enforcement 
 
If at any time the Commission finds that the excavation is not being conducted in accordance with the plan of operation as approved, the Commission may request the operator to supply a progress report of the excavation or removal including the contours or cross sections prepared by a certified engineer or land surveyor licensed in the State of Connecticut.  Based on the evaluation of the progress report, the Commission may order the applicant to cease operations.  Failure to supply the report or request shall result in invalidation of the special permit.  
 
J.   Completion 
 
Upon completion of the operation in accordance with the terms of a special permit and after any area of the lot required to be seeded has grown over one growing season a dense cover of grass or other suitable vegetative cover as required under this Section, the applicant may apply to the Commission for the return of the bond filed as provided in this Section, and if the Commission is satisfied that the work has been completed as required, the bond shall be returned to the applicant, but otherwise the bond shall remain in full force and effect. 
 
 
Section 608 – Performance Standards 
 
A. Purpose 
 
The purpose of this Section is to provide performance standards which are designed to prevent health and safety hazards, public nuisances and hazardous environmental effects; to permit potential nuisances to be measured factually and objectively; and to ensure that all uses will provide methods to protect the Town from hazard which can be prevented by processes of control and elimination. If any local standard differs from State or Federal standards, the more stringent or restrict standards shall apply. 
 
B. Application of Standards 
 
1.  The provisions of this Section shall apply to any uses located within the Town. If any existing use, process, building or other structure is extended, enlarged, moved, structurally altered or reconstructed, or any existing use of land is modified in any way, these performance standards shall become applicable. Performance standards shall be measured at the lot line in a point nearest the use or process being measured. 








 
2.  Industrial uses and buildings shall be designated and laid out to minimize impacts on adjacent property by such features as buffer fences, plantings, suitably located points of traffic ingress/egress and areas for loading and parking. 








 
C. Administration of Performance Standards 
 
1. Before issuing a zoning permit, the Agent shall certify any proposed use for compliance with this Section. 


 
2. Issuance of a zoning permit shall constitute certification of compliance with the standards of this Section. Any modifications or alterations shall be made part of the building permit. 


 
 
 
D. Plans and Specifications 
 
 In order to determine the probable compliance of a proposed use with this Section, the Agent may require the submission of: 
 
1. Plans of existing or proposed construction and development; 


 
2. Description of existing or proposed machinery, and products; 


 
3. Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques used or proposed to be used to adhere to these standards; 


 
4. Measurements of the amount or rate of emissions of the items referred to in these standards for existing industrial uses of the applicant; 


 
5. Certification by a registered professional engineer, that the proposed use shall comply with these standards; 


 
6. An affidavit from the applicant acknowledging his understanding of these standards and his continuing agreement to comply with them. 


 
 Failure to submit any data required shall constitute grounds for denying a permit. 
 
E. Report by Expert Consultants 
 
In the investigation of the compliance with these standards by an existing or proposed use, the Agent may require the owner or applicant to provide a study and report by an expert consultant as to the compliance with said standards and advice as to how much existing or proposed use can be brought into compliance with said standards if necessary. 
 
F.  Continued Enforcement 
 
The Agent shall investigate any purported violation of these standards and for such investigation, may request that qualified experts be employed. If it is found that a violation occurred or exists, a certified letter shall be sent to the owner of the use directing him to rectify the situation within a stated time period.  The notice shall state that upon continuation of the violation, any costs associated with monitoring the operation, including the costs of hiring qualified experts, shall be paid by the violator. If no violation exists, the Town shall bear the cost. 
 
G.  Cancellation of Permits 
 
If, after the conclusion of time granted for compliance with the performance standards, the Agent finds the violation is still in existence, any permits previously issued shall be void and the operator shall be required to cease operation until the violation is remedied. 
 
H.  Performance Standards 
 
The following standards shall apply to all existing and proposed industrial uses: 
 
1. Noise – At the points of measurement, the sound pressure level of noise shall not exceed the values given in Tables 1 and 2 in octave bands of frequency, between the nighttime hours of 11:00 PM and 7:00 AM. The sound pressure level shall be measured with a Sound Level Meter (American Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters for measurement for Noise and Other Sounds, S1.41961) and an Octave Band Filter Analyzer (American Standard Specifications for an Octave Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and other Sounds, Z 24, 10-1953). 


 
 
Table VI-4 – Maximum Permissible Sound-Pressure Levels 
 
           Pre-1960 Octave Bands         Preferred Frequency Octave Bands 
 
Octave Band Frequency           Octave Band Center Frequency 
      (Cycles per Second)  Decibels (Cycles per Second)  Decibels 
 
 0-75  72      21.5  76 
          75-150  67      63  71 
        150-300  59    125  65 
        300-600  52    250  57 
       600-1200  46    500  50 
      1200-2400  40 1000  45 
      2400-4800  34  2000  39 
     Above 4800  32  4000  34 
 
If noise is not smooth and continuous and/or is not radiated between the hours of 11:00 PM and 7:00 AM, one or more of the corrections in Table VI-5 shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given above in Table VI-4. 
 
Table VI-5 
 
Type of Operation or Character of Noise    Correction in Decibels 
 
Daytime operation – 7 AM to 11 PM      Plus 5 
 
Noise source operated less than  
20% of any one-hour period       Plus 5* 
 
Noise source operated less than  
5% of any one-hour period       Plus 10* 
 
Noise source operated less than  
1% of any one-hour period       Plus 15* 
 
Noise of impulse character 
(Hammering, and so forth)      Minus 5 
 
Noise of periodic character 
(Hum, screech, and so forth)       Minus 5 
 
*Apply one of these corrections only. 
 
 2. Vibration 
 
a. Ground-transmitted vibration shall be measured with a seismograph or complement of instruments capable of recording vibration displacement and frequency, particle velocity, or acceleration simultaneously in three mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum vector resultant shall be less than the vibration displacement permitted. Particle velocity may be measured directly or computed from the formula particle velocity (inches per second) – 6.28 times displacement (inches) times frequency (Hertz). 



 
b. Vibration shall be measured at any adjacent lot line as indicated and the vibration shall not exceed the limits shown at the specified points of measurement. 



 
c. The maximum permissible particle velocity of the ground shall be as follows: 



 
 
Table VI-6 
 
Point of Measurement            Particle Velocity 
 
 Steady-State         Impact 
Inches/Second         Inches/Second 
 
 Residential Zone Boundary                  0.02     0.04 
 Lot Line             0.10     0.20 
 
d. For purposes of these Zoning Regulations, steady-state vibrations are vibrations which are continuous, or vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than sixty (60) per minute. Discrete impulses which do not exceed sixty (60) per minute shall be considered impact vibrations. 



 
e. No vibration is permitted which is discernible to the human sense of feeling for three (3) minutes or more duration in any one hour of the day between the hours of 7:00 AM and 7:00 PM or of thirty (30) seconds or more duration in any one hour between the hours of 7:00 PM and 7:00 AM. 



 
3.  Smoke, Air Pollution, Gases and Fumes, Toxic Material, Odor – All operations, activities and uses shall be conducted so as to comply with State and/or Federal Regulations. 
 
4.  Sewage and Water-Borne Wastes 
 
a. Sewage and water borne wastes shall be disposed of in a manner acceptable to the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection who shall approve the design, installation and operation of all subsurface wastewater disposal systems. 



 
b. Discharge into a surface water body shall require issuances of a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit by the US Environmental Protection Agency and/or the State of Connecticut when reqried by state or federallaw 



 
c. Discharge into the sewer system, when available, shall adhere to the rules and regulations established to govern waste waters flowing into the plant. 



 
5. Heat and Glare – No use shall produce unreasonable heat beyond the property line. Any manufacturing operation or activity producing glare shall be conducted so that direct or indirect light from the source shall not cause illumination in excess of 0.5 foot-candles when measured in a neighboring residential district or public highway. 
 
6. Radioactive Materials – The handling of radioactive materials, the discharge of such materials into the air and water, and the disposal of radioactive wastes shall be in conformance with the applicable regulations of the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the State of Connecticut. 
 
7. Particulate Matter – No emission shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health, animals; vegetation, property, or which can cause excessive soiling at any points. 
 
 8.  Fire and Explosive Hazards – All industrial uses and storage facilities shall be approved by the State Fire Marshal with regard to fire and explosive hazards. 
 
 9.  None of the activities or businesses conducted within the premises shall: be hazardous; have or cause any detrimental effect to adjacent property; have fire or explosion hazards that will produce dangerous exposure to adjacent property. 
 
Article VII 
Special Requirements 
 
 
Section 701 – Residential Conversions 
 
When permitted as a special permit from the listing of uses, Section 304, a single-family detached dwelling exiting prior to January 1, 1957, may be converted into and used as a two-family, provided that: 
 
A. The plan and any other information as may be deemed necessary for the conversion of said dwelling shall be approved by the Commission.  


 
B. There is parking at a safe distance from the public highway in accordance with Section 601, Standards for Parking and Loading.  


 
C. The dwelling shall be subject to the height, area, width and yard regulations of the applicable district in accordance with Section 401 Table IV-1 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations.  


 
D. There shall be no external alterations of the building except as may be necessary for reasons of safety; fire escapes and outside stairways shall, where practicable, be located to the rear of the building.  


 
E. In an R-20, R-10 or R-7 district, the dwelling is attached to the Town’s sewer system. 


 
F. The maximum % coverage requirements of Section 401 and the minimum Livable Floor Areas requirements of Section 407 are met. 


 
G. The Commission may prescribe such further conditions and restrictions with respect to the conversion and use of such dwelling, and to the use of the lot, as deemed necessary. 


 
Section 702 – Multi-Family Housing  
 
A.   Intent 
 
Multi-family development is permitted in Putnam to provide a greater variety and choice in housing types, to broaden availability of housing for persons and families of all income levels, to focus development at location able to support it with relatively small environmental or municipal cost, and to protect the Town’s natural environment and existing character. 
 
 
B.   Requirements 
 
All Applications for a permit or special permit for a multi-family dwelling or project shall adhere to the following requirements. 
 
1. Relation to Transportation.  Principal vehicular access shall be from major streets.  Access points shall be designed to encourage smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.  Merging, turnout lanes and traffic dividers shall be provided where existing or anticipated heavy flows indicate need.  Streets within the development shall not be constructed so as to encourage use of minor streets in adjacent residential areas. 


 
2. Relation to Surrounding Property.  Site planning shall provide protection from potentially adverse surrounding influences, and protection of surrounding areas from potentially adverse influences from within the development.  


 
3. Buffer Zone.  There shall be a landscaped buffer of at least ten (10) feet between any multi-family structure and the lot line of any adjoining property.  If, in the opinion of the Zoning Commission, the natural vegetation does not provide a suitable buffer, planting of a double row of evergreens at least four feet tall, may be required. 


 
4. Screening.  Fences, walls or vegetative screening shall be provided along the perimeter of the development where needed to provide a buffer to minimize incompatibility with surroundings.  In particular, the following uses and areas shall be screened from adjacent residential districts or public streets: 


 
a. Off-street parking areas containing more than ten spaces.  When nearest portions of noncontiguous parking areas are separated by less than fifty (50) feet of landscaped space, as measured from their nearest points, they shall be considered as combined for computing number of spaces. 


 
b. Service areas for loading and unloading vehicles other than passenger, and for storage and collection of trash and garbage. 


 
c. Utility sites such as pumping stations, electric utility substations and the like. 


 
5. Rubbish Disposal.  Each building shall be provided with an enclosed waste pen of sufficient size to accommodate all trash and waste stored on the premises in accordance with Section 601.  


 
6. No multi-family structure shall contain more than twelve dwelling units, with not more than six dwelling units having access from a single entrance.  No building shall be larger than two hundred (200) feet in length and have an unbroken roof area greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet.  


 
 
C.  Special Permit for Multi-Family Housing 
 
In addition to the requirements of Sections 113 and 114, any application for a special permit to construct multi-family units shall include the following: 
 
1.  A site plan, prepared by a registered architect, landscape architect, professional engineer or land surveyor, that shall consist of five separate plans prepared at a scale of 1 inch equals 40 feet or such other scale as may be approved by the Zoning Commission.  The five plans are as follows: 


 
a.   Site Layout which shall contain the boundaries of the lot(s) in the proposed development, proposed structures, drives, parking, landscaping, screening, fences, walls, walks, outdoor lighting, and loading facilities.  






 
b.  Topography and Drainage Plan which shall contain the existing and proposed final topography at two intervals and plans for handling stormwater drainage.  






 
c.  Plan which shall include all facilities for refuse and sewerage disposal or storage of all wastes, the location of all hydrants, fire alarms and fire fighting facilities on and adjacent to the site, all proposed recreational facilities and open space areas, and all wetlands including floodplain areas. 






 
d.  Architectural Plan which shall include the ground floor plan and architectural elevations of all proposed buildings. 






 
e.  A Landscape Plan showing the limits of work, existing tree lines, and all proposed landscape features and improvements including planting areas with size and type of stock for each shrub or tree. 






 
2. A perspective drawing showing a typical building.  


 
3. A locus plan, at an appropriate scale, showing the entire project and its approximate relation to existing areas, buildings and roads for a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from the project boundaries or such other distance as may be approved or required by the Commission. 


 
4. A written statement indicating the estimated time required to complete the proposed project and any and all phase thereof. 


 
5. For any multi-family development over three acres, analysis of the consequences of the proposed development on: 


 
a.  Natural Environment:  groundwater and surface water quality, ground water level, stream flows, erosion and siltation, vegetative removal (especially unusual species and nature trees), and wildlife habitats. 









 
b.  Public Service:  traffic safety and congestion, used for water system improvements, need for public sewerage, need for additional public recreation facilities, need for additional school facilities.  









 
c.  Economics:  Municipal costs and revenues, local business activity, local jobs. 









 
d. Social Environment:  rate of town population growth, range of available housing choice.  









 
e.  Visual Environment:  Visibility of buildings and parking, visual consistency with existing development in the area.  









 
6. Any other information deemed necessary to describe the proposed development.  


 
 
Section 703 – Condominiums 
 
A.   Intent 
 
Residential condominiums differ from other residential development in a variety of ways, particularly the relationship between individually owned units and jointly held and maintained common areas. Condominium developments are a mix of individual and common ownership, which differs from conventional and familiar patterns of housing in the Town. The purpose of this Section is to address the special attributes of condominiums and to adopt development standards that will protect both the community and the purchasers of condominiums. 
 
B.  Applicability 
 
The provisions of this Section shall apply to all conversions of apartments or other similar existing developments to residential condominiums proposed on a real property within the appropriately Districted districts in the Town. 
 
C.  Requirements 
 
1. The documents setting forth a plan or manner of permanent maintenance of open spaces and recreational areas shall not be acceptable until approved by the Town Attorney as to legal form and effect, and by the Zoning Commission as to suitability of content. 


 
2. If the common open spaces are to be conveyed to the homeowners' association, the developer shall file a declaration of covenants to be submitted with the application for approval, that will govern the association. 


 
3. The homeowners' association shall be established prior to the sale of the last dwelling unit. 


 
4. Membership shall be mandatory for each buyer and any successive buyer. 


 
5. Provisions to restrict parking upon other than approved and developed parking spaces shall be written into the covenants, conditions, and restrictions for each project. 


 
6. If the development is constructed in phases which require one (1) or more final maps, reciprocal covenants, conditions, and restrictions and reciprocal maintenance agreements shall be established which will cause a merging of development phases as they are completed, and embody one (1) homeowners' association with common areas for the total development.  


 
7. Each condominium unit shall be separately connected to available public water supply and sanitary sewer system. 


 
8. All condominium projects shall require direct access and direct connection to a public road from the project site. All public or private streets within a condominium project shall conform to the standards and specifications of the Town of Putnam. 


 
9. The following information must be included on, or attached to the project site plan: 


 
a. Ownership Interest  



 
b. Declaration of all persons with an ownership interest in the land on which the condominium project will be located, including a description of the nature of each entity's interest (for example, fee owner, option holder, lessee, or land contract vendee). 



 
c. The proposed use(s) of the condominium project (for example: residential, commercial, industrial). 



 
d. The total acreage of the condominium site, acreage set aside for roads and parking areas, number of condominium units to be developed on the subject parcel and density computation on a unit per acre basis. 



 
e. The vehicular and pedestrian circulation system planned for the proposed development, including the designation of any street(s) for private ownership or dedication to the public. 



 
f. The location of existing roads adjacent to the development with details on the connection of the project circulation system to the public system. 



 
g. The proposed layout of structures, unit lots, parking areas, open space and recreation/park areas. 



 
h. Site drainage showing topography and flow directions, including computations of flows into storm sewers or retention and/or detention areas. 



 
i. Specific locations and dimensions of wetland areas, wetland buffers, floodplain, and significant natural features such as tree stands, unusual slopes, streams and water drainage areas. Include the total acreage of all wetland areas and open space. 



 
j. Proposed landscape screening, including greenbelt, berms, and screening walls, and a maintenance plan  



 
k. All deed restrictions or other regulations proposed to be included in the condominium documents in the nature of restrictive covenants that regulate the layout, use and maintenance of public or common areas, accessory structures, payment of assessments, and enforcement of condominium regulations. All items shall be physically incorporated as part of the site plan through detail sheets attached with the plan. 



 
l. Limited common elements, common elements, unit lots, preservation areas, convertible areas and any other designated ownership areas must be clearly delineated on the site plan. 



 
m. All condominium documents must be provided for review by the Town Attorney. 



 
n. All necessary easement documents showing the dedication of land areas for the purposes of constructing, operating, inspecting, maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing, and/or removing pipelines, mains, conduits and other installations of a similar character for the purpose of providing public utilities, including conveyance of sewage, water and storm water run-off across, through and under the property subject to said easement, and excavating and refilling ditches and trenches necessary for the location of said structures. 



 
D.  Conversions 
 
All condominium conversion projects shall be subject to the dimensional requirements of the Zoning Regulations and shall require site plan approval by the Commission prior to the occupancy of any unit converted to a condominium unit. The site plan submitted for a conversion project shall include all existing conditions and clearly identify all proposed site changes. The Commission shall review the site plan for a condominium conversion in the same manner as a new development on the site.  Any valid nonconforming two or multi-family residential use upon conversion shall not be subject to the dimensional requirements provided that the number of dwelling units after conversion is not increased. 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 704 – Active Adult Housing 
 
A.  Intent 
 
The development of elderly, assisted elderly and active adult housing is encouraged by these regulations. However, no provision of these Zoning Regulations shall be applied, enforced, or implemented in a manner which is inconsistent with or prohibited by the fair housing laws of the United States and the State of Connecticut. 
 
B.  Procedure and Standards 
 
1. An application for a special permit for a Senior Active Adult Housing District may be submitted to the Commission by a public, nonprofit or for-profit housing developer for a parcel of land or part thereof located in the R-7, R-10 and/or R-20 Residential Districts and which contains the minimum area set forth in these Zoning Regulations.  


 
2. No application for a Senior Active Adult Housing District shall be approved by the Commission unless it finds that a need exists within the Town of Putnam for the specific housing type proposed and the Commission finds that the topography and other natural features of the property are capable of accommodating increased building density without detrimental impact.  Each active adult housing unit shall be occupied by: 


 
a. Persons who are 55 years of age or older. 



 
b. A spouse of an occupant pursuant to a. above. 



 
c. Occupant pursuant to a. above who survives his or her spouse. 



 
d. Occupant pursuant to a. above whose spouse has entered into a long-term continuing care facility. 



 
e. In c. and d. above, remaining spouses who remarry or cohabitate must meet all occupancy requirements. 



 
f. A personal care attendant who is in service to a resident 55 years of age or older, to attend to that resident(s) medical and/or health needs, provided that: (1) the personal care attendant is: 21 years of age or older, registered with the Town of Putnam, and not paying the resident any form of rent; (2) the resident(s) in question has a note from his/her doctor stating that the condition of the resident is such that a personal care attendant is warranted; (3) if the resident in need of a personal care attendant is not in occupancy of his/her home for a period in excess of one month, unless extended by the Commission, the personal care attendant shall not live in the home. 



 
3. A proposed active adult housing development shall be a Common Interest Ownership Community as defined in Chapter 828 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 


 
4. A minimum of ten acres of contiguous land is required for establishment of an active adult housing development. 


 
5. The maximum number of units per acre is four. In computing the number of acres for the purposes of this paragraph, 75% of the area of the site consisting of soils regulated as inland wetlands or watercourses as well as 75% of slopes over 33% (as determined by two foot contour intervals) shall be excluded. 


 
6. No more than 40 percent of the lot area may be covered with impervious surfaces. 


 
7. Only single family detached units shall be allowed. 


 
8. The minimum living area of each dwelling unit, inclusive of bathrooms and exclusive of hallways, shall be 900 square feet. 


 
9. The maximum height of any building in an active adult housing development shall be 24 feet. 


 
10. The minimum distance between side walls of units shall be 20 feet. Where the distance between units is less than 24 feet, adjacent walls shall be angled to prevent parallel side walls. The minimum distance between rear walls of units shall be 40 feet. 


 
11. There shall be at least two parking spaces provided for each dwelling unit. At least one of these parking spaces shall be provided within an attached garage. A minimum of 25 percent of the units shall accommodate a two car attached garage. The Commission may require the provision of guest parking spaces in addition to aforementioned required parking. All unit driveways shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length. 


 
12. The Commission may require along the perimeter of the development a front buffer yard up to 40 feet in width and a side or rear buffer yard up to 40 feet in width. Front buffer yards shall be planted in accordance with the specifications of an “A” Buffer yard (40-foot width) and side or rear buffer yards shall be planted in accordance with the specification of a “B” Buffer yard (35-foot width). 


 
13. The purchase of a dwelling unit for investment purposes, i.e. by a person or entity not intending to occupy the unit, is prohibited except that a nonresident family member may purchase up to one unit for persons who will reside in the unit and who otherwise comply with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations. 


 
14. An owner of a dwelling unit may rent his or her unit for a term(s) of not less than one year provided that the tenant fully complies with all of the conditions of these Zoning Regulations. 


 
15. There shall be set aside open space area equal to 2,500 square feet per unit. Such open space area shall not include any watercourse, waterbody, wetland soils classified as poorly drained or very poorly drained or slopes in excess of 33% (as determined by two foot contour intervals). 


 
16. The Commission may require the provision of a walking trail system within the proposed development. Unpaved walking trails may be counted as open space under this Section of these Zoning Regulations. 


 
C.  General Requirements 
 
1. All development shall be served by public sewer and water. For the purpose of this Section, public water shall not include a community well. 


 
2. All utility wires shall be placed underground. 


 
3. A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued by the Building Inspector for more than 85 percent of the dwelling units of the approved development plan or of the approved stage of the development until all details of the approved development plan or of the approved stage of the development plan shall have been fully completed or bonded. 


 
 
Section 705 – Open Space Residential Development Subdivisions  
 
Open Space Residential Development (OSRD) subdivisions in accordance with these Regulations shall be encouraged within the town for all single-family residential subdivisions greater than four lots in the R-40 and AG-2 zoning districts. Open Space Residential Development shall mean a single-family residential subdivision in which the dwelling units are grouped together on reduced building lot areas, adjacent to permanently preserved open space. An Open Space Residential Development subdivision shall be the preferred method of subdivision development within the R-40 and AG-2 zoning districts wherever the following purposes would be served. 
 
A. Purpose and Applicability 
 
These regulations are intended to provide for increased flexibility, balanced by increased control, in the development of land so as to facilitate the preservation of open space, natural resources, recreational uses, and community character.  
 
1. The purposes of this Section are to: 


 
a. promote conservation of soils, wetlands, streams, large and healthy stands of trees, existing farmland, stone walls, and other significant natural and cultural features and landmarks, making the best use of the land through avoidance of unnecessary  regrading of the natural terrain; 


 
b. enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests, greenways, wildlife preserves, nature reservations or sanctuaries or other open spaces; 


 
c. enhance public recreation opportunities, including access to greenway networks and trails; 


 
d. encourage the permanent preservation of open space, agricultural lands, forest lands and other natural resources including aquifers, water bodies and wetlands, and historical and archaeological resources; 


 
e. encourage a less sprawling and more efficient form of development that consumes less open land and conforms to existing topography and natural features; 


 
f. maintain the traditional New England rural character and land use pattern in which small villages contrast with open space and farmlands; 


 
g. facilitate the construction of streets, utilities and public services in a more economical and efficient manner; 


 
h. ensure that residential developments are designed to minimize impacts to the natural features of the land, including wetlands, watercourses, forests, prime agricultural land, steep slopes, plants, wildlife, historically and culturally significant sites, scenic views, and rural character; 


 
i. encourage development out of view from the road, and promote alternatives to strip residential development lining roadsides in the town; and  


 
j. provide wildlife corridors connecting open spaces, needed by wildlife to ensure their survival. 


 
2. Applicability.  Any applicant applying for a single-family residential subdivision located in the R-40 and AG-2 districts, creating four or more building lots, shall apply for an OSRD subdivision under these Zoning Regulations, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the Planning Commission that a conventional single-family residential subdivision would better serve the purposes of this Section of the Regulation in the particular case.  
 
B.  General Density Limitations  
 
Except as otherwise provided in these Regulations, the overall density of an OSRD subdivision shall be no greater than what would be allowed in the district under conventional zoning.  The maximum number of units for an OSRD subdivision shall be determined by the Yield Plan Method, as follows.  
 
1. Under the Yield Plan Method, the applicant must provide a preliminary conceptual subdivision plan consisting of lot and street layouts conforming to the Zoning and Subdivision Regulations governing conventional subdivision lots.  Although such yield plans shall be conceptual in nature, and are not intended to involve significant engineering costs, they must be realistic and must not show potential house sites or streets in areas that would not ordinarily be legally permitted in a conventional subdivision layout. Consequently, yield plans must identify physical and other features that would limit or restrict the use of the parcel for development, including, but not limited to, topographic contours, at a contour interval of no less than ten (10) feet; wetlands and watercourses; 100-year floodplains (Flood Zones A, as shown on FEMA maps); slopes exceeding twenty-five percent (25%); rock outcrops; and easements and rights-of-way affecting the parcel.  On lots that would not be served by public sewerage or a centralized private sewage treatment facility, soil suitability for individual septic systems must be demonstrated. The Planning Commission may select a small percentage of lots (10 to 15%) to be tested, in areas considered to be marginal. If all tests on the sample lots meet applicable Public Health Code requirements, the applicant's other lots shall also be deemed suitable for septic systems, for the purpose of calculating total lot yield. However, if any of the sample lots fail, several others (of the Planning Commission’s choosing) shall be tested, until all the lots in a given sample pass. 
 
C.  Density Bonuses  
 
 The maximum number of lots allowed under this Section and/or under Section 401 may be increased in one of the following ways:  
 
1.  Open Space Maintenance Fund. The Planning Commission may allow a density bonus to generate additional income to the applicant for the express and sole purpose of endowing a permanent fund to offset continuing open space maintenance costs. The density bonus granted under this subsection shall be limited to fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of lots that would otherwise be allowed under this Section and/or under Section 401 as may be applicable. Any such density bonus shall be conditioned upon the provision by the owner of the parcel to be subdivided of an agreement to pay a fee into an open space maintenance fund to be established and maintained by either (1) the Town of Putnam or (2) the organization to be charged with the maintenance of the open space provided in the applicable subdivision plan. The amount of the fee shall be set by the following formula: [(CFMV/N) x (0.5 XL)], where CFMV is the cumulative fair market value of all of the buildable lots or parts resulting from the subdivision, N is the total number of buildable lots or parts resulting from the subdivision, and XL is the number of additional lots allowed by the density bonus. The value of CFMV shall, at the option of the applicant, be (1) the 100% value of all of the buildable lots or parts as determined by the Town Assessor for tax purposes as of the effective date of the subdivision approval, or (2) determined by a licensed Connecticut real estate appraiser chosen jointly by the applicant and the Planning Commission, in which case the applicant shall be responsible for any appraisal fees. 





 
2.  Other Open Space Dedications. A density bonus may be granted for the provision of excess open space, meaning the amount of any open space acreage that is greater than the minimum amount that would be required under this Section. The additional open space may be within the parcel to be subdivided or elsewhere within the Town of Putnam. For each five acres of excess open space accepted by the Planning Commission, one additional building lot shall be allowed, up to a maximum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of lots that would otherwise be allowed under this Section and/or under Section 401 as may be applicable. The decision whether to accept an applicant's offer 





to dedicate excess open space shall be at the discretion of the Planning Commission, which shall be guided by the recommendations contained in the Town's Plan of Conservation and Development and its determination as to the value of the excess land for any of the purposes described in this Section. 





 
D. Open Space Percentage and Use Limitations  
1. Minimum Percentage of Open Space. The minimum area of open space to be dedicated within an OSRD subdivision shall be forty percent (40%) of the total area of the parcel being subdivided. In addition, the area of open space to be dedicated must contain at least forty percent (40%) of the total area of the parcel that does not comprise wetlands, watercourses, floodplain areas, or slopes in excess of twenty-five percent (25%). As an example, if a parcel containing 100 acres is subdivided, and 30 acres of the parcel consists of wetlands, watercourses, floodplain areas, or slopes in excess of twenty-five percent (25%, the minimum open-space dedication will be 40 acres (100 acres x .40), and at least 28 acres (70 acres x .40) of the dedicated area must not be wetlands, watercourses or floodplain areas. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a subdivider from dedicating additional land consisting of wetlands, watercourses or floodplain areas, so long as the minimum amount of other types of land is also provided. For instance, in the example given above, the subdivider could dedicate 20 acres (not just 12 acres) of wetlands, so long as the dedication also included the minimum 28 acres of land that did not consist of wetlands, watercourses or floodplain areas. The Planning Commission encourages subdividers to dedicate or otherwise preserve as much of the wetlands, watercourses and floodplain areas as possible.  
2.  Use of Open Space Areas. The purposes for which open space areas are proposed shall be documented by the applicant. The required open space may be used, without restriction, for underground drainage fields for individual or community septic systems, provided that no portion of such systems protrudes above grade. Stormwater management ponds or basins may be included as part of the minimum required open space, as may land within the rights-of-way for underground utility lines. However, land within the rights-of way of overhead power lines or other surface utility lines shall not be included in the minimum required open space.  
 
E.  Design Standards  
 
 1. Dimensional Requirements. The dimensional requirements for building lots in an OSRD subdivision shall be as follows:  
. Minimum Lot Area: 25,000 square feet AG-2 District, 15,000 square feet R-40 District  

. Minimum Lot Frontage: 100 feet (25 feet for rear lots) 

. Minimum Front Yard: 40 feet 

. Minimum Side Yard: 20 feet  

. Minimum Rear Yard: 40 feet  

. Maximum Lot Coverage: 15%  

. Rear lots shall contain no less than 35,000 square feet, excluding the area of the accessway, and shall have a minimum driveway access width of twenty-five (25') feet.  


. All lots in an OSRD subdivision shall comply with the minimum buildable area requirements set forth in this Section except where the lot(s) is/are to be served by a community septic system in conformance with all Department of Energy and Environmental Protection and State Public Health Code regulations and requirements. 


 
2. Other Design Standards. In designing an OSRD subdivision, the applicant should consider the purposes set forth in this Section of these regulations and the following factors:  
 
a. Dwelling units shall be grouped allowing a portion of the parcel to remain open.  


 
b. The open space in any OSRD subdivision shall be located entirely within the subdivision and shall be in one contiguous piece, unless the Planning Commission finds that the purposes of this Section of these regulations would be more effectively served by separated parcels. The open space shall have suitable shape, dimension, character and location to promote the purposes specified in this Section of these regulations. 


 
c. When designing an OSRD subdivision the applicant must refer to the Town's Open Space Plan and plan the development in relation to the open space by first (1) locating the proposed open space; second, locating houses; third, locating roads; and, fourth, laying out lot configurations. 


 
d. Lots shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible, to achieve the following objectives (listed below in order of priority, as it is recognized that some may conflict with others on any given site):  


 
i. to place septic systems on the most suitable soils for subsurface wastewater disposal (in unsewered areas only); 


 
ii. within any woodland contained in the parcel, or along the far edges of the open fields adjacent to any woodland (to reduce impact upon agriculture, to provide summer shade and shelter from winter wind, and to enable new construction to be visually absorbed by natural landscape features);  


 
iii. in locations least likely to block or interrupt scenic vistas, as seen from the public roadway(s);  


 
iv. on the least fertile soils for agricultural uses, and in a manner that maximizes the usable area remaining for such agricultural use; and 


 
v. in locations where the greatest number of units could be designed to take maximum advantage of solar heating opportunities.  


 
e. Wherever possible, wetlands should be adjacent, contiguous or included in the Open Space.  


 
f. Underground utilities shall be required in OSRD subdivisions.  


 
g. Proposed lots and improvements should be designed and situated to minimize alteration of the natural site features to be preserved, including, but not limited to, stone walls.  


 
h. Proposed open space areas should include irreplaceable natural features located in the tract (such as, but not limited to stream beds, significant stands of trees, individual trees of significant size, and rock outcroppings).  


 
i. Open space intended for recreation or other active public use should be easily accessible to pedestrians, including, to the extent feasible, the handicapped and elderly.  


 
j. Individual lots should be arranged and situated to relate to surrounding properties, to improve the view from and the view of prospective home sites, and to minimize the area devoted to motor vehicle access and travel.  


 
3.  The Planning Commission may require the subdivider to refer any proposed OSRD subdivision to a professional landscape architect for review, comment and modification. The Planning Commission may modify any application so as to designate open space in locations other than those proposed, if it determines that such modified location(s) will better serve the purposes and satisfy the applicable criteria and standards of these Regulations, and of the Subdivision Regulations as recommended by the Planning Commission. In making such determination, the Planning Commission may also consider: 
 
a. the ownership of any existing open space on adjacent properties, or the proximity to non-adjacent open space which might reasonably interconnect with the proposed open space in the future; 


 
b. the proposed use of the open space for active or passive uses, and the extent of maintenance, supervision, or management required; 


 
c. the potential benefits which the open space might provide to residents of the Town or the State, if it were accessible to them; 


 
d. the size shape, topography, and character of the open space;  


 
e. the recommendations of the Putnam Plan of Conservation and Development and the Putnam Open Space Plan; and  


 
f. the reports or recommendations of any State, regional or Town agencies and officials.  


 
F.  Dedication of Open Space  
 
1.  Method of Dedication. The Planning Commission shall determine the most appropriate method of disposition after considering, among other things, the relationship of the subject area(s) and its specific characteristics to the Plan of Conservation and Development and the 
objectives cited in this Section; the desirability and suitability of public access and use and the scope of the subdivision proposal. The following disposition options may, be utilized by the Planning Commission: 
 
a. Perpetual dedication to the Town.  


 
b. Perpetual dedication to the State of Connecticut for open space or recreational purposes.  


 
c. Perpetual dedication to a land trust (at the option of the subdivider), as long as the land trust has agreed to accept the dedication.  


 
d. Dedication to a homeowners' association for open space or recreational purposes.  


 
e. Utilization of conservation easement(s), with or without public access.  


 
f. Utilization of a recreation easement, to the Town, State, or a private non-profit entity.  


 
g. Utilization of an agricultural use restriction easement, to the Town, State, or a private, non-profit entity.  


 
h. Private ownership for open space purposes with the appropriate taking of development rights.  


 
i. Any combination of the above or any suitable alternative approved by the Planning Commission. 


 
j. In any plan there shall be a recorded perpetual conservation easement to maintain the open space enforceable by the Town or a land trust, or designee of the Town.  


 
Any conservation easements or other open space covenants or restrictions shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission in form and content.  
 
2.  Agreement to Accept Ownership and Responsibility. If open space is to be owned by a private, not-for-profit conservation trust or corporation, the State of Connecticut, the Town of Putnam, or another entity, the application shall contain written evidence from the proposed entity satisfactory to the Planning Commission, stating that it is willing to accept ownership of and responsibility for the preservation and maintenance of the open space. Regardless of the manner of ownership of the open space, the instrument of conveyance must include provisions satisfactory in form and substance to the Planning Commission to ensure:  
  
a. The continued use of such land for the intended purposes;  


 
b. The continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of the open space requiring maintenance;  


 
c. When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such maintenance;  


 
d. Adequate insurance protection; and 


 
e. Recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation or otherwise.  


 
3. Recording of Documents.  At the time the approved OSRD subdivision plan is filed, the applicant shall record on the Putnam Land Records all legal documents required to ensure the aforesaid guarantees. 
 
4. Right to Enforce.  A right to enforce the Development Restriction shall be conveyed to: 
 
a.  The Town of Putnam, the State of Connecticut, or a private, not-for-profit conservation trust or corporation dedicated to conservation or preservation purposes in cases where the open space is dedicated to an association or corporation of lot owners, or a private or governmental entity; or 






 
b.  To the association or corporation of lot owners in cases where open space is dedicated to the Town of Putnam, the State of Connecticut, or a private, not-for-profit conservation trust or corporation. 






 
Any deed of conveyance shall contain language providing the holder of the Development Restriction with the right to obtain reimbursement for all costs it reasonably incurs, including attorney's fees, in any action to enforce the Development Restriction, in which it is the prevailing party.  
 
 5.  Association Requirements.  If the open space is to be dedicated to an association or corporation of lot owners, then the Planning Commission shall consider the following additional issues in determining whether to approve such proposal:  
 
a.  The increase in the burden imposed by the proposed OSRD subdivision on existing and proposed areas of open space. 
 
b. Any relevant recommendations of the Inland Wetlands Agency or any other public agencies or authorities regarding the most appropriate disposition and management of the open space.  
 
c. The level of access to the areas of open space proposed to be afforded to members of the general public. 
 
d.  The manner in which the association would manage the open space, and the extent to which proper management would be assured.  
 
In approving any proposed dedication of open space to an association or corporation, the Planning Commission, may set additional requirements to assure the proper and continuing management and oversight of the open space, including, but not limited to, the following,  
 
a.  Creation of the association or corporation prior to the sale of any lot; 
 
b.  Mandatory membership in the association or corporation by all original lot owners and any subsequent owner; and  
 
c.  Requiring the association or corporation to have the power to assess and collect from each lot owner a specified share of, and, where necessary, provide reserves for the costs associated with maintenance, repair, upkeep and insurance of the open space.  
 
G.  Procedures for Approval  
 
Except as otherwise provided in this Section, all OSRD subdivision plans and applications must meet the procedural and substantive requirements of the Town of Putnam Subdivision Regulations as determined by the Planning Commission and these Zoning Regulations.  
 
H.   Lots Deemed to Be Conforming  
 
Any lot with reduced area approved under the provisions of this Section shall be deemed to be a conforming lot notwithstanding the provisions of Section 401 of these Regulations; provided, however, that such lot meets the requirements of the other applicable sections of these Regulations. 
 
I. Water Supplied by a Water Company 
 
 No proposal for an OSRD subdivision using water supplied by a company incorporated on or after October 1, 1984, shall be approved by the Planning Commission unless such company has been issued a certificate pursuant to Section 16-262m of the General Statutes.   
 
 
Section 706 – Customary Home Occupation 
 
An Occupation or a Profession which: 
 
A. Is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit or in a building or other structure accessory to the dwelling unit for financial gain; 


 
B. Is carried on solely by a member or members of the immediate family; no outside employees; 


 
C. Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes, does not in any manner change or disrupt the residential character of the building, premise or neighborhood, and:  


 
D. Conforms to the following conditions: 


 
1.  Performed by the resident and immediate family members, using no more than 25% of the floor area of the residential dwelling or no more than 550 sq. ft. of accessory building and such activity shall not be visible from a lot line. 









 
2. Only products made on the premises may be sold at retail. 


 
3. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign larger than the one explained in Section 602, no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building. 


 
4. No vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare or offensive noise shall be produced. 


 
5. No hazardous, flammable or combustible liquids, material and or wastes located, stored, used, or displayed in association with uses of home occupation.  


 
6. No interference with radio and television reception in the vicinity. 


 
7. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. 


 
8. Any parking required for the conduct of such home occupation shall be provided off the street and not in a required front yard.  


 
E. No home occupation shall be conducted without first receiving a Special Permit from the Commission.  


 
F. No automotive use, as put forth in Section 210, shall be allowed as a home occupation. 


 
G. A Home Occupation Special Permit shall be granted with the following conditions: 


 
1. Said Special Permit may be revoked if, in the opinion of the Commission or its agent, any part of this Section 706 is being violated.  The Commission shall not revoke a permit without providing an opportunity for the permittee to appear before the Commission and be heard.  


 
2. Any change in the approved home occupation use to a different use category as listed in Section 304 shall require a new special permit.  


 
 
Section 707 – Adult-Oriented Establishments 
 A.  As used in this Section, the following words or phrases are defined as follows: 
 
“Adult Entertainment” means any exhibition which has as a significant or substantial portion the actual or simulated performance of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas by the removal of clothing, appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling or similar personal service offered to a customer; such exhibition shall include but not be limited to adult-oriented motion pictures, live performance, display, or dance. 
 
“Adult Oriented Establishment” shall include without limitation “adult bookstores”, “adult motion picture theaters”, “adult mini-motion picture theaters”, and further means any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or any premises where in an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or member when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. An “adult-oriented establishment” further includes, without limitation, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that are physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other terms of like import. 
 
“Adult Bookstore” means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes, sexual aids, toys, novelties or magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” as defined below, and may in conjunction therewith have facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment, as defined below, and including adult-oriented film, movies or live entertainment, for observation by patrons there in. 
 
“Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater” means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty(50) persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”, as defined below for observation by patrons therein. 
 
“Adult Motion Picture Theater” means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”, as defined below for observation by patrons therein. 
 
“Entertainer” means any persons who provide entertainment with an adult-oriented establishment as defined in this Section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is provided as an employee or an independent contractor. 
 
“Operator” means any persons, partnership or corporation operating, conducting or maintaining and adult-oriented establishment. 
 
“Sexual Activities” as used in these regulations, is not intended to include any medical publications or films or bona fide educational publications or films, nor does it include any art or photography publications which denote at least 25 per cent of the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects of art or photography.  Nor does this definition apply to any news periodical which reports or describes current events and which, from time to time, publishes photographs of nude or semi-nude persons in connection with the dissemination of the news.  Nor does this definition apply to publications or films which describe and report different cultures and which, form time to time, publish or show photographs or depictions or nude or semi-nude persons when describing cultures in which nudity or semi-nudity is indigenous to the population. 
 
“Specified Anatomical Areas” means: 1) human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola and/or 2) male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely opaquely covered. 
 
“Specified Sexual Activities” means human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; and fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts. 
 
B.  Adult entertainment / Adult oriented establishments  
 
 Adult entertainment / Adult oriented establishments may be permitted in the Highway Commercial (HC) District after the securing of a Special Permit in accordance with Sections 113 and 114 of these regulations provided that: 
 
1. Such establishments shall be a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from schools, churches, public and private parks and recreation lands, locations where minors congregate, municipal boundary lines, residentially zoned property and other adult-oriented establishments.  Measurements of distances shall be from the property lines of the uses, except in the separation from other adult uses, in which cases the distance shall be measured from structure to structure. 


 
2. Such establishments must be in stand-alone buildings and not part of any commercial plaza or complex. 


 
3. Such establishments shall be subject to special permit and site plan review by the Planning and Zoning Commission.  The following specific site plan criteria shall apply to any adult-oriented establishment: 


 
a. No exterior sign shall contain any photographic or artistic representation of specified anatomical areas. 



 
b. All building openings, entries, windows, doors etc. shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent view into the interior of the building form any public right of way or adjacent property. 



 
c. No adult use shall be established in any building of which any part is used for residential purposes. 



 
d. No residential use shall be established in any building of which any part is used as an adult use establishment. 



 
e. Stairways, sloping or rising paths and building entrances and exits shall be illuminated.  Spotlight type fixtures attached to the buildings should be avoided. 



 
f. Adequate lighting shall be provided on-site to ensure the safe movement of persons and vehicles and for security purposes, 



 
g. All parking must be provided solely on site and must be provided at a rate most consistent and comparable to the underlying activity (retail, restaurant, etc.) as stated in Section 601. 



 
Section 708 – Sale of Alcoholic Beverages 
 
A.  No building or premise shall be used for the sale of liquor, wine, beer or ale for off-site consumption under any permit issued by the Liquor Control Commission of the State of Connecticut unless the entrance to such building or premise is located outside of a 1,500 foot radius from any entrance to any other building or premise wherein alcoholic beverages are sold with a State permit.  Also, the building or premise shall be located outside of a 500 foot radius from the entrance of any school, house of worship, cemetery or library.  These requirements do not apply to any building or premise where alcoholic beverage was sold prior to the adoption of these Zoning Regulations.  
 
B.  Any permittee using any building or premises for the sale of said alcoholic beverages under said permits issued by the Liquor Control Commission of the State of Connecticut shall be permitted to move said place of business to another building or premises within the 1,500 foot radius as above described provided the entrance to said  other building or premises is located outside of a 750 foot radius from the entrance to any other building or premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold under any of said permits.  
 
 
Section 709 – Outdoor Dining Permits  
 
A.   General 
 
 Applicants may apply to the Commission for a special permit as listed in Section 114 for an outdoor dining permit for a restaurant, as follows: 
 
1.  Permit for 4 tables/16 seats or less. The applicant shall provide an adequate plan indicating locations of tables, chairs, etc., associated with the outdoor dining in relation to the location of buildings, sidewalks, parking spaces, and driveways. 





 
2.  Permit for more than 4 tables/16 seats.  The applicant shall provide the following information on a site plan of development prepared in accordance with Section 114 of these regulations: 





 
a. Location of building(s) 


 
b. Number of parking spaces required for entire restaurant, plus location of required parking 


 
c. Location of proposed outdoor dining, including surface upon which tables will be placed (for example, existing sidewalk, new flagstone patio, etc.) 


 
d. Number of tables/seats identified 


 
e. Written description of outdoor dining area amenities; for example, “15 wrought iron tables, 30 wrought iron chairs, an umbrella over each table, new awnings”, etc. 


 
B.  Conditions 
 
 The Commission may grant an approval of a special permit for seasonal outdoor dining areas for restaurants, subject to the following conditions: 
 
1. Outdoor dining area cannot be located on public property (Town sidewalk, right-of-way, etc.), unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commission with input from the Board of Selectmen or other controlling Town agency, including comments from Fire and Police, that such use will not constitute a public hazard. 


 
2. Outdoor dining may be allowed on porches or decks, provided all of the other conditions are met. 


 
3. Any non-vegetative shading devices shall be of a nonpermanent type (umbrellas, retractable awnings, etc.) and shall be safely anchored. 


 
4. Areas on which required parking exists cannot be used for outdoor dining, unless adequate alternative parking is provided. 


 
5. Adequate trash receptacles must be provided, and the restaurant is responsible for cleanup of all trash generated from the outdoor dining (including the restaurant site and surrounding areas). 


 
6. Tables must be located in such a manner as to maintain access to the building for emergency services. 


 
7. No outside audio systems are permitted. 


 
8. In addition to required parking for indoor seating, outdoor dining requires one parking space for every 4 seats. 


 
9. All tables, chairs, trash receptacles, etc., shall be removed at the end of each outdoor dining season or daily in the situation where public walkways are used. 


 
10. Outdoor dining area cannot exceed 4 tables/16 seats unless there are waitpersons to serve patrons.  


 
11. Where all food service is conducted by waitpersons, outdoor dining area cannot exceed 25% of the floor area of the indoor dining area; and cannot exceed 25% of the number of tables/seats within the indoor dining area. 


 
12. Any signage placed on outdoor umbrellas, awnings or chairs shall be limited to the name of the establishment. 


 
 
Section 710 – Residue Facilities 
 
A.  Standards for Residue Facilities 
 
Residue Facilities shall be located on sites that 1. are at least 60 acres in size, 2. are located along the Quinebaug River, and 3. either (1) are sites formerly used as a municipal solid waste facility, or (2) are contiguous to such a site and are to be used to expand or extend a Residue Facility already located on such a site.  
 
1.  No land shall be considered as contiguous to or eligible for inclusion in a Residue Facility, unless said land was contiguous to the site of the municipal solid waste facility as the property lines for said facility existed and for said contiguous site existed as of January 18, 1994.  It being the intention of this Section not to change any substantive rights but to simply clarify the existing language of Section 710.A. above. 


 
B. Except as set forth in Paragraph F. below, all earth removal necessary or incidental to the construction or operation of the Residue Facility shall be pursuant to a plan of operation submitted as part of the Residue Facility Special Permit application, shall include the details required under Section 607 of the Zoning Regulations, and shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 607 of the Zoning Regulations. 


 
1. The issuance of a special Permit for the use of a site as a Residue Facility shall constitute the only Special Permit necessary for earth removal contemplated in the plans submitted with the application and necessary or incidental to the construction or operation of the Residue Facility.  Such earth removal shall be permitted for the active life of the Residue Facility, without the need for renewal every three years.  Earth removal on such a site that is not necessary or incidental to such construction or operation of the Residue Facility shall be conducted only in accordance with the other provisions of Section 607. 


 
C. No building to be used as part of the Residue Facility shall be located within 200 feet of the front lot line of the site.  


 
D. No parking spaces to be used as part of the Residue Facility shall be located within 50 feet of the lot line of the site.  


 
E. All natural vegetation shall be maintained within a 50 foot deep buffer area at the front lot line of the site (except that additional vegetation may be planted as additional screening within the buffer area, and except that vegetation may be disturbed so that fencing may be installed within the 50 foot buffer area). 


 
F. If a Residue Facility is expanded to include contiguous sites, the standards of Section 401 of the Zoning Regulations shall apply as though no property line exists between such contiguous sites.  Notwithstanding the third standard of Section 607 Subsection E.3., excavation shall be permitted to within (30) feet of a property line (but not a street), provided that the plans for the Residue Facility provide for 1.  replacing removed materials within one hundred (100) feet of the property line with residue and cover material to a level at least as high as the ground level prior to the excavation (except for a perimeter swale surrounding the Residue Facility), 2.  a fifty (50) foot buffer between the outermost deposit of residue and cover material and the property line,  3. a thirty (30) foot buffer between the edge of the swale and the property line, 4. establishment of vegetation screening throughout said thirty foot buffer once the construction of the swale is completed, and 5. maintenance of such screening during the active operation of the Residue Facility.  


 
G. No incinerator or similar facility shall be allowed under a Residue Facility special permit or as a use accessory to a Residue Facilities special permit. 


 
H. Any change in location of a structure or facility or the erection or construction of any structure or facility not shown in the special permit plans and related documents as submitted to the Putnam Zoning Commission shall require site plan review upon a site plan satisfactory to the Zoning Commission and containing those items which the Commission may require pursuant to Sections 113 and 114 of these Zoning Regulations. 


 
I. The construction of an access road or the installation of standard utilities such as power, sewer and water beyond the site of the Residue Facility shall be permitted as of right provided such activities do not involve any off-site storage or disposal of residue and further provided that such proposed activities are in compliance with these regulations. 


 
J. Only land specifically described in the special permit or the application therefore issued pursuant to this Section and subject of a DEEP permit may be used for the disposal or Residue at a Residue Facility.  


 
K. A special permit issued under this Section (including one issued prior to the effective date of this paragraph K) authorizes the construction and complete operation of such Residue Facility and the following related uses, subject to the provisions of this Section: 


 
1. One story office buildings and temporary construction and office trailers not to exceed 5,000 square feet in total at any one time.  


 
2. Construction equipment garage and maintenance building not to exceed 3,000 square feet.  


 
3. Fuel storage tank not to exceed 10,000 gallons and related pump facilities.  


 
4. Water well pump houses. 


 
5. Wheel wash and truck wash facilities for not more than 4 trucks.  


 
6. Electrical service and utility sheds. 


 
7. Leachate handling and treatment facilities such as pumping stations, holding and storage tanks, equalization tanks, mixing and control equipment, and structures not to exceed 2,000 square feet, to house such facilities. 


 
8. Groundwater monitoring wells and appurtenances.  


 
9. Truck scales and scale houses 


 
10. Gravel conveyor belt and screening equipment for on-site material, provided that the resulting materials are not trucked off-site using local roads, and subject to all non-financial requirements of this Section. 


 
 
Section 711 – Trailers, Motor Homes, Boats and Recreational Vehicles 
 
A trailer, motor home, boat, boat trailer or recreational vehicle owned by the occupant of the premises, may be stored on the property provided that: 
 
A. No trailer, motor home, boat, boat trailer or recreational vehicle may be used for any commercial and/or business use and/or storage.  This does not include temporary construction trailers located on a site during the site’s construction phase. 


 
B. No trailer, motor home, boat or recreational vehicle shall be parked and occupied for more than seventy-two (72) hours, except by a permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.  Such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed two (2) weeks, said vehicle to be parked in side or rear yard only.  


 
C. Any Person who shall violate any of the provisions above shall upon conviction, be subjected to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100) for each violation.  Each day failing to comply with the above provisions shall be deemed to constitute a separate violation. 


 
 
Section 712 – Wireless Communication 
 
A.  Purpose 
 
To provide for the location of wireless communication towers, antennas and facilities while protecting neighborhoods and minimizing adverse visual and operational effects through careful design, siting and screening consistent with the provisions of the 1996 Telecommunications Act.  This Section of the Zoning Regulations is consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 in that it does not discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services, or regulate the placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with Federal Communications Commission regulations (FCC regulations) concerning such emissions.  Other specific wireless telecommunication purposes are as follows: 
 
1. To encourage use of nonresidential buildings and structures, such as water storage tanks.  


 
2. To require joint use of new or existing towers and facilities whenever possible. 


 
3. To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of towers. 


 
4. To accommodate the need for wireless communication towers and antennas while regulating their location and number.  


 
5. To protect historic and residential areas from potential adverse impacts of wireless communication facilities. 


 
6. To encourage suitable design measures to minimize adverse visual effects of wireless communication facilities.  


 
7. To reduce the number of towers and/or antennas needed in the future. 


 
B.  Definitions 
 
For the purposes of this Section, the following words shall have the following definitions: 
 
Antenna is to be defined as a device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves.  Examples include, but are not limited to whip, panel and dish antenna. 
 
Telecommunications tower is defined as a structure that is intended solely to support equipment used to receive and/or transmit electromagnetic waves.  Design examples of towers include, but are not limited to, self-supporting lattice, guide (guy-wire) and monopole. 
 
Wireless telecommunication facility includes the equipment and structures involved in receiving or transmitting electromagnetic waves associated with wireless telecommunication services, together with all cabinets, buildings, transformers and associated structures.  
 
Wireless telecommunication services are services associated with the transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications.  These services may include by way of example, but not limited to, cellular personal communications, specialized, mobilized, radio and paging.  
 
C.  Siting Preferences 
 
 The general order of preference for alternative facility locations shall range from A as the most preferred to E as the least preferred: 
 
1. On existing or approved towers. 


 
2. On existing structures such as nonresidential buildings/facades, water towers/tanks, utility poles, chimneys, bridges, grain elevators, and silos, or in structures such as steeples, clock and bell towers. 


 
3. On new towers located on property occupied by one or more existing towers. This recognizes an already proven good site, and implies that clustering or tower “farming” is more desirable than scattering or dispersal.  However, with lower power PCS, which can require more antennas for coverage, clustering may not necessarily provide seamless coverage.  


 
4. On new towers located in commercial or industrial zones. 


 
5. On new towers located in residential zones by special permit.  


 
D.  General Standards 
 
1. The wireless telecommunication facility standards enumerated below shall be followed: 


 
a.  The tower and/or antenna shall be erected to the minimum height necessary to satisfy the technical requirements of the telecommunications facility except as stated in 4.a.1 Documentation of the minimum height needed, prepared by a licensed telecommunication systems engineer, shall accompany an application.  The Commission may require the submission of propagation modeling results to facilitate its review of tower height. 



 
2.  In all residential and agricultural zones, accessory structures such as radio and television transmission relay or receiving, wireless telecommunication towers and/or antennas shall be allowed provided that the resulting total height (including support structures) is not greater than the maximum allowable building height measured from ground level, and provided that the height of the structure is less than its distance from any property line.  Structures more than the maximum allowable building height, but less than 100 feet above existing mean 
grade adjacent to the base of the facility may be allowed by Special Permit provided that the minimum site size shall be the minimum lot size required for a zoning district, and the site shall be of sufficient size to accommodate a setback from all adjoining property lines equal to the maximum height of the tower and all appendages plus twenty five (25) feet, or the provisions of Subsection E.1.b. of this Section, following, whichever is greater. 
 
a. A tower must comply with the setback requirements of the zone in which it is located, or be set back from all property lines a distance equal to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the height of the tower, whichever is greater.  


 
b. A telecommunication facility may be considered as either a principal or accessory use in an industrial or commercial zone, or as a principal use in a residential or agricultural zone.  The minimum lot area for the construction of a new tower shall be that of the zone in which it is located.  More than one tower on a lot may be permitted if all setbacks, design, and landscape requirements are met for each tower.  A telecommunications facility may be located on leased land as long as there is adequate ingress and egress to the site for service vehicles, and such access is documented in a formal written lease which would run for either the estimated useful life of the improvements, or provide for a mechanism satisfactory to the Commission for removal of all improvements at the termination of the lease.  The formal notice of lease shall be filed in the land records of the Town, and the lease shall provide the name of the individual or entity responsible for responding to emergency conditions, which information shall be continuously updated by the lessee and filed with the Town of Putnam Building Department on an ongoing basis. 


 
c. All towers in a residential zone shall be a monopole design unless a design which is less intrusive on the existing neighborhood is approved by the Commission.  The Commission may approve an alternate design if the Commission finds it s more in keeping with the existing neighborhood and less likely to affect property values, aesthetics and safety. 


 
d. Towers not requiring Federal Aeronautics Administration (FAA) painting or markings shall be painted a non-contrasting blue, gray, or other neutral color. 


 
e. No lights or illumination shall be permitted unless required by the FAA. 


 
f. No signs or advertising shall be permitted on any tower or antenna, except that “no trespassing,” “warning,” and ownership signs are permitted at ground level or no higher than seven (7) feet from ground level. 


 
g. The proposed support structure shall be required to accommodate a minimum of three users unless it is determined to be technically unfeasible based upon information submitted by the applicant and verified by the Commission.  These users shall include other wireless communication companies, local police, fire, and ambulance companies. 


 
h. A proposed tower shall be designed and constructed to all applicable standards of the American National Standards Institutes (ANSI), as amended. 


 
i. The Commission may require the use of Section 16-50aa of the Connecticut General Statutes to promote tower sharing if the Commission finds that such sharing shall lessen the overall impact of the proposed facility on the Town. 


 
j. Any telecommunication tower or telecommunications antenna located in a general business, highway commercial, downtown commercial or industrial zone, shall be a Special Permit rather than permitted use if the actual tower shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of any agricultural or residential use zone. 


 
E.  Permitted and Special Permit Uses 
 
The following uses generally pose a minimum adverse visual effect and shall be deemed permitted uses in all zoning districts subject to the standards in these regulations.  All towers located in a residential or agricultural zone in excess of the maximum allowable building height in that zone shall require a Special Permit. 
 
1.  Wireless telecommunication facilities where the antenna is mounted on the rooftop or façade of a commercial or industrial building, provided the following standards are met. 
 
a. No change is made to the height of the building. 


 
b. Panel antennas shall not exceed eighty (80) inches in height by twenty four (24) inches in width; whip antennas shall not exceed forty eight (48) inches in height; and dish antennas shall not exceed thirty six (36) inches in diameter. 


 
c. Equipment cabinets and sheds shall meet the requirements of these regulations.  


 
d. Facilities shall be of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building, and shall blend into the existing architecture to the extent possible. 


 
e. Façade mounted antennas shall not protrude above the building structure and shall not project more than three (3) feet beyond the wall or façade. 


 
f. Roof mounted antennas shall not exceed the highest point of the rooftop by more than ten (10) feet. 


 
g. Roof mounted antennas shall be set back from the roof edge a minimum of ten (10) feet or ten (10) percent of the roof in width, whichever is greater.  


 
h. Roof mounted antennas shall not occupy more than twenty five (25) percent of the roof area in residential zones, and fifty (50) percent in all other zones.  


 
i. For any roof installation other than a flat roof, a signed architects or engineers rendering shall be required, which rendering shall be accompanied by a certification of licensed architect or engineer that he has fully examined the subject premises and that the proposed facility can be attached to the subject premises in a safe manner, such that the installation shall not create potential hazard in high winds or otherwise, either to the occupant of the structure or to the occupants of any joining structure, street or passageway. 


 
2. Wireless telecommunication facilities where the antenna is mounted on existing towers, water towers/tanks, utility poles, chimneys, bridges, grain elevators, and silos, or in steeple, clock or bell towers, provided the following standards are met: 
 
a. No change is made to the height of the structure. 




 
b. Panel antennas shall not exceed eighty (80) inches in height by twenty four (24) inches in width; whip antennas shall not exceed forty eight inches in height; and dish antennas shall not exceed thirty six (36) inches in diameter. 


 
c. Equipment cabinets and sheds shall meet the requirements of these regulations.  


 
d. Facilities shall be of material or color which matches the exterior of the structure and shall blend into the existing architecture of the structure to the extent possible.  


 
3.  Wireless telecommunication facilities where a tower is located on property occupied by one or more towers erected prior to the effective date of these telecommunications zoning amendments, provided the following standards are met: 
 
a. The height of the tower to be erected shall not exceed the height of the tallest tower on the property. 





 
b. All attempts are made to co-locate the antenna on existing towers.  


 
c. Equipment cabinets and sheds shall meet the requirements of these regulations.  


 
4.  All other placement of wireless communication facilities shall comply with the Special Permit requirements found in these regulations and the following:  
 
a. All of the plans and information required for a permitted use wireless telecommunications facility site plan required in this Section of these Regulations.  


 
b. A view shed analysis showing all areas from which the tower would be visible, and if requested by the Commission, a simulation of the proposed site in order to help the Commission determine the visual impacts associated with the proposal. 


 
c. Documentation prepared by a licensed telecommunications system engineer that no existing or planned tower or other structure can accommodate the applicant’s antenna.  For tall structures located within one quarter mile radius of the proposed site, documentation that the owners of these locations have been contacted and have denied permission to install the antenna on these structures for other than economic reasons.  


 
d. Proximity of the tower to residential structures. 


 
e. Nature of use on adjacent and nearby properties within 1,000 feet. 


 
f. Surrounding topography within 1,000 feet at contour intervals note exceeding ten (10) feet. 


 
g. Design of the tower with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.  


 
E.  Site Plan Requirements 
 
All applications to develop a wireless telecommunications facility as a permitted use or special permit shall meet the site plan requirements listed in Section 114 of these regulations.  In addition, the following information shall be submitted for each application where applicable.  The Commission may require independent engineering/technical review of submitted materials at the applicant’s expense.  
 
1. A map indicating the service area of the proposed wireless communications site.  The site map shall be on a scale not grater than 1” = 40’, and certified to an A-2 standard.  A map indicating the extent of the providers existing and planned coverage within the Town of Putnam, and a map indicating the search radius for the proposed wireless telecommunications site, including the location of tall structures within one quarter mile of the proposed site.  


 
2. A report from a licensed telecommunication systems engineer indicating why the proposed site location is necessary to satisfy its function in the applicant’s proposed wireless telecommunications system. 


 
3. A plan showing where and how the proposed antenna will be affixed to a particular building or structure. 


 
4. Details of all proposed shielding and details of material including color.  


 
5. Elevations of all proposed shielding and details of material including color. 


 
6. An elevation of all proposed equipment buildings, boxes or cabinets.  Details of all proposed fencing, including color. 


 
7. Tower base elevation and height of tower. 


 
8. A design drawing, including cross section and elevation, of all proposed towers. A description of the tower’s capacity, including the number and type of antennas it can accommodate as well as the proposed location of all mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separating distances between antennas.  The design shall indicate how the tower will collapse without encroaching upon any adjoining property if failure occurs. 


 
9. A report from a licensed telecommunication systems engineer indicating that the proposed wireless telecommunications facility will comply with the FCC radio frequency emission standards and that the installation will not interfere with public safety communications.  


 
10. All proposed landscaping, if appropriate, with a list of plant materials. 


 
11. Proposed access to the site. 


 
12. Detailed analysis of alternative sites, structures, and access and antennas as provided by the applicant.  Particular attention will be placed upon the siting preferences found in Subsection C. of this Section of these regulations. 


 
13. Detailed propagation and antenna separation analysis relative to tower height. 


 
14. Tower sharing or co-location to facilitate the telecommunication needs of municipalities and other entities in order to reduce the need to construct additional towers.  The Commission reserves the right to require the applicant to utilize the provisions of Section 16-50aa of the Connecticut General Statues to achieve tower sharing. 


 
15. Assessment of tower structure type. 


 
16. Assessment of design characteristics/architectural treatments that mitigate, reduce or eliminate visual impacts on adjacent areas.  


 
17. If located on/or within one quarter mile radius of a property listed on the National Register of Historic Places, preservation of the historic and/or architectural archeological character of the landscape or any structure. 


 
18. Consideration of future use or re-use of the site, with the provisions for facility removal and site restoration. 


 
19. The owner of the facility shall keep the Town notified annually as to the current contact person for maintenance purposes.  


 
G.  Ancillary Buildings 
 
 All ancillary buildings associated with wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with the following:  
 
1. Each building shall not contain more than two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area or be more than eight (8) feet in height. 


 
2. Each building shall comply with the setback requirements for accessory buildings for the zoning district in which it is located.  


 
3. If located on the roof of a building, it shall be designed to blend with the color and design of the building to the extent possible. 


 
4. All ground level buildings, boxes, or cabinets shall be surrounded by an eight (8) feet high chain link or comparable fence and shall be planted with evergreen shrubs and trees at least six (6) feet high or a density sufficient to obscure lights and other visually objectionable items, satisfactory to the Commission as will safeguard or enhance the character of the adjoining properties.  


 
H.  Abandonment 
 
A wireless telecommunication facility not in use for twelve (12) consecutive months shall be removed by the facility owner at their expense.  This removal shall occur within ninety (90) days of the end of such twelve (12) month period.  The Commission shall require a bond to the Town of Putnam, to guarantee removal.  If there are two or more users of a single tower, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease utilizing the tower.  As part of the submission of any application, the applicant shall submit a cost removal estimate signed by a professional architect or engineer licensed to do business in the State of Connecticut certifying an amount which shall be sufficient to provide for the removal and disposition of any and all facilities to be constructed on the site and adjusted appropriately for future inflation such that the figures shall be good for a twenty year (20) installation. 
 
I.  Telecommunication Site Plan Review Fee 
 
Telecommunications site plan review fee is $250.00 
 
J.    Insurance 
 
Any facility to be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any public building, road, or other facility used by the general public shall be required to maintain a certificate of insurance on file with the Town Building and Zoning Office in an amount not less than $500,000. 
 
 
 
Article VIII 
Definitions  
 
Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in these regulations shall carry their normal and customary definitions.  Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words used in the plural shall include the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.  Except as otherwise defined by Connecticut Judicial Opinions, the word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.  The word “may” is permissive and discretionary.  The word “lot” shall include the words “piece” and “parcel.”  The words “District,” “zoning district” and “district” have the same meaning.  The phrase “used for” shall include the phrases “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,” “maintained for” and “occupied for.”  The phrase “these regulations” shall refer to the entire Zoning Regulations.   
 
 
A 
 
Abandonment – means discontinued use of any structure or land for a period of one (1) year.  However, abandonment may not be found or be determined solely as a result of nonuse for a specified period of time without regard to the intent of the property owner to maintain that use.  A structure shall be considered abandoned if it is fully or partial demolished or otherwise physically altered to bring it into conformity with these regulations.  The use of a structure or land shall be considered abandoned if the activity or operation ceases, the premises are vacated, machinery, equipment or fixtures are removed, or other action terminating the use is taken. to cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume, but excluding temporary or short-term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of remodeling, maintaining, or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility, or during normal periods of vacation or seasonal closure. 
 
Accessory Use or Structure – means a building, structure or use on the same lot with a principal use or structure, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure, provided the building, structure or use shall be constructed after or concurrently with the principal structure. 
 
Active Adult Housing – means a housing development where 100 percent of all dwelling units fully comply with the provisions of the United States Fair Housing Act as amended, as it pertains to “housing for older persons.” This includes compliance with any and all rules promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development which govern the implementation of such Act. 
 
Adaptive Re-Use – means the conversion of existing buildings into modern and functional facilities while retaining historic architectural features and original structure details, to the extent feasible. 
 
Administrative Order – means any order, regulation, or specification issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Zoning Commission acting in an administrative capacity acting in accordance with the Zoning Regulations, as amended.  
 
Adult Uses (see Section 707, Adult Uses) 
 
Adult Day Care Center (also known as “adult day center,” “adult day health center,” or “senior day care center”) – means a facility where seniors and disabled adults can go during the day if they cannot, or do not wish to, be home alone. An adult day care center provides supervision, social and recreational activities, personal care, lunch and snacks, and often medical care and health monitoring from a nurse on the premises. Most attendees need some supervision or medical services and are able to travel to the center during the day. Family members care for them at night and on weekends. This definition does not include facilities that provide overnight care and accommodations.  
 
Agent – means the Zoning Enforcement Officer.  
 
Agriculture – means the cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity, including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock, including horses, bees, poultry, and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan shellfish or fish; the operation, management, conservation, improvement or maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris left by storm, as an incident to such farming operations; the production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes; handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or delivering to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in the case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for market or for direct sale. 
 
Alteration – means a change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or structures of any nature, storage of materials, fences or barriers of any nature, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling or clearing of vegetation. 
 
Ambulatory Health Care Facility – means a building used by health care professionals for the treatment and examination of patients, provided that no overnight patients shall be kept on the premises. Includes, but is not limited to the following:  
 
• Health Maintenance Organizations;  

• Out-patient Clinics;  

• Diagnostic Centers;  

• Ambulatory Surgical Facilities;  

• Physicians, Dentists, and Opticians Offices;  

• Public Health Clinics;  

• Community Mental Health Centers; and  

• Physical Rehabilitation Facilities  


 
Antenna – means a device used to collect or transmit telecommunications or radio signals. Devices shall be limited to dish antennas (also known as microwave antennas), whip antennas (also known as Omni-directional antennas) and panel antennas.  
 
Apartment House – means a structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 
 
Assisted Living Residential Facility – means a residential facility which provides assisted living services by a Connecticut licensed assisted living services agency in a managed residential community, as defined, under regulations of the State of Connecticut Department of Public Health, including the provision of supportive services to assist those in need of assistance in the activities of daily living. 
 
Auto Accessory Business – means a building and land where automobile parts and supplies are sold at retail, but no repair services are provided. 
 
Auto Body Repair Shop – means any establishment, garage or work areas enclosed within a building where repairs are made or caused to be made to motor vehicle bodies, including fenders, bumpers and similar components of motor vehicle bodies, but does not include the storage of parts or vehicles or the cannibalization of parts.  
 
Auto, Recreational Vehicle, or Boat Sales Area – means an open area or lot used for the display, sale, or rental of new or used motor vehicles, recreation vehicles, or boats in operable condition, and where no major repair work is done.  
 
Auto Repair Station – means buildings and land where gasoline and other automobile parts and supplies are sold at retail and where major auto repairs are conducted. (See also Major Auto Repairs.)  
 
Auto Service Station – means buildings and land areas where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, or automobile accessories and commercial convenience items are supplied and dispensed at retail and where minor auto repairs are conducted. (See also Minor Auto Repairs.)  
 
Auto Wrecking – means the dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles or recreation vehicles, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts.  
 
B 
 
Basement – means that portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade.     
 
Bed and Breakfast Inn – means a dwelling in which, for compensation, sleeping accommodations are provided to transient guests in not more than five (5) guest rooms under management and operation of the occupants of the dwelling. A bed and breakfast inn may include the provision of meals for overnight guests only.  
 
Board – means the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
 
Boarding or Rooming House – means a building containing a single owner-occupied dwelling unit where lodging is provided with or without meals for two (2) or more persons but not more than six (6) persons who are not members of the operator's family, and by prearrangement for definite periods of time and for compensation, whether direct or indirect, but not to include rest homes or homes for the aged. 
 
Brewpub – means a restaurant/microbrewery that sells the majority of the beer it produces on site. The beer shall be brewed primarily for sale and consumption in the adjacent restaurant and/or bar within the same structure.  
 
Buffer Strip – means land which may be a part of the minimum setback distance and which is free of any principal or accessory building, parking, outdoor storage, or any use other than open space.  
 
Buildable Area – means the area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open space requirements of the zoning regulation have been met. 
 
Building – means any structure having a roof supported by column or walls for the housing or enclosure of any persons, animals, process equipment, goods or materials of any kind of nature.  A mobile home or trailer shall not be construed as a building in this definition. 
 
Building, Accessory – means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building and which is located on the same lot as the principal building. 
 
Building Area – means the building area is the aggregate or maximum horizontal cross section area of the main building on a lot, excluding cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys, or similar appurtenances projecting not more than 30 inches.  
 
Building Coverage – means the total ground area of a site occupied by any building or structure as measured from the outside of its surrounding external walls or supporting members.  
  
Building Height – means the vertical distance from the average finished ground level at the building walls to the highest point of the roof or to the average height between the eaves and the ridge for a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. For buildings which have more than one roof line, height requirements shall be measured to the highest roof.  Chimneys, spires, towers, and similar projection not intended for human occupancy shall not be included in the height, provided that any of such projections does not have an aggregate area greater than 25 percent of the roof area.  
 
Building Line – means a line generally parallel to a lot line at the minimum distance required for the zoning district in which the lot is located, which is also known as the setback line.  The front, rear and two side building lines, establish the area within the principal structure must be erected.  
 
Building Permit – means the permit required by law, issued by the Building Officer, for the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure. 
 
Building, Principal – means a building in which is conducted the principal uses of the lot on which it is situated.  
 
Business Office – means a business establishment which does not offer, on the premises, a product or merchandise for sale to the public but offers a service to the public. However, personal services such as barber and beauty shops and repair services are not to be included within the definition of business offices.  
 
Business Services – means establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as but not limited to, advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment services; management and consulting services; protective services, equipment rental and leasing; commercial research, development , and testing; photo finishing; and personal supply services. 
 
 
C 
 
Cabin – means a building having a design or character suitable for seasonal or temporary living purposes. 
 
Cafe – means a licensed establishment in the business of selling non-alcoholic beverages (such as coffee) and food for consumption on or off the premises and which contains seating for twenty-five (25) persons or less. 
 
Camp – means an area of land under the same ownership on which is located a cabin or other shelter suitable for seasonal or temporary living purposes. 
 
Camp Ground – means a tract of land, used for commercial purposes, with cabins, tent sites, camp or tent trailer sites, motor home sites or other accommodations of the design or character suitable for seasonal or temporary recreational living purposes.  Excluding mobile homes, boarding rooms, house, tourist homes, motels, or hotels. 
 
Car Wash – means a building or portion thereof where automobiles are cleaned, using brushes, blowers, steam cleaning equipment, or other device.  
 
Cellar – see “basement.” 
 
Certificate of Occupancy – means a statement signed by the Building Official and Zoning Enforcement Agent, setting forth either that a building or structure complies with the Zoning Regulations or that a building, structure or parcel of land may lawfully be employed for specified uses, or both. 
 
Church – means a building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship, together with all accessory buildings and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose.   The term “Church” includes chapels, cathedrals, temples, synagogues, mosques, and similar designations, as well as parish houses, and related accessory uses.  
 
Club – means an organization of persons incorporated pursuant to provisions of the non-stock or non-profit corporations law or the benevolent orders law, which is the owner, lessee or occupant of an establishment operated solely for a recreational, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purpose but not for financial gain, and includes the establishment so operated. A club shall cater only to its members or guests accompanying them.  A “member of a club” is a person who, whether as a charter member or admitted in agreement with the by-laws of the club, has become a bona fide member thereof, who maintains his membership by payment of his annual dues in a bona fide manner in accordance with such by-laws, and whose name and address are entered on the list of membership.  
 
Co-Located Wireless Telecommunication Facilities – means telecommunication facilities which utilize existing towers, buildings or other structures for the placement of antennas and do not require the construction of a new communications tower.  
 
Commission – means the Zoning Commission. 
 
Communications Tower – means a structure that is intended to support antennas in the provisions of wireless telecommunication services. Such structures shall be limited to monopoles and lattice towers.  
 
Community Center – means a building used for recreational, social, athletic, educational and cultural activities, owned and operated by a governmental or non-profit group or agency.   
 
Commercial Kennel – means any kennel maintained as a business for boarding or grooming of cats and dogs as defined in CGS Section 22-327. 
 
Commercial Use – means an activity involving the sale of goods or services carried out for profit. 
 
Condominium – means a building or group of buildings in which units are individually owned or occupied and the structure(s), common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.  Condominium is a type of ownership. 
 
Condominium Conversion – means the conversion of the ownership of three (3) or more units in a residential housing project that are or were previously occupied as rental units from a single ownership to an ownership in which the residential units may be sold individually.  
 
Conference Center – means a business designed and built almost exclusively to host conferences, exhibitions, large meetings, or training sessions.  
 
Convalescent Home – means an extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved by the State of Connecticut to provide health care under medical supervision for twenty-four or more consecutive hours to two or more patients not a member of the family which resides on the premises.  
 
Convent/Monastery – means a building or group of buildings designed to provide group housing for persons under religious vows or orders who are part of a non-profit tax exempt group or religious organization who are duly organized and registered under the laws of the State of Connecticut living together as a single housekeeping unit, and wherein the occupants are not billed for rent or room and board.   
 
Convenience Store – means a general merchandise and grocery store usually with less than 3,000 square feet of gross floor area and open for business for extended hours. A Convenience Store generally attracts patrons because of the speed in which items may be purchased and because of the extended hours for which such stores are open for business. 
 
Court – means any open space, other than a yard, that is on the same lot with and is bounded on two or more sides by the wall of a building. 
 
Customary Home Occupation – means any activity carried out for gain by the homeowner which is clearly incidental to the residential use of the property and conducted entirely within the owner’s dwelling unit or in a building or other structure accessory to the dwelling unit. 
 
 
D 
  
Date of Receipt – means the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting of such Commission immediately following the date of submission of the application, request or appeal, or thirty-five (35) days from the date of application, request or appeal, whichever is sooner – if there is any conflict between this provision and the requirements of 8-7d of the General Statutes, the provisions of the General Statutes as amended shall prevail. 
 
Day Care Center, Child – means a facility which offers or provides a program of supplementary care to more than twelve related or unrelated children outside their own homes on a regular basis for a part of the twenty-four hours in one or more days in the week.  
 
Day Care, Family – means any dwelling unit where nine (9) or fewer children not related by blood, adoption, or marriage to the person who resides in and maintains the home are received for care, protection, and guidance during only part of the twenty-four (24) hour day, on a regular basis, for a minimum of ten (10) hours per week, and that complies with the requirements of the State of Connecticut. Every family day care home shall have a certificate of occupancy. 
 
Day Care Home, Group – means a private family home which offers or provides a program of supplementary care to not less than seven nor more than twelve related or unrelated children on a regular basis for a part of the twenty-four hours in one or more days in the week.  
 
District – means any portion set aside on the Zoning Map having separate requirements established by these regulations.  
 
Dormitory – means a structure used for housing of persons generally unrelated to each other by blood or marriage accessory to a main use on the property (school, convent, etc.).  Dormitories are further characterized by the provision of sleeping accommodations and common kitchen, dining or recreation facilities.  
 
Drive-Through Businesses – means an establishment that sells products or provides services to occupants in vehicles, including drive-in or drive-up windows and drive-through services. 
1. Drive-Through Businesses, Non-Restaurants.  A drive-through business that serves a use not related to a restaurant, or fast food restaurant. This use includes the operation of drive-up or a drive-through service at a bank or financial institution, personal services, and retail sales (e.g., pharmacy). 


 
2. Drive-Through Businesses, Restaurants.  A drive-through business that operates in conjunction with a restaurant, or fast food restaurant. 


 
Dump (Landfill) – means a land site used primarily for the disposal by dumping, burial, burning or any other means and for whatever purpose, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste material or any kind. A residue facility shall not be deemed a dump or a landfill for the purposes of these Zoning Regulations.  
 
Duplex House – means a building containing two dwelling units joined side by side, sharing a common wall for all or substantially all of its height and depth; that is, in which no part of one dwelling unit is over any part of the other dwelling unit. A duplex shall be considered as one (1) principal building occupying one (1) lot for the purpose of determining yard requirements. 
 
Dwelling – means a building designed for and occupied exclusively for residence purposes, excluding hotel, rooming house, institutional home, residential club, and the like. A dwelling may also exist in a building designed for and occupied for Mixed-Uses where such uses are allowed. 
 
1. Dwelling, Age-Restricted – means a residential development designed in accordance with the standards set forth in these regulations to meet the needs and requirements of an active adult community where at least seventy-five (75) percent of the residents are fifty-five (55) years or older and no permanent resident is under the age of twenty-one (21). 


 
2. Dwelling, Efficiency – means a dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette, and sanitary facilities. 


 
3. Dwelling, Multifamily – means a building containing three or more dwelling units without habitable rooms in the basement. 


 
4. Dwelling, Row House/Town House – means a one-family dwelling unit in a row of three or more buildings, each having its own front and rear access, and each having a party wall in common with one or more of the other buildings.  For these Zoning Regulations these units are considered multi-family dwellings. 


 
5. Dwelling, Single-Family Detached – means a building containing one dwelling unit surrounded by yards, which is not attached by any means to any other dwelling.  


 
6. Dwelling, Two-Family Detached – means a building on a single lot containing two dwelling units, each unit is separate from the other, with one family living wholly or party over the other and which is not attached by any means to any other dwelling.  


 
7. Dwelling Unit – means one or more rooms constituting a separate housekeeping unit with provisions for living, sleeping, bathing and eating for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household. 


 
 
E 
 
Elderly Housing – means a multi-family dwelling containing dwelling units each of which units is occupied in the case of private elderly housing by at least one person 55 years of age or older and none below the age of 16 years and in the case of municipal elderly housing by at least one person meeting the definition of “Elderly Persons” as set forth in Section 8-113a(m) of the Connecticut General Statutes as may from time to time be revised or amended.  
 
Essential Services – means services provided by public utility or governmental agencies through erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance of gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems and collection, communication, supply or disposal systems whether underground or overhead. Facilities necessary for the provision of essential services include poles, wires, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith.  Specifically excluded from this definition are buildings necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utility or governmental agencies for the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
 
 
F 
 
Family – means one or more persons who live together and maintain a common household, related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption.  Three persons or less not related by blood who live together and maintain a common household shall constitute a family.   
 
Farm – means farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses, hoophouses and other temporary structures or other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities - but excluding the raising of fur bearing animals and the maintaining of dog kennels. 
 
Farm Stand – means a structure used to sell on a retail basis the products of a farm grown on the premises by the occupant.  
 
Floor Area – means the sum of the horizontal area of all floors of a building (including enclosed porches) and its accessory buildings on the same lot, measured from the exterior faces of the walls. Such area shall not include basements designed and used solely for storage or mechanical equipment and unenclosed porches or attics not used for human occupancy or for commercial and industrial purposes.  
 
Frontage – See Lot Frontage 
 
 
G 
 
Garage, Private – means a structure which is accessory to a principal building which is used for the storage of not more than three (3) motor vehicles owned and used by the resident thereof. 
 
Garage, Public – means a building other than a private or storage garage, used solely for the parking and storage of vehicles, which is available to the general public. 
 
Gasoline Service Station – means any area of land, including structures thereon, or any building or part thereof, that is used for the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel, and which may or may not include the sale of accessories, or facilities for lubrication, washing, or otherwise servicing motor vehicles, but which shall not include painting or body and fender repair. 
 
Gross Floor Area – means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all the floors of a principal building and its accessory building or buildings on the same lot, including basements, as measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or centerlines of walls separating two (2) buildings, including:  
 
1. elevator shafts and stairwells on each floor not including open or lattice enclosed exterior fire escapes or attic space and other areas for elevator machinery or mechanical equipment accessory to the operation of the building;  

  

2. that part of attic space with headroom, measured from subfloor to the bottom of the roof joists, of seven feet three inches or more; 

  

3. interior mezzanines, and penthouses, but not exterior porches and balconies; 

  

4. basements, and cellars in residential use exclusive of that part of basements devoted exclusively to mechanical uses accessory to the operation of the building; 

  

5. all weather habitable porches and balconies; and 

  

6. parking garages except areas used for accessory parking garages, or off-street loading purposes. 



Gross Leasable Area – means the floor space of a building that is available for lease.  Gross leasable area excludes foyers, hallways, stairways, corridors and similar common areas, and areas devoted to elevators, air conditioning, and other utilities. 
Group Home – means a one family dwelling shared by six or fewer handicapped persons and necessary resident staff members who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the resident to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential. As used herein, the term "handicapped" shall mean having: (1) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities so that such person is incapable of living independently; (2) a record of having such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such an impairment. However, "handicapped" shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. The term "group home for the handicapped" shall not include alcoholism or drug treatment centers, work release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration. This does not include community residences as a defined by Section 8-3e of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
 
 
H 
 
Hazardous Waste – means those wastes where significant potential exists for causing adverse public health or environmental impacts if the waste is handled, stored, transported, treated, or disposed of in that manner customarily accepted for ordinary solid wastes: materials subject to special state or federal licensing; materials designated hazardous by the federal government or the State of Connecticut.  
 
Health Club or Spa – means a facility designed to offer athletic activities, physical conditioning and/or diet and nutritional counseling. Such facility may include but not be limited to the following activities: tennis, handball, racquetball, squash, aerobic dancing, basketball, running track, swimming, weight lifting and use of Nautilus-type equipment. 
 
Height of Building or Structure – means the vertical distance derived from the average finished grade at the foundation corners of the building or structure to the highest point of the building or structure, excluding a chimney, parapets or other similar structure.  
 
Hospital – means an acute care and short-term general hospital licensed by the State of Connecticut; which provides medical, surgical, psychiatric and obstetrical care primarily to inpatients and emergency room, ambulatory and clinical care for outpatient diagnosis and treatment and other uses customarily associated with a hospital.  A "hospital" shall include, but is not limited to, offices for hospital administrators and hospital employees, including physicians who work for or are under contract with the hospital; hospital support facilities, such as medical laboratories, diagnostic testing centers, physical therapy and inpatient pharmaceutical facilities; storage facilities for medical equipment and supplies; hospital operations and maintenance facilities, such as food service and laundry facilities, housekeeping and maintenance storage areas; extended care facilities; overnight accommodations and cafeteria facilities for on-duty hospital employees and medical residents; medical libraries, research and educational facilities; cogeneration, incineration, water, electrical and heating equipment facilities; and off-street parking facilities. 
 
 
Hospital Hospitality House – means a residential facility that provides lodging and support services to patients, families and their loved ones who are receiving medical treatment far from their home communities.  A hospital hospitality house is a home-like facility with private sleeping rooms and bathrooms, which may also have shared communal areas such as a kitchen and dining room, living or family rooms, playrooms, offices, libraries, and outside gathering places, as well as shared laundry facilities, public computers for their guests and shuttle services to local treatment facilities.  
 
Hospital, Veterinary – means a building providing for the diagnosis and treatment of ailments of animals other than human, including facilities for overnight care. 
 
Hotel – means a building used for the purpose of furnishing for compensation more or less temporary lodging to the public, with or without meals, designed such that access to the rooms is from interior corridors, and having lodging accommodations for ten (10) or more persons. 
 
 
I 
 
Impervious Surface – means any material that substantially reduces or prevents infiltration of storm water into the ground. Impervious surfaces include bituminous or concrete driveways and parking areas. 
Incubator Use (also Incubator Business) – means an entrepreneurial business or a nonprofit entity with the potential to grow, particularly with regard to employment, rather than sales alone, with an objective to conceive, refine, and produce a distinct product or service that is associated with practical applications in research and development, industry, manufacturing, technical, or other services. Such uses are often start-up businesses and typically utilize flexible, pre-existing space to meet their initial needs.  
Indoor Sports Facility – means a group of related uses of an athletic, recreational, entertainment, and/or educational nature, on a lot under common ownership and control, and which shall consist of natural or artificial playing surfaces for recognized sporting activities (such as baseball, football, soccer, basketball, swimming, or hockey) and which shall be entirely enclosed, except for accessory outdoor athletic fields (not to exceed three in number), normal and customary accessory uses, and parking. The facility may include such uses as indoor swimming pool, skating rink, sports practice facilities, sports and crafts instruction facilities, game room, video games, pinball games, party/function rooms, pro shop, outdoor picnic area, and other related and similar uses, all designed and operated as an integrated unit for the recreation, amusement, and/or education of its patrons. Food service concession areas shall be allowed only as accessory to such facility.  
 
Institutional Use – means a multi-functional facility where a combination of social, recreational, welfare, health, habilitation, or rehabilitation services are provided to the public. 
 
 
 
J 
 
Junk – means any worn out, castoff, or discarded articles or material which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use in excess of two-hundred (200) cubic feet. 
 
Junk Yard – means a lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded material or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or three or more unregistered, inoperable, motor vehicles or other type of junk.  Further defined by Chapters 405 and 406 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
 
 
K 
 
Kennel – means a location which houses one pack or collection of dogs which are kept under one ownership at a single location and are bred for show, sport or sale. 
 
 
L 
 
Laboratory – means a building or group of buildings in which are located the facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, and experimentation, but not included the manufacture of products for sale. 
 
Light Industrial/Manufacturing Uses – means any of the following uses: office buildings; research laboratories; manufacturing, processing, packaging or assembly of components or goods; warehouses; distribution centers; plumbing, heating, electrical, mechanical and general contracting establishments; and truck and freight terminals. 
 
Livable Floor Area – means the sum of the gross horizontal area of each floor of a dwelling which has structural head room of seven feet six inches (7’-6”) or more, is provided with heat and is suitable for year-round occupancy.  Basement, cellars, attic, open or screened porch, breezeway, terrace or other similar areas or rooms with unfinished ceilings or walls shall not be included in computing the Livable Floor Area 
 
Livestock Keeping – means the raising of animals and the keeping of animals for profit or enjoyment.  Excluded, however, is the raising of fur bearing animals.  
 
Loading Space – means an off-street space of berth for the temporary use of vehicles, while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. 
 
Lot, Zoning Lot – means a parcel of land defined by metes and bounds or boundary lines on a recorded deed, or as shown on a recorded plot in single or undivided ownership used or intended to be used as the site for a main structure and accessory structures or for use not requiring a structure.  Such parcel shall be of sufficient size to meet the minimum dimensional regulations required for the permitted use, and shall have frontage on a public street. 
 
1. Lot, Corner – means a lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more intersecting streets or upon the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 



 
2. Lot, Frontage – means the length of the front lot line measured at the street line. 



 
3. Lot, Rear – means a lot not fronting on or abutting a street and where access to the street is by a private drive which is part of the lot, created in accordance with Section 416 of these Regulations. 



 
4. Lot Area – means the total horizontal area of the lot lying within the lot lines, provided that no area of the land lying within any street line shall be deemed a portion of any land lying within any street line shall be deemed a portion of any lot area; the area of any lot abutting a street shall be measured on the street line only.  



 
5. Lot Coverage – means the amount of land area of a lot which is covered by principal and accessory structures, expressed as a percent of total lot area. 



 
6. Lot Line – means the outside dimension of a lot except that the lot line abutting the street shall be the same as the street line. 



 
7. Lot Line, Front – means the lot line abutting a street and coinciding with the street line, and in the case of a corner lot, whichever street – abutting lot line is elected by the owner or person applying for a building permit. 



 
8. Lot Line, Rear – means a lot line opposite and most distance from the front line; if the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet in length, or in the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 



 
9. Lot Line, Side – means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 



 
10. Lot, Through – means a lot having both front and rear yards abutting on a street. 



 
11. Lot Width – means the distance between the side lines of a lot measured along the street line except where the street line is an arc or the side lines converge toward the street line, in which case the distance may be measured along the minimum front yard setback line. 



 
M 
 
Major Auto Repair – means the general repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, or trailers, including bodywork, welding, and major painting service. 
 
Major Recreational Equipment – means and includes travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats and boat trailers, but does not include mobile homes. 
 
Manufacturing – means the treatment, processing of raw products and the production of articles, finished products from raw or prepared materials by giving them new forms, or qualities.  
 
Manufactured or Modular Homes – means a prefabricated or transportable single family dwelling unit, which is transported in one or more sections. A manufactured home must not be less than 22 ft. at its narrowest dimension and must be constructed in accordance with Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code). The manufactured home must be suitable for year round habitation, and equipped with a means to connect to water, sanitary, and electric facilities. A manufactured home must comply with all applicable flood management regulations and have a minimum floor area of 600 square feet. 
 
Minor Auto Repair – means the replacement or repair of any automobile part that does not require removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission, or differential but may include incidental body and fender work, minor painting, and upholstering service 
 
Mixed-Use – means a development that provides multiple compatible uses in close proximity to one another. And/or a land use pattern that seeks to increase concentrations of population and employment in well-defined areas with a mix of diverse and compatible land uses. 
 
Mobile Home – means a trailer coach or mobile home, which is or can be used for sleeping, living or working quarters, and which is, has been, or can be mounted on wheels, and which may contain cooking, bathing and toilet facilities, and is capable of being connected to a water supply and sewage disposal system.  
 
Motel – means a building or buildings of ten (10) or more units providing lodging for persons, with or without meals, and intended primarily for the accommodation of transients and so designed that access to the rooms is direct from the out-of-doors.  “Motel” shall include also, “Motor Hotel” and “Automobile Court”. 
 
Motor Freight Terminal – means terminals with the capacity of handling a large variety of goods involving goods moved by trucks.  
 
Motor Vehicle in Livery Service – means every motor vehicle used by any person, association, limited liability company or corporation which represents itself to be in the business of transporting passengers for hire, except (1) any motor bus and any taxicab operated under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the Department of Transportation, (2) any school bus, as defined in Connecticut General Statutes section 
14-275, or student transportation vehicle, as defined in Connecticut General Statutes section 14-212, when used for the transportation of children under the age of twenty-one years, (3) any school bus, as defined in Connecticut General Statutes section 14-275, when used for the transportation of passengers (A) by virtue of a contract with any public or private institution of higher education, (B) pursuant to aa contract for service to a special event held at a location or facility which is not open for business on a daily basis throughout the year, not to exceed a period of ten days, or (C) pursuant to a contract with a municipality for which the carrier provides school transportation service, (4) any motor vehicle operated by or through a community-based regional transportation system for the elderly established pursuant to section 55 of public act 05-280, and (5) any motor vehicle operated by or through a community-based regional transportation system for the visually impaired.  
 
 
N 
 
Nonconforming Lot – means a lot which met the dimensional requirements for the zone in which it is located at the time of creation or which preexisted zoning but which does not meet the current regulations for lot area, width, depth or access.  
 
Nonconforming Parking – means a parking area that does not conform to Section 601 because of a lack of the amount of minimum required parking spaces or because of an excess of parking spaces beyond the maximum number of spaces allowed.   
 
Nonconforming Structure – means a building located on a lot which does not conform with bulk regulations established in the zoning regulation, such as setback, height, and encroachment. 
 
Nonconforming Use – means the activity in a building, structure or on land lawfully existing immediately prior to the effective date of the current zoning regulation, as may be amended, which is no longer permitted in the current zone. 
 
 
O 
 
Office Park – means a development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, with accessory and supporting uses, and open space designed, planned, constructed, and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis. 
 
Outdoor Dining – means eating locations (tables, benches, etc.) placed outside the immediate confines of a restaurant for the purpose of serving the patrons of such restaurant. 
 
 
P 
 
Parking, Angled – means any parking space that is not parallel to the curb or aisle.  
 
Parking, Off-Street – means parking spaces provided outside of the right-of-way of a street or highway.  
 
Parking, On-Street – means parking spaces provided within the right-of-way of a street or highway 
 
Parking Aisle – means the driving portion of the parking area. The aisle provides access to each space. 
 
Parking Area – means that portion of a lot set aside, marked, posted, or intended for parking, including total of circulation areas, loading and unloading areas, parking spaces and aisles, landscaped areas, bikeways, and walkways. 
 
Parking Space – means a reasonably level space, available for the parking of one (1) motor vehicle. 
 
Parking, Shared – means when parking spaces are shared among different structures or uses, or among mixed uses, and can include properties with different owners.   
 
Pawn Shop – means a facility for loaning money on the security of personal property and the sale of unclaimed property 
 
Person – means a group of persons, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
 
Personal Service Establishment – means places primarily providing services oriented to personal needs, such as barber and beauty shops, shoe repair shops, household appliance repair shops, dry cleaning pick-ups, laundromats, shoe shine parlors, pet grooming establishments, and other similar establishments. Retail sales shall be allowed as incidental uses in personal service establishments.  
 
Pet Grooming Establishment – means a personal service establishment that, for a fee, trims, cleans, or curries domestic pets such as dogs or cats and which may sell pet supplies as an incidental use. This term does not include establishments which board pets.  
 
Pigsty – means a pen, enclosure, place, shelter or building where pigs are kept. 
 
Plan of Conservation and Development – means the Town of Putnam’s plan pursuant to Section 8-23 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
 
Premises – means all land comprising a lot, and including all buildings and uses located on the lot. 
 
Principal Use – means the general use to which a lot of land or structure is dedicated. 
 
Professional Office – means offices of persons rendering professional services, limited to architects and landscape architects; attorneys; certified massage therapists; certified public accountants; chiropractors and osteopaths; dentists and oral surgeons; enrolled agents; naturopaths; acupuncturists; ophthalmologists and optometrists; physical therapists; physicians; planners; podiatrists; professional engineers and land surveyors; psychologists, psychiatrists, and licensed clinical social workers; speech and language pathologists and audiologists; and registered investment advisors. 
  
 
Q 
 
 
R 
 
Recreational Facility – means an area principally dedicated to recreational activities.  Outdoor activities may include buildings for maintenance, indoor sports, and food service. 
 
Recreational Trailer or Vehicle – means a vehicular, portable unit designed for travel, camping, or recreational use, including but not limited to the following: 
 
1. Travel Trailer: A vehicular, portable dwelling unit built on a chassis, being of any length provided its gross weight does not exceed forty-five hundred (4,500) pounds, or being of any weight provided its overall length does not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet. 

  

2. Pick-Up Camper: A portable dwelling unit designed to be mounted on a pick-up truck or chassis, whether or not so mounted. 

  

3. Motorized Camper: A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 

  

4. Tent Trailer: A folding structure, constructed of canvas, plastic or similar water repellant material, designed to be mounted on wheels to be used for camping only. 



 
5. Boat Trailer: A vehicle without motive power, designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and designed for the hauling or storage of a boat, aircraft, snowmobile or other recreational vehicle. 



 
Rehabilitation Center – means a facility used for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments which may or may not contain beds or living quarters. 
 
Resident – means an individual who occupies a dwelling unit as his principal place of abode. 
  
Residue Facility – means a specially designed facility, including related improvements for the disposal of materials remaining after the combustion of non-hazardous solid waste at any solid waste combustion facility, or remaining after-processing at any recycling facility. 
 
Restaurant, Fast Food – means a restaurant where the principal business is the sale of foods or beverage to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, typically served in paper, plastic or other disposable containers, for consumption within the restaurant building, elsewhere on the premises or for carryout/delivery for consumption off the premises, and designed for rapid service and high customer turnover. 
 
Restaurant, General – means an establishment where food and/or beverages are prepared, served, and consumed, and whose principal method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics:  
 
1. customers are normally provided with an individual menu and are served their food and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter where the items are consumed; or  

  

2. cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages generally are consumed within the restaurant building.  



 
 
S 
 
School – means a public or private organization, licensed by the State of Connecticut, that provides instruction. 
 
Shopping Center – means a group of three or more contiguous commercial establishments, the purpose of which is primarily retail sales with off-street parking provided on the lot - but shall not include a discount supercenter, as defined.  
 
Single and Separate Ownership – means the ownership of property by any persons, which ownership is separate and distinct from that of any adjoining property.  
 
Sign – means and includes any permanent or temporary structures or part thereof or any device attached, painted, or represented directly or indirectly on a structure or other surface that shall display or include any letter, word, insignia, flag, or representation used as or which is the nature of an advertisement, announcement, visual communication, direction, or is designed to attract the eye or bring the subject to the attention of the public. Flags of any governmental unit or branch or of any charitable or religious organization, interior signs not visible from a public right-of-way or adjoining property, cornerstones built into or attached to a wall of a building erection or commemorating a person or event, official notices of any court or public office, legal notices posted pursuant to law, and public service company signs as aids to safety or service are excluded.  For purposes of these regulations, there are two types of signs: 
 
1. On-Premises Signs – means a sign which directs attention to a person, business, profession, home occupation, or activity conducted on the same lot, and 



  

2. Off-Premises Signs – means a sign which directs attention to a person, business, profession, product, home occupation, or activity not conducted on the same lot.  



 
 Types of signs include: 
 
a. Awning Sign – means a sign mounted, painted or attached to an awning, canopy or marquee. 

  

b. Banner Sign – means a flexible material such as cloth, paper, vinyl, etc. on which a sign is painted or printed.  

  

c. Billboard – means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.  

  

d. Business or Identification Sign – means a sign which directs attention to a business, profession, product, service, activity, or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.  

  

e. Directional Sign – means any sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, indicating the location of churches, schools, hospitals, parks, scenic or historic places of general interest. 




 
f. Flags – means sign consisting of a piece of fabric or other flexible material attached to a flagpole, except as otherwise authorized. A flag representing the official symbol of a national, state or local government is not a sign for the purposes of these regulations. 




 
 A "commercial flag" is a flag that contains commercial speech. 




 
 A "non-commercial flag" is a flag that contains no commercial speech, such as decorative, hospitality, and seasonal flags containing no advertising, words or logos related to a specific business, product or service, and does not represent the official symbol of a national, state or local government. 




 
g. Flashing Sign – means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constantly in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effects and frequent changes in message. Illuminated signs which indicate the time, temperature, date shall not be considered flashing signs. 




 
h. Freestanding Sign – means any non-movable sign not affixed to a building. 




 
i. Illuminated Sign – means a sign lighted by artificial lighting or exposed to lighting by lights directed at or in the sign. 




 
j. Indirectly Illuminated Sign – means an illuminated, non-flashing sign whose illumination is derived from an external artificial source so arranged that no direct rays of light are projected from such artificial source into residential zones or public streets. 




 
k. Name Plate Sign – means a sign which states the name or address, or both, of the occupant of the lot where the sign is located. 




 
l. Occupant Sign – means a sign bearing only the names and/or address of occupants or premises. 




 
m. Pole or Ground Sign (Freestanding Sign) – means a sign supported by, or suspended from a freestanding column or other support located in or upon the ground surface.  




 
n. Political Sign – means a sign used by a candidate for public office or to express a political point of view. 




 
o. Projecting Sign – means a sign erected so as to project approximately perpendicular from the exterior of any building or wall more than four (4) feet.  




 
p. Roof-Mounted Sign – means a sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is wholly or partially dependent upon a building for support and which projects above the point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. 




 
q. Sandwich/Sidewalk Sign – means a sign which stands with self-supporting elements, which is not illuminated, and is not permanently affixed to the ground. Sandwich signs may be used to communicate a specific message or information (e.g., lunch menus, special sales, promotional events) that is not found in a business’ permanent signage.  




 
r. Sign Plaza – means a grouping of signs in a common location, having uniform size and materials and regulated by the Town in accordance with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations. 




 
s. Temporary Sign – means a sign that: (1) is used in connection with a circumstance, situation, or event that is designed, intended, or expected to take place or to be completed within a reasonably short or definite period after the erection of such sign; or (2) is intended to remain on the location where it is erected or placed for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. If a sign display is permanent but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be regarded as temporary.  




 
t. Wall Mounted Sign – means a sign fastened to or painted on the wall of any building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms a background surface of the sign.  Such sign shall not project more than (12) inches from the building or structure. 




 
u. Wall Painted Sign – means a sign painted directly on the wall of a structure. 




 
v. Wayfinding Sign – means signage sponsored by and approved by the Town that enables people to navigate through an environment or to a given destination. 




 
w. Window Sign – means a sign affixed to or visible through a window of a building.  




 
Soil Erosion & Sediment Control Plan – means a scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative.  
 
Special Permit Use – means permitted uses which must meet specific conditions established within the Zoning Regulations and must receive the approval of the Commission. 
 
Storage Structure – means a structure used for the temporary, not greater than ninety (90) days per year from the date of usage, for storage of materials. 
 
Street – means any right-of-way used as a public thoroughfare dedicated and accepted for public travel and any right-of-way recorded in the office of the Town Clerk constructed and accepted for public travel before the passage of these Regulations. 
  
Street Line – means the dividing line between the street and the lot. In any case where the width of the street and the location of the street lines have not been established, the street line shall be assumed to be a distance of twenty-five feet from the center line of the traveled path. Where the width of the street has been established but where the exact locations of the street lines have not been determined, they shall be assumed to be equidistant from the center line of the traveled path.  
  
Structural Alteration – means any change or addition to the supporting or structural members of a building; any change which could convert an existing building into a different structure or adapt it to a different use, or which in the case of a nonconforming building would prolong the life of such building.  
 
Structure – means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, including foundations and signs. In any District, walls and fences, except those less than four feet or less in height and located in a front yard or seven feet or less in height and located in a rear or side yard, shall be classified as structures, and with regard to their erection and maintenance, shall be subject to the same rules and regulations herein contained for other structures. In a rear lot, walls and fences six (6) feet or less in height and located in the front yard of the rear lot, shall be exempt from classification as a structure.  
 
Subdivision – means the division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots made subsequent to the adoption of subdivision regulations for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation, or agricultural purposes. The term "subdivision" includes "resubdivision".  
 
Subdivision, Conventional – means a subdivision design consistent with the provisions of the Putnam Zoning and Subdivision Regulations that would be applicable in the absence of Section 705 of these Regulations.  
 
Subdivision, Open Space – means a cluster development, as defined by Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes, in which the dimensions that would otherwise be required for lots under the Putnam Zoning and Subdivision Regulations may be reduced for the purposes of encouraging the dedication and preservation of additional open space.  
 
Swimming Pool – means any structure used for swimming or bathing which is more than 24 inches deep or has a surface area of more than 250 square feet or any pool that is permanently equipped with a water re-circulating system or where structural materials are involved, for the purpose of these Regulations.  A swimming pool is considered an accessory structure. 
 
  
T 
 
Tattoo Parlor – means a business licensed by the State of Connecticut engaged in the permanent marking made by inserting ink into the layers of skin to change the pigment for decorative or other reasons. 
 
Taxicab or Taxi – means any motor vehicle operated upon any street or highway or on call or demand accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for transportation for hire between such points along streets or highways as may be directed by the passenger or passengers being transported, provided nothing in this chapter shall be construed to include, as a taxicab, a motor bus, as defined in Connecticut General Statutes section 14-1, or a motor vehicle in livery service when such motor vehicle is hired for a specific trip or trips and is subject to the direction of the person hiring the same.  
 
Telephone Central Office – means a building used for the transmission and exchange of telephone messages. 
 
Temporary Storage Unit (Portable on Demand Storage) – means a transportable box-like container not exceeding eight (8) feet in width,  eight (8) feet in height and sixteen (16) feet in length for the purpose of storing household goods and other personal property that is intended to be filled, refilled, or emptied while located outdoors on a residential property. 
 
Temporary Tent (Parking Lot) Sales – means a special event sale conducted by an existing business and which takes place on the premises of such business. 
 
Total Square Feet – means the area measurement using the exterior side of walls or other perimeter boundaries. 
 
Town – means the Town of Putnam, Connecticut. 
 
Town House – means one of a row of homes sharing common walls. Differing from condominiums, townhouse ownership does include individual ownership of the land. There can also be common elements, such as a central courtyard, that would have shared ownership. 
 
 
U 
 
Use – means a use is (1) any purpose for which a building or other structure, or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; or (2) any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.   
 
 
 
V 
 
Variance – means a permissive waiver of terms and conditions of these Regulations granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.  
 
Veterinary Office/Hospital – means any building used for the treatment and limited temporary internal boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, goats, rabbits, and birds or fowl by a veterinarian. Such use shall not be construed as a home occupation or a professional office.  
 
 
W 
 
Warehouse – means a building used for the storage of goods, wares, and merchandise that will be processed, sold, or otherwise disposed of off the premises. 
 
Wayfinding – means enabling people to navigate through an environment or to a given destination through the use of effective signage and visual clues.  Successful wayfinding occurs when the navigator can make correct navigation decisions that take him/her from his/her present location to a destination that fulfills his/her larger purpose. 
 
Windmill – means a structure used to convert wind energy into electricity. 
 
Wireless Telecommunications (see Section 712, Wireless Telecommunications) 
 
 
X 
 
 
Y 
 
Yard – means a space on the same lot with a main building which is open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise provided in these Zoning Regulations. 
 
Yard, Front – means the area between a street line and the building line which is parallel thereto, extending between side lot lines.  
 
Yard, Side – means the area between the side building line and the side lot line, extended from the front yard (front lot line where no front yard is required) to the rear yard.  
 
Yard, Rear – means an area extending across the full width of the lot between the rear building line and the rear lot line.  
 
Yard Sale – means the occasional sale of household goods or handcrafted items conducted on the premises of the owner and/or craftsman of the goods to be sold at a maximum frequency of two times per calendar year for a maximum of one consecutive days. 
 
 
Z 
 
ZEO – means the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
 
 
  
  
Appendix A 
 
Table of Amendments 
 
For reference purposes.  Not a legally adopted part pf these regulations.  The Town of Putnam has had zoning regulations in effect since 1958.   
 
Date of Vote Effective Date  Subject of Amendment    
 
June 18, 2014  July 17, 2014 Comprehensive Zoning Regulations and Zoning Map Restatement 
 
September 17, 2014 October 10, 2014 Amend Article III, Section 304, Table III-1, Schedule of Uses and Districts, Transportation, by adding the uses Taxi, Livery and Paratransit Office and Off-street parking for Taxi, Livery and Paratransit vehicles in livery service; and Amend Article VIII Definitions, by adding definitions for the terms Motor Vehicle in Livery Service, and Taxicab or Taxi  
 
November 19, 2014 December 12, 2014 Amend Article VI – Town-Wide Requirements – Section 601 – Parking and Loading, D. Parking Spaces Required, Table VI-1 – Parking Schedule, by changing the minimum number of parking spaces per 1,000 square feet (sf) of Gross Leasable Area (GLA) under Land Use, Industrial Plant, from 2 minimum, to the words “1½ parking spaces for every employee (on the largest shift for which the building is designed) plus one for each vehicle maintained on the premises (minimum of four spaces); or, as determined by the Commission on a case by case basis determined by the site plan, based on a parking demand study” 
 
August 19, 2015  September 11, 2015 Amend Article III, Section 304, Schedule of Uses and Districts, Table III-1, Schedule of Uses and Districts, Park, playground, or outdoor recreation facility not conducted as a private gainful business, P District: Change “N” (Prohibited Use) to “P” (Use Permitted as a Matter of Right).  
 
TOWN OF PUTNAM, CONNECTICUT
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
PREPARED BY
PUTNAM PLANNING COMMISSION
CONSULTANTS: PARE ENGINEERING CORPORATION
LINCOLN, RHODE ISLAND AND NORWICH, CONNECTICUT
ENGINEERS - PLANNERS - LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTS
1989
Adopted January 19, 1990
Comprehensive Amendment/Restatement prepared September 2014 – August 2015 by the Planning Commission
(with assistance from the NECCOG Regional Engineer)
Comprehensive Amendment/Restatement approved November 23, 2015
Effective Date: December 21, 2015
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
ii
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
iii
AUTHORITY
The following regulations are the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Putnam, Connecticut, which were adopted by the Putnam Planning Commission on November 23, 2015, pursuant to Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
EFFECTIVE DATE
These Subdivision Regulations and any amendments thereto shall be in full force and effective from the date of adoption by the Commission.
Edward Briere Jr., Chairman Gerard Cotnoir
Timothy Ford Patricia Gilman
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
iv
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND LEGAL STATUS Page
Section 100 Purpose 1 101 Policy 2
102 Adoption 2
103 Jurisdiction 2
104 Interpretation, Conflict and Severability 3
105 Saving Provisions 3
106 Appeals 3
107 Amendments and Conditions 4
108 Waiver of Requirements 4
109 Conformance to Zoning 4
110 Open Space Residential Development (OSRD) 5
111 Enforcement 5
ARTICLE II - PROCEDURES
Section 200 General 7
201 Preliminary Subdivision Plan 7
202 Subdivision Plan 7
203 Public Hearing 14
204 Final Plan 15
ARTICLE III - STANDARDS
Section 300 General 17
301 Lots/Blocks 17
302 Streets 18
303 Drainage 20
304 Water Supply Facilities 22
305 Sanitary Sewer/Septic Systems 23
306 Sidewalks and Berms 24
307 Utilities 25
308 Street Lighting 25
309 Parks and Public Area Reservation 25
310 Preservation of Natural Features 26
311 Non-Residential Subdivisions 26
312 Driveways 27
313 Easements 28
314 Tree Planting/Loaming and Seed 28
315 Street Signs/House Numbers/Street Names 29
316 Bounds 29
317 Erosion and Sediment Control 29
318 Energy Conservation 29
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
v
ARTICLE IV - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE
OF IMPROVEMENTS
Section 400 Improvements and Financial Guarantee 31
401 Inspection of Improvements 32
402 Maintenance of Improvements and Financial Guarantee for 32 Maintenance
ARTICLE V - DEFINITIONS
Section 500 General 34
501 Definitions 34
APPENDICES
A. Sample Financial Guarantee Agreement Form & Conditional Approval Contract 39
SAMPLE FINANCIAL AGREEMENT FORM 40
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL CONTRACT 45
B. Subdivision Application Form and Checklist 49
APPLICATION FORM 50
APPLICATION CHECKLIST FORM 51
C. Figures 53
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY DETAIL 54
TYPICAL CROSS SECTION – RESIDENTIAL STREETS (NON-LID) 55
TYPICAL CROSS SECTION – RESIDENTIAL STREETS (LID) 50
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
vi
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 1 -
ARTICLE 1 - PURPOSE AND LEGAL STATUS
Section 100 - Purpose - These Regulations are adopted:
To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the Town.
To guide the future growth and development of the Town in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development.
To provide for adequate light, air and privacy; to secure safety from fire, flood and other danger; and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population.
To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the Town and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the Town.
To protect and conserve the value of the land throughout the Town and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
To guide public and private policy pertaining to the proper subdivision of land so that adequate and efficient circulation, utilities, open space, parks and other facilities will be provided.
To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the Town; to avoid congestion in the streets and highways; to insure pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings; and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and location of building lines.
To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions; to further the orderly layout and use of land; and to insure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land.
To insure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision.
To prevent the pollution of air, stream and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the Town in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the value of land.
To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the Town, to insure appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land while preserving the density of land, as established in the Zoning Regulations of the Town.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 2 -
Section 101 - Policy - It is declared to be the policy of the Town of Putnam P1anning Commission that the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivision is subject to the control of the Town pursuant to State Statutes and the Plan of Conservation and Development.
Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from flood or other menace. Land shall not be subdivided until proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewerage, recreation or open space improvements, and traffic and circulation systems.
The existing and proposed improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown in the Plan of Conservation and Development. It is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the administration of the provisions and standards contained in the building code, Zoning Regulations and Plan of Conservation and Development.
Section 102 - Adoption - By authority of the Planning Commission of the Town of Putnam, adopted pursuant to the powers and jurisdictions vested through the provisions of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, and other applicable laws, the Planning Commission does hereby adopt these regulations and any amendments thereto, and exercises the power and authority to review, approve, modify and approve, and disapproved plans for subdivision or resubdivision of land within the Town which show lots, blocks or sites with or without new streets or highways.
Section 103 - Jurisdiction - The subdivision regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land, as defined herein, located within the Town.
A. No land shall be subdivided and no street, driveway, sanitary sewer, stormwater sewer, water main or public service, or other facilities in connection with land subdivision, shall be constructed, maintained, opened or dedicated for public use, or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, until a subdivision plan has been approved and the provisions of these regulations have been met.
B. No subdivider shall sell any lot in a subdivision or erect any building on land in a subdivision unless and until a subdivision plan has been approved.
C. The Planning Commission shall review and approve or disapprove subdivision plans and shall administer provisions of these regulations.
Section 104 - Interpretation, Conflict and Severability
A. Interpretation - In matters of judgment or interpretation of the Subdivision Regulations, the opinion of the Planning Commission shall prevail. In their interpretation and application, the
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 3 -
provisions of the Subdivision Regulations shall be construed to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
B. Conflict - All sections or portions of sections of the Subdivision Regulations heretofore in effect which are inconsistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Regulations are hereby repealed. Wherever the terms of the Subdivision Regulations require a higher standard of development than is required in any other statute, local ordinance or regulations, the provisions of the Subdivision Regulations shall govern. Wherever the provisions of any other statute, ordinance or Regulations require a higher standard of development, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulations shall govern.
C. Severability - If any section, clause, provision, or portion of the Subdivision Regulations shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the whole of these Regulations or any other section, clause, provision or portion other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.
D. If State statute or State or local governmental regulations requires a higher standard than contained in these subdivision regulations, the higher standard shall prevail and be deemed to be required by these regulations. If any provision of these regulations shall contradict or be in violation of State Statute as amended, the provisions of the State Statute shall prevail over the specific language of these regulations.
Section 105 - Saving Provisions - These regulations shall not be construed as:
Abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or
Discontinuing, abating, modifying any penalty accruing or about to accrue under prior existing subdivision regulations, or
Affecting the liability of any person under prior existing subdivision regulations, or
As waiving any right of the municipality under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or
Vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations.
Section 106 - Appeals - Any person aggrieved by an official action of the Planning Commission on a subdivision application may appeal therefrom within fifteen (15) days of such official action to the Superior Court for the Judicial District of Windham.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 4 -
Section 107 - Amendments and Conditions
A. Amendments - The Planning Commission may, from time to time, amend the Subdivision Regulations in the manner prescribed by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as now or hereafter amended.
B. Conditions - The applicant has the duty to comply with reasonable conditions laid down by the Planning Commission for design, dedication, improvement and restrictive use of the land so as to conform to the purposes herein.
Section 108 - Waiver of Requirements - Where the Planning Commission finds that practical difficu1ties may result from compliance with the Subdivision Regulations, it may approve waivers so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured. Such waiver shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the Subdivision Regulations. Further, the Planning Commission shall not approve waivers unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
A. The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare, or have a significant adverse effect on other adjacent property;
B. The conditions upon which the request for a waiver is based are unique to the property for which the waiver is sought and are not applicable generally to other property;
C. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular difficulty to the owner would result if these regulations are carried out; and
D. The waiver will not in any manner conflict with the provisions of the Zoning Regulations, Plan of Conservation and Development, or regulations of any other Town board or commission.
In approving waivers, the Planning Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. A petition for any such waiver shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the subdivision plan is filed for the consideration of the Planning Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. A three-quarters vote of all the members of the Commission shall be required to approve a waiver and the Commission shall state on its record the reasons for granting the waiver.
Section 109 - Conformance to Zoning - All subdivisions must conform to the provisions of the Putnam Zoning Regulations.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 5 -
Section 110 – Open Space Residential Development (OSRD)
A. Definition and Purpose. For the purposes of these regulations, the term "conventional subdivision" refers to a subdivision conforming to the base requirements for zoning districts as stated in Section 401 of the Town of Putnam Zoning Regulations. The term "Open Space Residential Development (OSRD)" refers to subdivisions in the AG-2 and R-40 zoning districts conforming to the requirements and purposes of Section 705 of the Town of Putnam Zoning Regulations as amended.
B. Considerations. Effective July 17, 2014, Section 705.A.2. of the Putnam Zoning Regulations states:
Any applicant applying for a single-family residential subdivision located in the R-40 and AG-2 districts, creating four or more building lots, shall apply for an OSRD subdivision under these Regulations, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the Planning Commission that a conventional single-family residential subdivision would better serve the purposes of this Section of these Regulations in the particular case.
In determining whether or not to allow a conventional subdivision, rather than an OSRD subdivision, the Commission shall consider, but not be limited to, the following criteria:
? Size of the proposed subdivision;
? The Town of Putnam Plan of Conservation and Development;
? The presence of any existing open spaces, recreation areas, and/or land for other public purposes in the vicinity;
? The need for buffer areas between incompatible land uses;
? Protection of flood plains, wetlands, and watercourses;
? Conservation of natural features as scenic vistas, ridge tops, rock outcroppings, waterfalls, etc.;
? Protection of significant habitats for plant and animal species; and
? Linkages connecting open spaces; and
? Any other of the purposes of an OSRD subdivision referred to in Section 705.A.1. of the Town of Putnam Zoning Regulations as amended.
C. Procedures for Approval
Except as otherwise provided in this Section and/or in Section 705 of the Town of Putnam Zoning Regulations as amended, all OSRD subdivision plans and applications must meet the procedural and substantive requirements of these Subdivision Regulations as determined by the Planning Commission and of the Town of Putnam Zoning Regulations.
Section 111 – Enforcement - Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision of land without the approval of the Commission shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each lot sold or offered for sale or so subdivided. Each day any provision of the Subdivision Regulations is violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 6 -
Any subdivision of land in violation of the terms of these Regulations is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be the duty of the Planning Commission, or its agent, to enforce these Regulations and to advise the Town attorney of any violations. The Town attorney shall institute appropriate action or proceedings to restrain or abate such violation.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 7 -
ARTICLE II - PROCEDURES
Section 200 - General
A. All applicants shall submit an application to, and receive approval from the Commission in accordance with these regulations before any offer is made for the sale of any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure is granted.
B. Official Submission Dates - In all matters where an application, request or appeal must be submitted to the Commission, the date of receipt of such application, request or appeal by the Commission shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled Commission meeting, immediately following the day of submission to the Commission or its agent of such application, request or appeal, or 35 days after submission, whichever is sooner, as per the Connecticut General Statutes. In the event of any conflict between this section and the Connecticut General Statutes (Section 8-26 d) the provisions of the Statutes will prevail.
C. All applications shall be submitted at least 7 days prior to the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting.
D. Fees - As part of any application for subdivision plan approval, a fee(s) shall be required. The fee(s) shall be the greater of that called for under either: applicable State Statute; or, Ordinance adopted by the Town of Putnam.
Section 201 - Preliminary Subdivision Plan - All applicants are strongly urged to file a non-binding preliminary subdivision plan for review and comment by the Commission. The purpose of the preliminary plan is to identify areas of concern and to give direction to the subdivider prior to the development of the formal application.
A. Timing and Procedure - A preliminary subdivision plan will be placed on the Commission's next agenda after receipt of the plan and application. Every effort will be made to expedite the review.
B. Contents - The preliminary subdivision plan submission shall include a minimum of three (3) copies of the plan at a scale not greater than 1"=100', showing lots, easements, roads, open spaces, drainage, wetlands, contours at 10-foot intervals, utilities, vicinity map and other information pertinent to the subdivision.
C. The subdivider is urged to submit the preliminary plan to the Inland Wetland Commission for their review and comment at this time.
Section 202 - Subdivision Plan
A. Application Procedure and Requirements - The application shall:
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 8 -
1. Be made on forms available from the Land Use Office, together with required fees and with six (6) paper copies of the subdivision plan;
2. The six (6) copies will be distributed, by the applicant, to the Planning Commission, and, forthwith, to the following: Highway Department; Northeast District Department of Health; Water and Sewer - if applicable; Police Department - if applicable; and Fire Department.
Letters of approval from the above groups as applicable as well as any other agency, commission, etc. that may be required, shall be submitted by the above groups to the Planning Commission for its review prior to the lapse of 30 days following the filing date of the plan with said groups. If no such letter is received from any of the above groups as noted above, it will be presumed that said group or groups do not disapprove of the subdivision plan as submitted.
3. Include two (2) extra copies, if within 500 feet of a bordering town, for the Northeastern Connecticut Council of Governments (NECCOG) (or its successor) and the bordering town in question.
4. Include all offers of dedication to the Town. Submittal shall include deeds of all streets, land for local government uses, utility easements, parks and other easements, agreements, etc. Any dedication shall be reviewed by the Town Attorney for approval as to form and content along with a title certification satisfactory to the Town Attorney, which shall be completed before the Commission-approved plan(s) is filed with the Town Clerk.
5. Connecticut Department of Transportation (CTDOT) approval is required for curb openings and/or drainage systems on state highways, which shall be submitted to CTDOT for its approval according to plans approved by the Commission under these Regulations.
6. Be accompanied by evidence (i.e. submission letter stamped as received and dated by the receiving agency) of submission of the plans with the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission for its review and approval. The Planning Commission shall receive the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission’s written approval of the plans before the close of the public hearing and/or, if no public hearing is held, before granting its approval.
7. Include evidence (i.e. submission letter stamped as received and dated by the receiving agency) that all applications for wells and septic systems have been submitted to the Northeast District Department of Health, or, if public water and/or sewer are proposed, include evidence that all applications for connection to the public water and/or sewer system have been submitted to the Putnam Water Pollution Control Authority.
8. No final approval shall be endorsed until all requirements of the Commission have been met.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 9 -
9. All subdivisions must meet the requirements of this Article II and Article III of these Regulations.
B. The Plan Requirements.
1. General – the plan shall be an accurate Class A-2 survey, prepared by and containing the name, stamp, and signature of a Connecticut licensed land surveyor. The plan shall be at a scale not more than 1"-40' and shall be drawn on polyester film (mylar), numbered in sequence if more than one (1) sheet is used. Sheet size shall be 24"x36". Subdivisions containing proposed streets or other improvements shall also contain the name and stamp of a Connecticut registered professional engineer who is responsible for their design. Additionally, a signature of a soil scientist qualified pursuant to Section 22a-38 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, shall be entered on the plan if wetlands are present. The Class A-2 survey shall be noted as pertaining to horizontal accuracy. Vertical and topographic accuracy shall be noted on the plan(s) at minimums of Class V-3 for vertical and Class T-3 for topographic. Furthermore, topographic elevations shall be based upon the most recent FEMA standard (NAVD 88), and so stated on the plan. The horizontal survey shall be coordinated to the Connecticut State Grid (NAD 83) for future GIS use. Additionally, topographic elevations benchmarks shall be established and shown on the plans—at least two shall be included on each sheet and scattered throughout the project area.
The surveyor's and engineer's original signatures shall be affixed to any submitted plans. This is also applicable to the soil scientist who verifies any wetland delineation shown on the plan(s) and shall be included herein.
2. Index Map - is required if the proposed subdivision is divided into sections or is of such size that more than one plan sheet is required.
3. Location Map – (scale 1”=1000’) showing the location of the subdivision in relation to major streets in the Town, is required.
4. Features - The final plan shall show the following:
a. The location of property with respect to surrounding property and streets, the names of all abutting property owners of record and those owners of land separated from the site only by a street, and the names of adjoining streets.
b. The location of existing streets, easements, water bodies, streams and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, bridges and other significant features. Where wetland areas have been delineated, the applicable upland review area and any 100-year floodplain shall be shown in accordance with wetland and zoning regulations.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 10 -
c. The location and width of all existing and proposed streets, easements, alleys, other public ways, rights-of-way and building setback lines.
d. The locations, dimensions, areas and numbers of all proposed or existing lots and the location of groundwater test holes and percolation tests, if applicable. All test hole and percolation test data shall be listed on a plan sheet.
e. The location and dimension of all property proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public or private reservation and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation.
f. The name of the owner or owners of land to be subdivided and the name of the subdivider if other than the owner.
g. The date of the plan, north arrow, and scale.
h. Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and length of all lines, including horizontal curves (arc length, radius, tangent, central [delta] angle, chord, chord angle, point of curvature station, point of tangency station), and to reproduce such lines upon the ground and the location of all proposed monuments, iron pins and drill holes. Furthermore, at least three points on the perimeter property and two points on the centerline of a proposed road shall be tagged with State of Connecticut plane grid coordinates (NAD 83).
i. Profile plans shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: horizontal scale of not less than 1" = 40' and a vertical scale of not less than 1" = 4'; existing ground profile along centerline or baseline; centerline or baseline design profile; existing and proposed elevations calculated and noted at 50-foot intervals along tangent sections and at 35-foot intervals within vertical curves; tangent line slopes expressed in feet per foot (4 decimal places); beginning and end of vertical curve stationing; length of vertical curve; high or low point station and elevation, if applicable; point of vertical intersection station and elevation; property lines; street intersections with station and design profile elevation; "K" factor and algebraic difference of tangents; and underground utilities and drainage systems. Profile drawings shall include a grid having horizontal lines (whole elevations) at ascending l-foot intervals along the vertical axis and vertical stationing lines drawn along the horizontal axis of the grid at 50-foot intervals along tangent sections, 25-foot intervals within vertical curve sections and odd stations, e.g., intersecting street centerlines.
j. Name of the subdivision and all new streets to be approved by the Commission.
k. Zoning district(s) and municipal boundary lines.
l. Indication of the use of any lot other than residential proposed by the subdivider.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 11 -
m. Topographical contours at 2-foot intervals, except in very flat areas where l-foot contours shall be required. Spot elevations shall be made available and placed on the plan where the ground is very flat.
n. A comprehensive drainage report shall be prepared by a Connecticut registered professional engineer with his/her name, stamp and signature on the report cover and submitted to the Commission for review and approval. The report shall demonstrate that the rates of runoff from the site after development of the subdivision will closely match or match those of the pre-development condition, for the 2-, 10-, 25- and 100-year Type III design storms. Stormwater drainage facilities shall be designed to replicate, to the extent possible, the pre-development characteristics of stormwater runoff currently flowing onto the site, whether from inside or outside the subdivision, as well as the stormwater runoff which may be expected to flow onto the site under conditions of full development permitted under the Zoning Regulations in effect at the time of the submission of the Subdivision Plan application, in the post-development condition. The drainage design shall be in accordance with the latest Connecticut Department of Transportation “Highway Design Manual” and “2000 Drainage Manual” and the “2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual” of the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, as amended, in effect at the time of plan submission, unless otherwise specified herein. In order to minimize impact to downstream drainage facilities, increase the environmental quality of stormwater runoff, and to provide for water conservation and increased groundwater recharge measures, Low Impact Development (LID) methods as defined in the latest edition of the “2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual”, as amended, shall be incorporated into the stormwater design for the subdivision. The hydrologic method used in estimating the peak discharge should be based on National Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) methods or other equivalent hydrologic computational techniques. Other methods of estimating the peak discharge may be used if approved by the Commission. For design of culverts, the Manning Equation shall be used. Other methods of drainage design may be used if approved by the Commission. The engineer shall design the drainage system piping in accordance with the natural drainage boundaries of the total contributing drainage area (watershed), using a minimum of a 10-year design frequency storm. A 50-year design frequency storm shall be used for all bridge openings or major culverts. A 100-year design frequency storm shall be used for all detention and/or retention basins. The report shall demonstrate that the drainage design of the subdivision will meet the construction and performance requirements of Section 303 of these Regulations.
C. Construction Plans
1. Construction plans shall be prepared by a Connecticut registered professional engineer for all required improvements. They shall be drawn at a horizontal scale of not more than 1" = 40' and a vertical scale of not more than 1" = 4' when printed out at full size on 24" x 36" media. The following shall be shown:
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 12 -
a. Site Plan
i. Show the locations of street pavement, including curbs, berms and gutters; sidewalks and driveway openings; drainage pipes, catch basins and manholes; sanitary sewer pipes and manholes; water mains and fittings, gate valves, fire hydrants and blowoffs; other underground or aboveground utilities; signs and street trees; light standards; 100-year flood plain; easements and rights-of-way. Drainage and sanitary sewer systems shall be labeled with inlet/outlet invert elevations (2 decimal places), ± gradient (4 decimal places), top of frame/grate elevations (2 decimal places), size and material composition of interconnecting pipes, and retention/detention basin elevations. Construction details and notes shall be included on a separate plan (see Section 202C.d.i. below).
ii. Street rights-of-way shall have a centerline with tick marks drawn at 50-foot intervals (stations) and at the start and end of any horizontal curve with end point stationing (2 decimal places) noted. A Horizontal Curve Data Table shall be included on the plan sheet where there are horizontal curves, to include the following data: central angle [delta], radius, tangent, length of curve, chord, and chord angle.
iii. Existing and proposed contour lines shall be drawn at no greater than 2-foot intervals, however, where the slope of the ground is 2% or less, a 1-foot interval shall be required. Spot elevations shall be made available upon request. Steep slopes of 25% and greater and rock outcrops shall be cross-hatched and labeled accordingly.
iv. Wetlands, which are delineated (flagged) by a certified Connecticut Soil Scientist, shall be accurately located on the plan along with any upland review area. Pond high and low water elevations shall be shown.
v. Other pertinent features to be drawn on the plan include, but not necessarily limited to, the following: buildings, miscellaneous structures, pathways, railroad tracks, tunnels, walls, fences, overhead utilities, cemeteries, significant trees, woodland edges, etc.
vi. Sight line distances shall be included on the plan from a point 10-feet inside a driveway or an intersecting street (each way).
vii. Areas of U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service soil types shall be shown on the plan.
viii. If applicable, soil test hole and percolation test sites shall be accurately shown on the plan. Data collected at each test site and the date it was collected shall be included on the plans. Alternatively, the data element may be placed on a "Construction Details and Notes" plan.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 13 -
ix. An estimate of the cost of all required improvements shall be prepared by a Connecticut registered professional engineer at the Applicant’s expense and submitted to the Commission for its guidance in setting the amount of any financial guarantee required.
b. Profile Plan
i. Profile plans shall include both existing ground and proposed design profiles along the centerline of the road right-of-way. Existing and proposed elevations shall be noted at 50-foot intervals along tangent sections and at 25-foot intervals within vertical curves. Slopes shall be indicated on tangents. Vertical curves shall include the following information on the plan: beginning and ending stations (2 decimal places) with elevations (2 decimal places); high/low point stations with elevations, where applicable; curve length; and k value with algebraic difference. Road profiles shall incorporate vertical curves at all changes of slope along the centerline of the road right-of-way—angle points are unacceptable.
ii. Existing and design elevations shall be noted at every 50- and 25-foot station interval as well as the location of centerlines of intersecting streets.
iii. Portions of drainage and sanitary sewer systems and underground utilities shall be shown on the profile, where practical.
iv. Profiles shall be drawn over a grid (1' interval vertical and 25- or 50-foot interval horizontal with odd stations where necessary). Graphical scales (horizontal and vertical) shall be drawn on the plan.
v. Certain easements and retention/detention basins may require their own profile drawing.
c. Cross-Sections
i. Where steep slopes exist, if required by the Commission, cross-sections shall be drawn at 50-foot intervals perpendicular to the centerline of the right-of-way, however, odd station cross-sections may be required. The sections shall show existing and proposed topographic elevations from at least 25 feet into the property on the left to a point at least 25 feet into the property on the right. Property lines, drainage and sanitary sewer components and other underground utilities shall be accurately drawn in their proposed horizontal and vertical location where intersected by the cross-section.
ii. Certain easements and retention/detention basins may require their own cross-section drawing.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 14 -
d. Construction Details and Notes
i. Construction details and notes (general construction notes, soil erosion and sedimentation control, sequence of construction, landscaping, emergency contact information, etc.) shall be contained on a dedicated plan sheet. Here it should be clearly noted that construction of the subdivision is to be in accordance with Town regulations and standards and the State of Connecticut Department of Transportation Form 816, "Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction," latest edition.
D. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan - Whenever plans for the proposed subdivision show that it will result in the cumulative disturbance of more than one-half acre of land, the subdivider will submit with the subdivision plan an erosion and sediment control plan that presents, in mapped and narrative form, the measures to be taken to control erosion and sedimentation both during and after construction. The plan shall be based on the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control as amended, which is available from the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, and on the requirements of the Putnam Zoning Regulations.
Section 203 - Public Hearing - After the application has been filed and it is determined by the Commission that the requirements of these regulations have been met, the Commission shall:
A. When a subdivision is within 500 feet of a Town boundary, submit the Subdivision Plan to the Northeastern Connecticut Council of Governments (NECCOG) (or its successor) for an advisory report. If such report of NECCOG (or its successor) is not submitted to the Commission within thirty (30) days after transmittal, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposed subdivision.
B. Public Hearing - The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the subdivision application. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least twice at intervals of not less than two days; the first not more than fifteen days, nor less than ten days, and the last not less than two days prior to the date of such hearing; and, by sending a copy thereof by registered or certified mail to the applicant.
C. After the public hearing, the Commission shall approve the subdivision if the subdivision plan and accompanying certificates, documents, plans and data conform to the conditions and requirements of these regulations. In granting approval, the Commission may attach conditions that it deems necessary to modify the subdivision plan or documents, and to preserve the purpose and intent of these regulations. The Commission shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove, any subdivision application or maps and plans submitted within sixty-five (65) days after the close of the public hearing in accordance with the requirements of these regulations. Notice of the decision of the Commission shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town and addressed by certified mail to the subdivider by the Secretary of the Commission within ten (10) days after the decision
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 15 -
has been rendered. The notice shall state that: the application was approved, modified and approved, or disapproved, together with the date of such action. An extension of this period may be had with the consent of the subdivider. The grounds for approval, modified approval, or denial, shall be stated in the records of the Commission. No changes, modifications or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plan after approval and endorsement by the Commission. Any change, modification or revision shall require a new subdivision application to be filed with the Commission. In the event that a subdivision plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, the same shall be considered null and void, and the Commission shall institute proceedings to have the plan stricken from the records of the Town Clerk.
Section 204 - Final Plan
A. Subdivision approval shall take effect when all conditions of approval have been met and the subdivision plan has been endorsed by the Commission and filed with the Town Clerk. The Commission shall either endorse the Subdivision Plan to permit filing with the Town Clerk when all conditions of final approval have been met and all required subdivision improvements have been completed in accordance with the plans as approved, or when a financial guarantee satisfactory to the Commission to cover the full cost of all improvements has been filed in a form and manner satisfactory to the Commission.
B. Financial Guarantee - In lieu of completion of all or part of the required improvements prior to the endorsement of the Subdivision Plan, the subdivider may file with the Commission, a financial guarantee in accordance with Article IV, and request the Commission to approve the subdivision on the condition that the subdivider expressly agrees to complete all improvements within the time specified by the commission or if the commission shall fail to specify a time within five years or as otherwise required by statute. This undertaking shall be guaranteed by a proper financial guarantee as provided in Article IV.
C. Filing - The Subdivision Plan, (i.e. mylar) shall be filed through the Land Use Office by the Applicant. The Applicant shall pay the requisite filing fee, and said plan shall be permanently filed in the office of the Town Clerk. No plan shall be approved for filing by the Land Use Office unless and until the statutory appeals period has elapsed without the taking of an appeal. Forthwith, after the expiration of the appeal period, the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission shall sign the plan and a written notice shall be mailed, return receipt requested, to the applicant, indicating that the ninety-day period for filing of the plan has commenced to run. Any subdivision plan not so filed within ninety (90) days as aforesaid or within ninety (90) days of the date upon which such plan is taken as approved by reason of the failure of the commission to act shall become null and void. The physical filing of the signed plan with the Town Clerk shall be the responsibility of the Applicant.
D. Contingent Approval - The Commission may authorize the filing of a plan with conditional approval endorsed thereon. Such approval shall be conditioned upon (1) the actual construction, maintenance, and installation of improvements or utilities prescribed by the Commission; or (2) the occurrence of a financial guarantee as provided in this section and
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 16 -
Article IV of the regulations. Upon the occurrence of either of such events, the Commission shall cause a final approval to be endorsed thereon in the manner provided in this section. Any such conditional approval shall lapse five years from the date it is granted unless said time period is extended pursuant to the provisions of Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any person, firm, or corporation who prior to such final approval sells or offers for the sale of any lot subdivided pursuant to a conditional approval shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each lot sold or offered for sale, and any plan conditionally approved shall provide in large and prominent letters on the plan that the approval is conditional and that no lots may be sold or offered for sale until final approval is endorsed directly on said plan by the appropriate authority acting for the Commission. In addition, any applicant who receives conditional approval shall execute and record simultaneously with the filing of the plan a caveat substantially in the form as contained in the appendix of these regulations indicating that no lot can be sold or transferred until final approval of the plan as herein provided.
E. Release of Conditions - At the request of the subdivider the Commission shall execute a statement certifying: that the subdivision has received approval; all of the conditions of approval have been met; and, all required subdivision improvements have been completed in accordance with plans and specifications as approved.
F. Certificate of Compliance - Before release of any financial guarantee, or before the Commission endorses any Subdivision Plan to permit filing with the Town Clerk when no financial guarantee has been posted, the Commission shall request the subdivider to present a statement signed and sealed by the engineer who prepared the construction plans and specification for the subdivision improvements, certifying that such engineer has inspected all of the required construction work and that all of the required improvements have been completed in accordance with plans and specifications as approved. Any expense incurred in securing a certificate of compliance shall be borne by the subdivider.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 17 -
ARTICLE III - STANDARDS
Section 300 - General – All land to be subdivided or resubdivided shall be deemed suitable for building purposes in the judgment of the Commission. In all subdivisions or resubdivisions, the layout of the development should show due regard for natural features such as large trees, groves, water courses, scenic points, historic points or other community assets which add to the attractiveness or value of the area and shall take into consideration any land not deemed suitable for development.
Proper provision shall be made for the supply of potable water, storm drainage and disposal of sanitary sewerage; for soil erosion control; and for the proper provision of flood control measures. Proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing or proposed principal streets and arranged with the proper width and with safe intersections to provide an adequate and convenient system for present and prospective traffic needs. All subdivision and resubdivision plans shall be in reasonable conformance with the Plan of Conservation and Development as adopted by the Commission.
Reserve strips of land which, in the opinion of the Commission, show an intent by the subdivider to control access to the land of another, are prohibited.
Section 301 – Lots/Blocks
A. Lots - All lots shall conform to the requirements of the Putnam Zoning Regulations established for the district within which the subdivision or resubdivision is located.
1. All lots shall front on an existing or proposed public street.
2. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
3. Corner lots shall have sufficient width to provide for the required building setback on both abutting streets.
4. Reverse frontage lots are prohibited except where they are essential: to provide separation from traffic arteries; to provide protection to abutting properties; or to overcome certain conditions of topography or orientation.
5. All lots in a subdivision shall be numbered consecutively with the first lot designated with the number one. No fraction, suffix or prefix shall be permitted. Adjoining subdivisions having the same name shall not duplicate the numbers of the previous plan, but shall continue the sequence used in the previous plan.
B. Blocks - Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots are required. Interior walks may be required where
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 18 -
necessary to facilitate circulation or provide access to community facilities. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be designed with due regard for:
1. Provision of suitable building sites for the type of use contemplated;
2. Elimination of excessive street area;
3. Safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
4. Topography and drainage; and
5. The requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
Section 302 - Streets
A. Street System.
1. Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce reasonable grades and suitable building sites.
2. The subdivider shall be responsible for the construction, development, installation and completion of all streets and sidewalks within the subdivision. In addition, the subdivider shall be responsible for the construction and installation of all utilities including, but not limited to, electric lines, gas lines, water mains, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and drains, and the necessary fire alarm protective system. All streets, sidewalks and utilities shall be constructed and installed by the subdivider at his own expense in accordance with the standards, requirements and specifications of these Regulations and the regulations of the Connecticut Department of Transportation.
3. Residential streets shall be laid out as to discourage through traffic; however, the arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of existing or proposed major streets or highways.
4. If lots resulting from original subdivision are large enough to permit resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, adequate street rights-of-way to permit further subdivision shall be provided as necessary.
5. The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the continuation of streets as required by the Commission in adjoining subdivisions or for their proper future projection when adjoining property is not subdivided, and shall be of a width consistent with that of existing connecting streets.
6. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street or highway, the Commission may require marginal access streets, driveways, reverse frontage lots, or such additional treatment as will reduce the number of intersections with such street or
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 19 -
highway, separate local and through traffic, and provide protection for abutting properties.
7. Dead end streets shall be prohibited, except as short stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts, in which case they shall be provided with a temporary turn-around of standard cul-de-sac radius.
B. Cul-de-sac - Permanent cul-de-sacs shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet, and shall have at the closed end a turn-around containing a right-of-way having an outside radius of fifty (50) feet, which shall be paved to a radius of forty (40) feet. In non-residential developments, the Commission may require an outside radius of seventy (70) feet which shall be paved to a radius of sixty (60) feet
C. Street Requirements.
1. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall conform to the following:
a. A primary residential street and/or a non-residential street shall have pavement 28-feet in width centered in a right-of-way 60-feet in width.
b. A secondary residential street shall have pavement 24-feet in width centered in a right-of-way 50-feet in width.
2. Short extensions of existing streets with lesser right-of-way requirements may be permitted at the discretion of the Commission.
D. Street Alignment
1. Horizontal curves shall be incorporated into the design wherever there is a change in direction of the centerline of the roadway. Horizontal curves shall be laid out in accordance with the following standards:
a. Primary residential street and non-residential street – 150 feet.
b. Secondary residential street – 100 feet.
2. On a primary residential street, reverse horizontal curves shall be separated by a forty (40) foot or more length of tangent section.
E. Street Grades
1. Centerline grades shall be not less than 1%, nor more than 10%. Vertical curves shall be used at all changes in slope and shall be designed in relation to the extent of the grade change and to provide the following minimum sight distance:
a. Primary residential street and/or non-residential street – 200 feet.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 20 -
b. Secondary residential street – 150 feet.
2. Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection exceeds 3%, leveling areas having a maximum grade of 3% shall be provided for a minimum distance of 50 feet measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
F. Street Intersections.
1. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles (90?). However, no street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 60 degrees. In all cases intersections shall be designed so as to provide satisfactory land usage and safe traffic conditions.
2. Intersections with major streets or major highways should be reduced to a minimum.
3. Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out either directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of 150 feet between their centerlines.
4. Curve radii shall be provided at street intersections varying according to the types of streets intersecting and the angle at which they intersect; provided, however, that none shall be less than 25 feet.
G. Connecticut Department of Transportation Permit
1. Where a proposed road or drain joins with a State Highway, the subdivider shall obtain a permit for such connection from the Connecticut Department of Transportation.
Section 303 - Drainage
A. General Requirements.
1. No subdivision or resubdivision shall be approved which does not make adequate provision for storm or flood water runoff control. The stormwater management system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and shall, wherever possible, utilize techniques designed to recharge groundwater, minimize downstream flooding, etc. Low Impact Development (LID) methods as defined in the latest edition of the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as amended, shall be incorporated into the stormwater design for the subdivision unless impractical in the particular instance. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed in accordance with the standards of the regulations and said Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual. A copy of design computations shall be submitted along with plans.
2. If LID methods are not used, inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any intersections, nor for a distance of more than 350 feet in the gutter.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 21 -
When capacities are exceeded at a point, catch basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point.
B. Nature of Stormwater Facilities.
1. Location
a. The subdivider may be required by the Commission to carry away by pipe or open ditch, any spring or surface water that may have existed previous to, or may result from, the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width.
2. Accessibility to Public Storm Sewers
a. If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the Commission, the subdivider shall make arrangements for future stormwater disposal at the time the plan receives approval. Provision for such connection shall be incorporated in the financial guarantee required for the subdivision plan.
3. Accommodation of Upstream Drainage Areas
a. A culvert or other drainage facility shall be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area whether inside or outside the subdivision. The subdivider shall submit to the Commission, calculations to establish the necessary size of the facility, based on applicable construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by the zoning regulations.
4. Effect on Downstream Drainage Areas
a. The subdivider shall study the effect of the subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incidental to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the Commission may require the subdivider to take steps to minimize the impact on downstream properties.
5. Low Impact Development (LID)
a. In order to minimize impact to downstream drainage facilities, increase the environmental quality of stormwater runoff, and to provide for water conservation and increased groundwater recharge measures, Low Impact Development (LID) methods as defined in the latest edition of the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as amended, shall be incorporated into the stormwater design for the subdivision.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 22 -
6. Flood Prone Areas.
a. If a proposed subdivision is in a flood prone area, (1) it shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood prone area; (2) all public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize and eliminate flood damage; and (3) adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
b. Flood prone areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste material or stumps.
c. All subdivisions located in a flood prone area shall include base flood elevation data on the plans.
Section 304 - Water Supply Facilities
A. General Requirements - if a public water supply is within 200 feet of a subdivision boundary, measured along a street, alley or easement, the water supply lines shall be extended to serve the subdivision and connected to the subdivision. The cost of extending this line will be borne by the developer, under the supervision of the Water Pollution Control Authority. Upon completion of the extension, the line shall become the property of the Water Pollution Control Authority. Application for water line extensions shall be made through the Water Pollution Control Authority office and will be contingent upon approval of the developer's plans and specifications. When a public water supply is more than 200 feet from the subdivision boundary, the Commission may require a water system, subject to the approval of the Fire Marshal, capable of providing fire protection if it finds that the size of the proposed development requires such a water system to insure the public health and safety.
Water supply facilities design shall be in conformance with the Water Pollution Control Authority's design criteria and engineering requirements. All water supply facilities shall be compatible with the long range planning for water supply within the Town.
B. Fire Hydrants - Where public water is available or required, fire hydrants may be required where necessary to insure the public health and safety. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 500 feet apart in residential areas and no more than 300 feet apart in commercial/industrial areas, and shall be approved by the Water Pollution Control Authority. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements, shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plan. All fire protection facilities (i.e. hydrants, sprinklers, etc.) shall be designed and installed in conformance with the standards, requirements and direction of the Town of Putnam Fire Marshal. Furthermore, all proposed fire protection facilities shall be in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) as well as the local fire protection authority. Fire hydrant flow tests shall be required in the area of the proposed subdivision to see if there is sufficient water pressure and delivery volume (under stress) for the proper operation of a fire hydrant pursuant to the
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 23 -
Water Pollution Control Authority's specifications. In areas where a public water supply is not available within 200 feet measured along a street, alley or easement, a dry hydrant accessing a pond with adequate water supply for firefighting purposes, if such a pond is available within 500 feet from the subdivision and along a public street, alley or easement, or within the subdivision, shall be included within or adjacent to the subdivision. Such dry hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the Fire Marshal.
C. Private potable water wells shall be reviewed and approved by the appropriate public health authority.
Section 305 - Sanitary Sewer/Septic Systems
A. Public Sewer Systems.
1. Public sewer systems shall be constructed throughout the subdivision and shall be connected to existing public sewer facilities when such facilities are within 100 feet of any boundary of the proposed subdivision measured along any street, alley or right-of-way. The cost of extending such facilities will be borne by the developer, under the supervision of the Water Pollution Control Authority. Upon completion of the extension, the line shall become the property of the Water Pollution Control Authority. Applications for sewer line extensions shall be made through the Water Pollution Control Authority office and will be contingent upon approval of the developer's plans and specifications.
2. When public sewer facilities will be made available to the area within 100 feet of any boundary of the proposed subdivision measured along any street, alley or right-of-way, within a period of five years, as determined by the Putnam Water Pollution Control Authority, public sewer systems shall be installed throughout the subdivision and up to the boundary for future connections. Such systems shall be capped and shall include all underground sewer lines for a complete system from the homes or commercial/industrial users along streets or easements to the subdivision boundary.
3. Where a subdivision has frontage on an existing street, public sewer facilities may be required within the existing street right-of-way if existing public sewer facilities are within 100 feet of any boundary of the proposed subdivision measured along any street, alley or right-of-way. The cost of extending such facilities will be borne by the developer, under the supervision of the Water Pollution Control Authority.
4. Sanitary sewers shall be located within street rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in easements on private property, access shall be provided to all sewer lines, manholes, and other related sewer facilities. The proposed location of sewer facilities shall be shown on the final plan of subdivision, and easements to the Town shall not be less than twenty (20) feet wide.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 24 -
5. Sanitary sewer facilities design shall be in conformance with the Water Pollution Control Authority's design criteria and engineering requirements. All sanitary sewer facilities shall be compatible with the long range planning for sewering the Town.
B. Septic Systems - When the subdivision is not served by sanitary sewer, a statement from the Northeast District Department of Health shall be obtained and submitted to the Commission by the Subdivider certifying that the land to be subdivided and the subdivision plans are satisfactory for private sewage disposal. Adequacy of plans for sewage disposal facilities shall be based on percolation tests carried out in accordance with State Public Health Code Regulations, and witnessed by the Northeast District Department of Health or its designated alternate. At least one test pit shall be dug and one percolation test made for each lot. The method of making such tests and reporting of said results shall be as prescribed by the State Public Health Code and the Northeast District Department of Health. At its discretion, the Commission may require the subdivider to submit a report from a sanitary engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, certifying that the land to be subdivided and the subdivision plan are satisfactory for private sewage disposal and water supply systems. All sewage disposal systems and water supply systems shall meet the applicable requirements of the Connecticut State Department of Health. All costs in connection with securing a sanitation certificate, making, witnessing and reporting of percolation tests, test pits, sanitary engineering reports, etc., shall be borne by the subdivider.
Section 306 - Sidewalks and Berms
A. Sidewalks are required in all subdivisions, and berms are required in all non-LID subdivisions, in accordance with the following standards:
1. Five-foot wide concrete sidewalks shall be included in the non-pavement right-of -way on both sides of all streets in all subdivisions unless waived by the Commission in accordance with this section. Sidewalks shall be located at least 2 feet from the road edge. This area shall be loamed and seeded.
2. Cape Cod berm shall be provided on both sides of all streets in all non-LID subdivisions and shall be constructed to provide for driveway cuts and sidewalk ramps at intersections at the time of construction unless waived by the Commission in accordance with this section.
3. All sidewalk and Cape Cod berm construction shall comply with the requirements of these Regulations and of the Connecticut Department of Transportation's “Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction” Form 816, latest revision, and any Town of Putnam detail drawings.
4. All Cape Cod berms, as shown on Appendix C, Figures, TYPICAL CROSS SECTION – RESIDENTIAL STREETS (NON-LID), shall be designed with cuts at all pedestrian crosswalks to provide adequate and reasonable access for the safe and convenient movement of physically handicapped persons. The following specifications shall be
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 25 -
complied with: (1) the cut shall have a detectable warning strip; (2) the cut shall be at least thirty-six inches wide; and (3) the cut shall have a slope not greater than 1-inch per foot and shall be beveled at the bottom.
5. Sidewalks shall meet standards described in the Americans with Disabilities Act “ADA Standards for Accessible Design”, latest revision thereto.
B. The Commission may waive the requirement for berms and sidewalks if:
l. The subdivision is less than ten (10) lots and is unable to be expanded;
2. The subdivision is in a rural area and is located outside of a one-mile radius from any school or commercial area; or
3. The Applicant demonstrates that in the particular instance the exclusion of berms better serves the purposes of employing Low Impact (LID) construction methods.
C. The Commission may waive the sidewalk on one side of the street in rural areas.
Section 307 - Utilities – Utilities (electric, telephone, CATV, broadband, etc.) shall be provided and installed underground in all subdivisions in accordance with appropriate utility company design criteria and engineering requirements.
Section 308 - Street Lighting - Street lighting fixtures shall be full cutoff fixtures and shall be provided in all subdivisions and shall not be spaced more than three hundred (300) feet apart. The developer shall install fixtures prior to the acceptance of the street. The provisions of this section shall apply only to property located within the special service district of the town.
Section 309 - Parks and Public Area Reservations - The tract to be subdivided should not be a part of or encroach upon an area or areas designated in the Plan of Conservation and Development for future public facilities. Due regard shall be shown for the preservation of outstanding natural and cultural features such as scenic areas, water courses and historic sites. Land for parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and open spaces shall be provided and reserved in each subdivision as deemed necessary and in locations deemed proper by the Commission. Said open spaces, parks and playgrounds shall be shown on the subdivision plan. The land reserved shall be of such size, location, shape, topography and general character as to be useful to satisfy the needs determined by the Commission. The reservation of land shall also conform to any Town plan pertaining to parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and open spaces. In determining the need for provision of land for parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and open spaces, the Commission shall be guided by, but not limited to, a standard of 1,000 square feet of land area for each building lot and a minimum reservation area of one acre, and shall take into consideration the size of the subdivision and any existing parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and open spaces in the neighborhood. Pursuant to the provisions of CGS Section 8-25 as
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 26 -
amended, the applicant may, with the approval of the Commission, pay a fee to the Town or pay a fee to the Town and transfer land to the Town in lieu of this requirement to provide open spaces. Such payment or combination of payment and the fair market value of land transferred shall be equal to not more than ten per cent of the fair market value of the land to be subdivided prior to the approval of the subdivision. The fair market value shall be determined by an appraiser jointly selected by the Commission and the applicant. A fraction of such payment the numerator of which is one and the denominator of which is the number of approved parcels in the subdivision shall be made at the time of the sale of each approved parcel of land in the subdivision. Payments made to the Town under this section shall be deposited in a fund which shall be used for the purpose of preserving open space or acquiring additional land for open space or for recreational or agricultural purposes.
Where the property line of a proposed subdivision abuts an existing park, playground, recreation area or open space, the Commission may require the new park, playground, recreation area or open space to form a continuation of the existing area to provide a single large unified area. Such parks, playgrounds, recreation areas or open spaces shall abut or have direct access to a public right-of-way dedicated to public use. No privately owned reserved strip which controls access to such areas will be permitted. The right-of-way shall not be included in the required area, shall be at least 20-feet wide and shall be leveled off in a manner suitable for pedestrian and vehicular traffic with a maximum grade of 10 percent.
When a park, playground or other recreation area or open space shall have been shown on a subdivision plan, the approval of said plan shall not constitute an acceptance by the Town of such area. The Commission shall require the Plan to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. The Commission may also require the filing of a written agreement between the subdivider and the Town covering future deed and title, dedication, and provision for the cost of grading, development, equipment and maintenance of any such recreation area. Where title to land designated for parks, recreation areas or open space is to remain with the subdivider or reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners of the subdivision, there shall be submitted copies of agreements or other documents shoving the manner in which such areas are to be maintained and the provision made therefor. All agreements and covenants covering the maintenance of such unceded parcels of land shall be acceptable to the Town Counsel as to their legal sufficiency.
Section 310 - Preservation of Natural Features - In the consideration of the subdivision, the Commission shall make such recommendations as necessary to preserve and enhance or produce scenic values and conditions for the improvement of subdivision or development design.
Section 311 - Non-Residential Subdivisions
A. General
1. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 27 -
B. Standards
1. In addition to these regulations, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed, is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed:
a. Street rights-of-way, pavement width and pavement thickness shall be according to the following:
ROW Pavement Pavement
Function Width Width Thickness
Office Park 50’ 24’ 4”
Industrial 60’ 30’ 6”
Commercial 60’ 30’ 6”
Mixed Industrial & Commercial 60’ 30’ 6”
b. Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent, existing or potential residential areas.
Section 312 - Driveways
A. Where permitted, access drives serving residential properties must have a minimum paved width of twelve (12) feet, and a maximum paved width of fifteen (15) feet, at the street line. During construction of roads, paved driveway apron areas shall be paved to the property line or a distance of 10-feet from the edge of the paved road; whichever is greater.
B. Access drives in multi-family, commercial and industrial subdivisions serving any required paved parking lots as a direct access drive from a street shall, when measured at the beginning of the driveway after the radii are parallel, be paved not less than twelve (12) feet in width or more than sixteen (16) feet in width for one-way traffic (parking spaces angled at 70 degrees or less only), and shall be paved not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width or more than thirty (30) feet in width for two-way traffic. Traffic lanes may be separated by landscaped islands. Where necessary for safe and efficient vehicular movement and capacity, extra traffic lanes may be added. To the extent practical, access drives shall align with access drives to lots across the street, if any, or, where such alignment is not possible, be offset a minimum of 150 feet between their centerlines. Curve radii shall be provided at the points where such an access drive intersects a street, varying in dimension according to the type of street intersected, the angle at which the drive intersects the street, and the intensity of the use of the adjoining lot.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 28 -
C. Connecticut Department of Transportation Permit
1. Where a proposed drive joins with a State Highway, the subdivider shall obtain a permit from the Connecticut Department of Transportation for connection of such drive to the State Highway.
Section 313 - Easements
A. Easements shall be provided as necessary for public utilities and shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. Such easements shall be located on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines to the extent feasible.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially to the line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to provide drainage and permit access for maintenance by the Town.
C. Easements for sanitary sewers, water mains and public rights-of-way and easements and discharge rights for storm drainage and water courses draining existing or proposed public streets or public streets that may be constructed in the future shall be confirmed by written easements and deeds describing the land involved and privileges of the Town in a legal form satisfactory to the Town Counsel.
Section 314 – Tree Planting/Loaming and Seeding
A. Tree Planting
1. The subdivider shall supply and plant, to the specifications shown on the subdivision plan. Trees shall be planted not less than twenty (20) feet from the street line.
B. Loaming and Seeding
1. All exposed and disturbed areas, except hard surfaced areas, shall be covered with a minimum of four (4) inches of loam and suitably seeded by proper application of lime, fertilizer, seed and mulch, so as to establish a good ground cover and prevent erosion. The following minimum application rates apply:
Material Application Rate (lb./1,000 s.f.)
Seed According to Specific Seed Mix
Fertilizer (10-10-10) 7.5
Lime 200
Mulch 115
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 29 -
NOTE: Increase seeding rate by at least 10% and inoculants for legumes by 4x when application is by hydroseeding. Also, warm season seed mixes may be applied during the spring planting period only.
All seed shall produce an acceptable stand of perennial grass approved by the Commission.
Section 315 - Street Signs/House Numbers/Street Names
A. Street Signs - Street signs shall be erected by the subdivider at the expense of the subdivider, under the direction of the Department of Public Works.
B. House Numbers - House numbers shall be assigned by the Town Assessor.
C. Street Names - Names of new streets shall not duplicate nor bear phonetic resemblance to the names of existing streets within the Town. Streets which join or are in alignment with streets of abutting or neighboring properties shall bear the same name. Street names shall be included on the Subdivision Plan. Street names shall be approved by the Board of Selectmen and a Town Meeting.
Section 316 – Bounds – Monuments shall be set throughout the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors (CALS), Minimum Standards of Accuracy, Content and Certification for Surveys and Maps, as amended.
Section 317 – Soil Erosion and Sediment Control – A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared in accordance with the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control as amended, which is available from the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, and the requirements of the Putnam Zoning Regulations and approved by the Commission.
Section 318 - Energy Conservation
A. The applicant shall, in the design of the final subdivision plan, demonstrate to the Commission, that he/she/it has provided a subdivision site development design that encourages energy-efficient patterns of development and land use, the use of solar and other renewable forms of energy, and energy conservation. Said site development design shall demonstrate to the Commission that the applicant has considered, in developing the plan, using passive solar energy techniques which would not significantly increase the cost of the housing to the buyer, after tax credits, subsidies and exemptions. As used in this Section, passive solar energy techniques mean site design techniques which maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss and provide thermal storage within a building during the heating season
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 30 -
and minimize heat gain and provide for natural ventilation during the cooling season. The site design techniques shall include, but not be limited to:
1. House orientation, so that the building is located as close to the north lot line as possible to increase yard space on the south site of the building for better capture and control of prevailing sun during the various seasons;
2. Street and lot layouts such that the maximum possible number of houses are placed on south-facing slopes;
3. Vegetation and landscaping, and natural and man-made topographical features, that take into account the effects of prevailing winds and prevailing sun during the various seasons, water conservation, the deployment and usage of alternative energy systems (such as wind or solar photovoltaics), and protection of solar heat gain or solar shading during the various seasons, as appropriate within the development.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 31 -
ARTICLE IV –
ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
Section 400 - Improvements and Financial Guarantee
A. Completion of Improvements - All applicants shall be required to complete all the street and other improvements as specified in the subdivision plan or as required in these regulations, and to dedicate public improvements to the Town, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
1. The applicant shall submit a "Certificate of Title" indicating all title restriction, prior to the conveying any land to the Town indicating all title restrictions.
B. Financial Guarantee
1. Except in cases of conditional approval or where all improvements have been constructed prior to final approval of the plan the applicant shall post a financial guarantee for the construction of such improvements prior to the time of filing the subdivision plan in the Land Records in an amount estimated by the Commission. This financial guarantee shall be in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit, a cash deposit with the Town, or a bank passbook or statement savings account payable to the Town. The financial guarantee shall be accompanied by a written and executed agreement which shall be satisfactory to the Town Attorney. If a letter of credit is used, it shall be satisfactory to the Town Attorney. If a cash deposit with the Town, or a bank passbook or statement savings account payable to the Town, is used, it shall be accompanied by an agreement substantially in accordance with the sample form in Appendix A, and said agreement shall be satisfactory to the Town Attorney.
2. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be incorporated in the financial guarantee agreement and shall not in any event exceed five (5) years or except as otherwise provided by Section 8-25 of the State of Connecticut General Statutes.
3. Maintenance During Construction - All maintenance, including snowplowing, prior to formal acceptance of any road or associated drainage improvements shall be and remain upon the developer and shall be covered by the financial guarantee for the construction of improvements.
C. Failure to Complete Subdivision - Where a financial guarantee for the construction of improvements has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the time specified by the Commission the Town may thereupon declare the financial guarantee to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed. If necessary the Town shall, in addition to call the financial guarantee, proceed against the individual developer and/or owner of said premises. The continued maintenance of any agreed financial guarantee for the construction of improvements is a condition of approval of all subdivisions and the lapse or
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 32 -
failure of such financial guarantee prior to final release by the Commission shall be grounds for revocation of the subdivision approval as to all unbuilt lots.
Section 401 - Inspections of Improvements
A. General Procedure - The Commission or its agent shall provide for inspection required improvements during construction and insure satisfactory completion. If it is found upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for completing the improvements in accordance with said standards and specifications.
B. Modification of Improvements - If the applicant finds that a deviation from the approved plan is necessary, he shall notify the Commission of the extent and type of modifications prior to executing any change. The item will be reviewed at the next Commission meeting.
C. Release or Reduction of Financial Guarantee for the Construction of Improvements
1. Certificate of Satisfactory Completion - The Commission will not recommend acceptance or dedication of required improvements, nor release a financial guarantee for the construction of such improvements until all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Commission, through submission of detailed "as-built" survey plans of the subdivision, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements are in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision and are ready for dedication to the local government. Upon such approval and recommendation, the Town may thereafter accept the improvements for dedication.
2. Reduction of Financial Guarantee for the Construction of Improvements - A financial guarantee for the construction of improvements may be reduced upon actual completion of public improvements and then only to the ratio that the public improvement dedicated bears the total public improvements of the plan. In no event shall a financial guarantee for the construction of improvements be reduced below ten (10%) percent of the principal amount.
Section 402 - Maintenance of Improvements and Financial Guarantee for Maintenance
A. The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements in the subdivision and provide for snow removal, street cleaning, drainage and general maintenance on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of said improvements by the Town. In the event that the applicant fails to comply, the Town is authorized to perform the necessary work without incurring any liability, and to charge such work to the applicant in accordance with Section 400.
B. The applicant shall be required to file a Financial Guarantee for maintenance, with the Commission, in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney, prior to acceptance, in an amount
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 33 -
equal to ten (10) percent of the original cost of the public improvements, in order to assure the satisfactory maintenance of the required improvements for a period of one (1) year after the date of their acceptance by the Town.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 34 -
ARTICLE V – DEFINITIONS
Section 500 - General - The purpose of this Article is to define the terms and words that are specific to the subdivision of land or to the Subdivision Regulations. Article VIII - Definitions, of the Zoning Regulations, are hereby incorporated as part of these Subdivision Regulations.
Section 501 - Definitions
1. Applicant, Subdivider or Developer - shall mean an individual, partnership, firm, corporation, legal entity or agent thereof who, or which, undertakes the subdivision or resubdivision of land or any activity, included in the subdivision regulations. For the purpose of the Subdivision Regulations, these three terms shall be synonymous.
2. Application - Refer to Section 200
3. Agent - That person or persons designated by the Planning Commission to enforce these regulations.
4. Certification - means a signed, written approval by a Connecticut registered professional engineer that the soil erosion and sediment control plan has been prepared based on the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control as amended, which is available from the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, and that the subdivision plan, including the soil erosion and sediment control plan, has been prepared in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Town of Putnam Zoning Regulations.
5. Commission - shall mean the Town of Putnam Planning Commission.
6. Cul-de-sac - shall mean a street or a portion of a street with only one (l) vehicular outlet that has a turn-around at the end. (Sec. 302B)
7. Dead End Street - shall mean a street or a portion of a street with one vehicular outlet, and not terminated by a cul-de-sac. Dead End Streets are not permitted.
8. Detention Basin - an area excavated or constructed for the purpose of temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
9. Development - shall mean any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
10. Discharge or Rate of Flow - the volume of water passing a particular point in a unit of time, cubic feet per second (cfs), or gallons per minute (gpm).
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 35 -
11. Disturbed Area - an area where the natural vegetative ground cover is destroyed, moved or removed.
12. Easement - shall mean the right to use land owned by another for a special limited purpose.
13. Final Plan - A complete and exact subdivision plan prepared in form for official recording, to define property lines, proposed streets and other improvements. (Sec. 204)
14. Financial Guarantee - shall mean a type of surety posted by the applicant with the Town, which guarantees that all required improvements shall be completed as per the approved plans and these regulations. For the purpose of the Subdivision Regulations, a Financial Guarantee shall be either an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank licensed to do business in the State of' Connecticut, a cash deposit with the Town, or a bank passbook or statement savings account payable to the Town.
15. Improvements - shall mean all things constructed or placed within the subdivision, including but not limited to, the following:
a. Roads, streets, alleys, driveways, access ways, entrances into rights-of-way, street signs, and lights.
b. Grading, slopes, retaining walls and monuments.
c. Sidewalks, crosswalks, pedestrian paths and bicycle paths.
d. Berms, gutters and curve returns at intersections.
e. Water mains, utility pipes and utility conduit lines.
f. Sodding, landscaping, tree planting and erosion control measures.
g. Stormwater drainage facilities and related appurtenances.
16. Land Dedication - shall mean either land reserved and formally restricted of the land record for the benefit of the lot owners of a specific subdivision or land formally conveyed either in fee or in easement to the town or non-governmental entity approved by the town for a public purpose including, but not limited to, conservation, recreation or open space.
17. Loam, Topsoil - shall mean a rich, easily pulverized soil, consisting of a mixture of varying proportions of clay, sand and organic matter capable of supporting cultivated vegetation.
18. Monument - a permanent marker installed to designate the legal limits of a street, boundary or right-of-way. (Sec. 315)
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 36 -
19. Performance Guarantee - refer to Sec. 400, Improvements and Financial Guarantee, and to definition of Financial Guarantee.
20. Preliminary Subdivision Plan - shall mean a preliminary plan of the entire property under single ownership, drawn in accordance with the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations and including required supporting documents. The purpose of this plan is to enable the applicant and the Planning Commission to identify potential problems and to take corrective measures prior to filing a Subdivision Plan.
21. Resubdivision - as set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes, shall mean a change in the plan of an approved or recorded subdivision or resubdivision, if such change:
a. Affects any street layout shown on such plan;
b. Affects any area reserved thereon for public use; or
c. Diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such plan.
22. Reverse Frontage Lot - shall mean a lot extending between and having frontage on a major street or highway and a residential street, with vehicular access solely from the residential street. This limitation shall be guaranteed through granting a lien against the property to the Town.
23. Retention Basin - an area excavated or constructed for the purpose of stormwater runoff. Discharge from the retention basin is achieved through the infiltration of the stored runoff into the ground.
24. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan - shall mean a scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and shall include, but not be limited to, a plan and narrative based on the provisions of the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control as amended, which is available from the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, and on the requirements of the Putnam Zoning Regulations.
25. Street Right-of-Way or Right-of-Way - shall mean that portion of land between property lines over which a street, path, driveway, utility lines, and other public improvements are built or reserved for future use.
26. Street - Primary Residential - a street which serves the prime function of collection or distribution of intracommunity residential traffic.
27. Street - Secondary Residential - a street which is used primarily for residential access.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 37 -
28. Subdivision - as set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes, shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots, made subsequent to the adoption of subdivision regulations by the Commission for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes, and includes resubdivisions.
29. Subdivision Plan - shall mean a drawing in final form showing a proposed subdivision containing all information or detail required by these Subdivision Regulations, to be presented to the Commission for approval and which, if approved, may be duly filed or recorded by the subdivider in the office of the Municipal Clerk. (Sec. 302)
30. Wetlands and Watercourses - areas defined in accordance with Section 22a-38 of the General Statutes of Connecticut and the Town of Putnam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 38 -
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 39 -
Appendix A
Sample Financial Guarantee Agreement Form &
Conditional Approval Contract
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 40 -
SAMPLE FINANCIAL GUARANTEE AGREEMENT FORM Page 1/5
TOWN OF PUTNAM PLANNING COMMISSION
PERFORMANCE SECURED BY DEPOSIT OF MONEY
AGREEMENT made this date ______________, between the Town of Putnam, acting by and through the Putnam Planning Commission, and _____________________________, who has a usual place of business at _________________________ (the “Applicant”), to secure construction of ways and installation of municipal services and other improvements for the subdivision of land located ______________________________ (Assessor’s Map ___Parcel ________) and owned by _____________________ and shown on a plan entitled “_____________________________________________”, that was prepared by _________________________, dated __________________________, that depicts _____ residential building lots and was granted subdivision approval by the Planning Commission pursuant to a Certificate of Approval filed with the Putnam Town Clerk on _________________,
KNOW ALL PERSONS by these presents that the Applicant hereby binds and obligates itself/himself/herself/themselves and the Applicant’s executors, administrators, devisees, heirs, successors and assigns to the Town of Putnam, acting by and through the Putnam Planning Commission, in the sum of $ ___________ dollars, and has secured this obligation by depositing with the Town of Putnam Treasurer a deposit of money in the aforementioned sum to be deposited in a subdivision escrow account in the name of the Town of Putnam. Said deposit shall be used to insure the performance by the Applicant of all covenants, conditions, agreements, terms and provisions contained in the following documents:
1) The Application for approval of the subdivision plan, dated ___________;
2) CGS Sections 8-25, 8-25a, 8-25b and 8-26 as amended;
3) The Town of Putnam’s applicable Subdivision Regulations;
4) The conditions set forth in the Planning Commission’s Vote of Approval of the subdivision;
5) The subdivision plan as qualified by the Planning Commission’s Vote of Approval and as hereinafter endorsed and recorded; and
6) The following additional documents that set forth construction or installation requirements: A. _____________________________________________
B. _____________________________________________
C. _____________________________________________
D. _____________________________________________
E. _____________________________________________
This Agreement shall remain in full force and effect until the Applicant has fully and satisfactorily performed all of the obligations secured hereunder or has elected to provide another method of securing performance as provided for under CGS Sections 8-25, 8-25a, 8-25b and 8-26 as amended. Furthermore, in the event that increased security is required to be posted, the Applicant agrees that the Applicant shall post said security in a timely manner.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 41 -
SAMPLE FINANCIAL GUARANTEE AGREEMENT FORM Page 2/5
Upon satisfactory and timely completion of all of the obligations secured hereunder, the deposit of money made hereunder, including any interest accrued thereon, shall be returned to the Applicant and this Agreement shall become void. The time for completion of said obligations shall be not later than five years from the date of this agreement or such later date as may be specified by formal vote of the Planning Commission with the concurrence of the Applicant. The Planning Commission shall have the right, but not the obligation, to use the deposit made hereunder to complete the required obligations in the event that the Applicant defaults. Said deposit shall remain in place until all of the obligations secured hereunder are satisfactorily completed or the Planning Commission applies said funds and uses them to complete said obligations. Any failure by the Planning Commission to exercise this right shall not operate as a waiver or constitute laches. Any unused portion of the deposit and interest accrued will be returned to the Applicant upon satisfactory completion of the secured obligations as determined by the Planning Commission.
The Applicant hereby grants a license to the Town of Putnam and the Putnam Planning Commission and its agents to perform the obligations secured hereunder and agrees to grant any easement that the Town may deem necessary to perform said work.
In consideration of the terms and conditions of this Agreement, the Town, by and through its Planning Commission, hereby accepts the aforesaid deposit in the amount specified as security for the performance of the obligations referenced above.
Any amendments to this Agreement or to the form of the surety provided shall be agreed upon in writing and executed by all parties to this Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we set our hands and seals in agreement hereto this ____ day of ______, 20___ and in consideration of the vote of the Planning Commission duly taken on ______, 20__. ______________________________
___________________________________
___________________________________
___________________________________
___________________________________
PUTNAM PLANNING COMMISSION
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
Windham, SS. ___________, 20___
On this ____ day of ______, 20__, before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared ___________________, a/the member(s) of the Planning Commission of the Town of Putnam, personally known to me/who identified him/herself/themselves satisfactorily to me, and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be his/her/their free act and deed and for the stated purpose.
________________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires: __________________
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 42 -
SAMPLE FINANCIAL GUARANTEE AGREEMENT FORM Page 3/5
If the Applicant is a Trust:
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I also set my hand and seal in agreement hereto this _____ day of __________, 20___ on behalf of the ___________________________________ Trust, being duly authorized to do as set forth in the documentation provided herein, and for consideration of good and valuable consideration, the receipt of which is hereby acknowledged.
______________________________
Trustee (Print Name: _____________)
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
Windham, SS.
On this _____ day of __________, 20___, before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared _____________________________________, as Trustee of said Trust, who identified him/herself satisfactorily to me, and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be his/her free act and deed and for the stated purpose.
________________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires: __________________
TRUSTEE’S CERTIFICATE
, Connecticut _________, 20___
I, , hereby state under oath that I am a Trustee of the Trust (the “Trust”)), that the Trust is in full force and effect, that I am the sole Trustee of the Trust or am duly authorized under the terms of the Trust to make this statement and that the above-referenced Trustee is authorized under the Trust to enter into this Agreement.
______________________________
Trustee
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
, SS.
On this day of , 20 , before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared _____________________________________, as Trustee of said Trust, who identified him/herself satisfactorily to me, and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be his/her free act and deed and for the stated purpose.
________________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires: __________________
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 43 -
SAMPLE FINANCIAL GUARANTEE AGREEMENT FORM Page 4/5
If the Applicant is a corporation:
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I also, on behalf of _____________________________ (the “Corporation”), being duly authorized to do so in accordance with the documentation provided herewith, and for good and valuable consideration, the receipt of which is hereby acknowledged, hereby set my hand and seal in agreement hereto this _____ day of ______, 20__.
_______________________
Name of Corporation
By: President/Treasurer (circle one)
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
, SS.
On this day of , 20____, before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared _____________________________________, who identified him/herself satisfactorily to me, and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be his/her free act and deed and for the stated purpose. ________________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires: __________________
CORPORATE CLERK CERTIFICATE
, SS ___________, 20___
I, , the duly appointed clerk of __________________________, (the “Corporation”) hereby state, being under oath, hereby certify that I am the duly appoint clerk of the corporation and that the above named ________________ is the president/treasurer of the Corporation or was authorized, by a proper vote of the Corporation taken on __________, 20___, at a meeting of the Corporation that was duly convened, to enter into this Agreement on behalf of the Corporation.
______________________________
Clerk (Print Name: _______________)
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
, SS.
On this day of , 20 , before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared _____________________________________, as Clerk of the said Corporation, who identified him/herself satisfactorily to me, and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be his/her free act and deed and for the stated purpose.
________________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires: __________________
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 44 -
SAMPLE FINANCIAL GUARANTEE AGREEMENT FORM Page 5/5
TREASURER’S ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF DEPOSIT
Putnam, Connecticut
This is to certify that I, , Town Treasurer for the Town of Putnam, Connecticut, received a deposit of money from the Applicant in the amount of $ Dollars and deposited said monies in an interest bearing/noninterest bearing account with the following financial institution: __________________ in account number ______________ on the following date: ____________.
Dated: ___________ ______________________________
Town Treasurer
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 45 -
PAGE 1 OF 4
PUTNAM, CT
Date______________
COVENANT
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL CONTRACT
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS that whereas the undersigned has submitted application dated , to the Putnam Planning Commission for approval of a Subdivision Plan of a certain subdivision entitled identified as Assessors Map(s) , Lot(s) ,shown on plans dated and has requested the Commission to approve such plan without requiring a Financial Guarantee.
NOW, THEREFORE, THIS AGREEMENT WITNESSETH that in consideration of the
Putnam Planning Commission approving said plan without requiring a financial guarantee, and in consideration of one dollar in hand paid, receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, the undersigned covenants and agrees with the Town of Putnam as follows:
1. The undersigned will not sell any lot in the Subdivision or erect or place any permanent building on any such lot until the work on the ground necessary to serve adequately such lot has been completed in the manner specified in the aforesaid application and accompanying plans, and in accordance with the covenants, conditions, agreements, terms and provisions contained in the following:
a. Application for Approval of a Subdivision Plan dated ______________.
b. The Subdivision Regulations adopted by the Planning Commission.
c. The Plan as defined by the above Subdivision Regulations and as qualified by the Certificate of Approval issued by the Planning Commission dated____________________.
2. This agreement shall be binding upon the executors, administrators, devisees, heirs, successors, and assigns of the undersigned.
It is the intention of the undersigned and it is hereby understood and agreed that this Contract shall constitute a covenant running with the land included in the aforesaid subdivision and operate as a restriction upon said land; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single deed, subject to such covenant, of either the entire parcel of land shown on the subdivision plan or of all lots not previously released by the Planning Commission.
It is understood and agreed that lots within the subdivision shall, respectively, be released from the foregoing conditions upon the completion of the required improvements and approval by the Commission or by the filing of a Performance Guarantee acceptable to the Commission.
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 46 -
PAGE 2 OF 4
PUTNAM, CT
Date______________
3. The undersigned represents and covenants that the undersigned is the owner (*) in fee simple of all the land included in the aforesaid subdivision and that there are no mortgages of record or otherwise on any of said land, except such as are described below and subordinated to this Contract, and the present holders of said mortgages have assented to this Contract prior to its execution of the undersigned.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned applicant as aforesaid, does hereunto set his/her hand and seal this _______day of ______________, 20.
Applicant
Signature
Address
Description of Mortgages:
(Give complete name and Town Clerk reference)
(*If there is more than one owner, all must sign)
Assents of Mortgagees: ________________________________________
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
____________,SS , 20
Then personally appeared the above named _________________and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be _____________ free act and deed, before me.
Notary Public
My Commission expires:
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 47 -
PAGE 3 OF 4
PUTNAM, CT
Date______________
If the Applicant is a Trust:
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I also set my hand and seal in agreement hereto this _____ day of __________, 20___ on behalf of the ___________________________________ Trust, being duly authorized to do as set forth in the documentation provided herein, and for consideration of good and valuable consideration, the receipt of which is hereby acknowledged.
Trustee (Print Name: )
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
Windham, SS.
On this _____ day of __________, 20___, before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared _____________________________________, as Trustee of said Trust, who identified him/herself satisfactorily to me, and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be his/her free act and deed and for the stated purpose.
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires: __________________
TRUSTEE’S CERTIFICATE
, Connecticut _________, 20___
I, , hereby state under oath that I am a Trustee of the Trust (the “Trust”)), that the Trust is in full force and effect, that I am the sole Trustee of the Trust or am duly authorized under the terms of the Trust to make this statement and that the above-referenced Trustee is authorized under the Trust to enter into this Agreement.
______________________________
Trustee
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
, SS.
On this day of , 20 , before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared _____________________________________, as Trustee of said Trust, who identified him/herself satisfactorily to me, and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be his/her free act and deed and for the stated purpose.
________________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires: __________________
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 48 -
PAGE 4 OF 4
PUTNAM, CT
Date______________
If the Applicant is a corporation:
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I also, on behalf of _____________________________ (the “Corporation”), being duly authorized to do so in accordance with the documentation provided herewith, and for good and valuable consideration, the receipt of which is hereby acknowledged, hereby set my hand and seal in agreement hereto this _____ day of ______, 20__.
_______________________
Name of Corporation
By: President/Treasurer (circle one)
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
, SS.
On this day of , 20____, before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared _____________________________________, who identified him/herself satisfactorily to me, and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be his/her free act and deed and for the stated purpose. ________________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires: __________________
CORPORATE CLERK CERTIFICATE
, SS ___________, 20___
I, , the duly appointed clerk of __________________________, (the “Corporation”) hereby state, being under oath, hereby certify that I am the duly appoint clerk of the corporation and that the above named ________________ is the president/treasurer of the Corporation or was authorized, by a proper vote of the Corporation taken on __________, 20___, at a meeting of the Corporation that was duly convened, to enter into this Agreement on behalf of the Corporation.
______________________________
Clerk (Print Name: _______________)
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
, SS.
On this day of , 20 , before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared _____________________________________, as Clerk of the said Corporation, who identified him/herself satisfactorily to me, and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be his/her free act and deed and for the stated purpose.
________________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires: __________________
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 49 -
Appendix B
Subdivision Application Form and Checklist
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 50 -
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 51 -
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 52 -
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 53 -
Appendix C
Figures
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 54 -
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 55 -
-55-
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 56 -
-56-
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 57 -
TOWN OF PUTNAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
- 58 - 

Town of Putnam
Municipal Regulations
Aquifer Protection Areas
Effective Date
March 12, 2009
(
Town of Putnam Municipal Regulations
Aquifer Protection Areas
Effective Date:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
1 Title and Authority 2
2 Definitions 3
3 Delineation of Aquifer Protection Area Boundaries 9
~4 Prohibited and Regulated Activities 10·'
.-, 5 Activities Regulated by the State 12
6 Application for an Exemption from Prohibition or Regulation 13 C- I
7 General Registration, Permit Application and Transfer Procedures 13
8 Registration Requirements 14
9 Permit Requirements 16
10 Public Hearings Regarding Permit Applications 20
11 Bond and Insurance Relevant to Permit Applications 21
12 Best Management Practices 21
13 Other State, Federal and Local Laws 23
14 Enforcement 24
15 Amendments 25
16 Appeals 25
17 Conflict and Severance 25
18 Application and Registration Fees 26
19 Effective Date of Regulations 27
Cr.
'-".'
Town of Putnam Municipal Regulations
Aquifer Protection Areas
SECTION 1. Title and Authority
(a) Aquifers are an essential natural resource and a major source of public drinking water for
the State of Connecticut. Use of groundwater will increase as the population grows and
opportunities for new surface water supplies diminish due to the rising cost ofland and
increasingly intense development. At the same time, numerous drinking water wells have
been contaminated by certain land use activities, and others are now threatened. To address
this problem, Connecticut has established the Aquifer Protection Area Program
(Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb) to identify critical water supply
aquifers and to protect them from pollution by managing land use. Protection requires
coordinated responsibilities shared by the state, municipality and water companies to ensure
a plentiful supply of public drinking water for present and future generations. Itis therefore
the purpose of these regulations to protect aquifer protection areas within the Town of
Putnam by making provisions for:
(1) implementing regulations consistent with state regulations and An Act Concerning
Aquifer Protection Areas, Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb
(''the Act"); c (2) delineating aquifer protection areas on the town zoning or inland wetland and
watercourse areas maps;
(3).regulating land use activity within the aquifer protection area including: prohibiting
certain new activities; registering existing regulated activities; 'and issuing permits for
new regulated activities at registered facilities; and
(4) administering and enforcing these regulations.
(b) These regulations shall be known as the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations (the nAPA
Regulations") of the Town of Putnam .
.(c) These regulations were adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance
with the provisions of §22a-354p of An Act Concerning Aquifer Protection Areas, the
Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb and the Regulations of Connecticut
State Agencies §22a-354i-1 through §22a-354i-10.
(d) The Zoning Commission of the Town of Putnam is established as the Aquifer Protection
Agency (the "Agency") in accordance with the "Ordinance for the Establishment of an
Aquifer Protection Agency," (the "APA Ordinance") effective March 12, 2009, and shall
implement the purposes and provisions of the AP A Ordinance and the Act.
(e) The Agency shall administer all provisions of the Act and shall approve or deny c
Town ofPumarn Regulations -2- Aquifer Protection Areas
registrations, issue permits, issue permits with terms, conditions, limitations or
modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in aquifer protection areas in the
Town of Putnam pursuant to the Act.
SECTION" 2. Definitions
(a) As used in these regulations, the following definitions apply:
(1) "Affected water company" means "affected water company" as defined in §22a-354h
of the Connecticut General Statutes;
(2) "Agency" means the board or commission authorized by the municipality under
§22a-3540 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
(3) "Agriculture" means "agriculture" as defined in the §l-l(q) of the Connecticut
General Statutes;
(4) "Applicant" means, as appropriate in context, a person who applies for art exemption
under §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, a permit under
§22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or a permit under
Section 9 of the APA Regulations;
(5) "Application" means, as appropriate in context, an application for an exemption under
§22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, an application for a (- )
permit under §22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or an '<,
application for a permit under Section 9 of the APA Regulations;
(6) .."Aquifer protection area"means "aquifer protection area" as defined in §22a-354h of
the Connecticut General Statutes and any extension of such area approved by the
Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354i-4 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies;
(7) "Area of contribution" means "area of contribution" as defined in §22a-354h of the
Connecticut General Statutes and as mapped in accordance with §22a-354b-l of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(8) "Bulk storage facility" means property where oil or petroleum liquids are received by
tank vessel, pipeline, railroad car or tank vehicle for the purpose of storage for
wholesale distribution;
(9) "Certified Hazardous Materials Manager" means a hazardous materials manager
certified by the Institute of Hazardous Materials Management and who is qualified by
reason of relevant specialized training and relevant specialized experience to conduct
audits of regulated activities to ensure compliance with applicable laws and identify
appropriate pollution prevention practices for such activities;
(10) "Commissioner" means the commissioner of environmental protection, or his or her
Town of Putnam Regulations -3- Aquifer Protection Areas
(
agent;
(11) "Domestic sewage" means "domestic sewage" as defined in §22a-430-3(a) the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(12) "Facility" means property where a regulated activity is conducted by any person,
including without limitation any buildings located on the property that are owned or
leased by that person; and includes contiguous land owned, leased, or for which there
is an option to purchase by that person;
(13) "Floor drain" means any opening in a floor or surface which opening or surface
receives materials spilled or deposited thereon;
(14) "Hazardous material" means (A) any hazardous substance as defined in 40 CFR 302.4
and listed therein at Table 302.4, exc1udingmixtures with a total concentration of less
than 1% hazardous substances based on volume, (B) any hazardous waste as defined
in §22aM9(c}-101 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, (C) any
pesticide as defined in §22a-47 of the Connecticut General Statutes, or (D) any oil or
petroleum as defined in §22a-448 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
(15) "Hazardous waste II means "hazardous waste" as defined in §22a-449(c)-101 of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(16) "Industrial laundry" means a facility for washing clothes, cloth or other fabric used in
. industrial operations;
(17) "Infiltration device" means any discharge device installed below or above the ground
surface that is designed to discharge liquid to the ground;
. (18) "Inland wetland and watercourse areas map" means a map pursuant to §22a-42a of
the Connecticut General Statutes; '.
(19) "ISO 14001 environmental management system certification" means a current ISO
14001 environmental management system certification issued by an ISO 14001
environmental management system registrar that is accredited by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) - American Society for Quality (ASQ) National
Accreditation Board CANAB);
(20) "Level A mapping" means the lines as shown on Level A maps approved or prepared
by the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354c, §22a-354d or §22a-354z of the
Connecticut General Statutes encompassing the area of contribution and recharge
areas;
(21) "Lubricating oil" means oil that contains less than 1'% chlorinated solvents and is
used for the sale purpose of lubricating, cutting, grinding, machining, stamping or
quenching metals; .
Town of'Putnam-Regulations -4- Aquifer Protection Areas
. (22) "Municipality" means "municipality" as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut
General Statutes; . (
(23) "Owner" means the owner or lessee of the facility in question;
(24) . "De-icing chemical" means sodium chloride, calcium chloride, or calcium magnesium
acetate; .
.(25) "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company,
trust, corporation, limited liability company, municipality, agency, political or
adniinistrative subdivision of the state, or other legal entity of any kind;
(26) "Pollution" means "pollution" as defined ill§22a-423 of the Connecticut General
Statutes;
(27) . "Pollution prevention" means the use of processes and materials so as to reduce or
minimize the amount of hazardous materials used or the quantity and concentration of
pollutants in waste generated; .
(28) "Professional engineer" means a professional engineer licensed in accordance with
Chapter 391 of the Connecticut GeneralStatutes, and who is qualified by reason of
relevant specialized training and relevant specialized experience to conduct audits of
regulated activities to ensure compliance with applicable law and identify appropriate
pollution prevention practices for such activities;
. (29) "Publicly Owned Treatment Works" means "publicly owned treatment works" as (
defined in §22a-430-3 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(30) "Public service company" IDf!aIlS"public service company" as defined in §16-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes;
(31) "Public supply well" means "public supply well" as defined in §19-13-B51b of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(32) "Recharge area" means "recharge area" as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut
General Statutes and as mapped in accordance with §22a-354b-l of the Regulations
of Connecticut State Agencies;
(33) ''Registered regulated activity" means a regulated activity which has been registered
under §22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 8 of
the APA Regulations, and is conducted at the facility identified in such registration;
"Registrant" means a person, who or which, • has submitted a registration for an
existing regulated activity under §22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
.Agencies or Section 4 of the AP A Regulations; .
"'"(35) "Regulated activity" means any of the following activities, which are located or
conducted, wholly or partially, in an aquifer protection area, except as provided for in
(34)
(
Town of Putnam Regulations -5- Aquifer Protection Areas
r~.....
'. ,) 4.
§22a-354i-5(c) and §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or
Section 4 of the APA Regulations:
(A) underground storage or transmission of oil or petroleum, to the extent such
activity is not pre-empted by federal law, or hazardous material, except for (i)
an underground storage tank that contains number two (2) fuel oil and is located
more than five hundred (500) feet from a public supply well subject to
regulation under §22a-354c or §22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes,.
or (ii) underground electrical facilities such as transformers, breakers, or cables .
containing oil for cooling or insulation purposes which are owned and operated
by a public service company,
.(B) oil or petroleum dispensing for the purpose of retail, wholesale or fleet use,
(C) on-site storage of hazardous materials for the purpose of wholesale sale,
(D) repair or maintenance of vehicles or internal combustion engines of vehicles,
involving the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, including
solvents, lubricants, paints, brake fluids, transmission fluids or the generation of
hazardous wastes,
(E) salvage operations of metal or vehicle parts,
(F) wastewater discharges to ground water other than domestic sewage and
stormwater, except for discharges from the following that have received a
permit from the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-430 of the Connecticut .
General Statutes: (i) a pump and treat system for ground water remediation, (ii) ..
a potable water treatment system, (iii) heat pump system, (iv) non-contact
cooling water system, (v) swimming pools,
(G) car or truck washing, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully
disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works,
(H) production or refining of chemicals, including without limitation hazardous
materials or asphalt, .
(I) clothes or cloth cleaning service which involves the use, storage or disposal of
hazardous materials including without limitation dry-cleaning solvents,
(J) industrial laundry activity that involves the cleaning of clothes-or cloth
contaminated by hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity
are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment
works, .-
(K) generation of electrical power by means offossil fuels, except for (i) generation
of electrical power by an emergency engine as defined by §22a-174-22(a)(2) of
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or (ii) generation of electrical
power by means of natural gas or propane.
Town of Putnam Regulations Aquifer Protection Areas
(L) production of electronic boards, electrical components, or other electrical
equipment involving the use, storage or disposal of any hazardous material or - (
involving metal plating, degreasing of parts or equipment, or etching
operations,
.,/ (M) embalming or crematory services which involve the use, storage or disposal of
.hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully
disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, •
(N) furniture stripping operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of
hazardous materials,
.....--.,
(0) furniture finishing operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of
hazardous materials, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully
disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works,
(P) storage, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste subject to a permit under
§22a-449( c)-100 to §22a-449( c)-110, inclusive, of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies,
(Q) biological or chemical testing, analysis or research which involves the use,
storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such
activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned
treatment works, and provided that on-site testing of a public supply well by a
public water utility is not a regulated activity,
(R) pest control services which involve storage, mixing or loading of pesticides orother
hazardous materials,
(8) photographic finishing which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous
materials, unless all waste water from such activity are lawfully disposed of
through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works,
(1) production or fabrication of metal products which involves the Use, storage or
disposal of hazardous materials including (i) metal cleaning or degreasing with
industrial solvents, (ii) metal plating, or (ill) metal etching,
(U) printing, plate making, lithography, photoengraving, or gravure, which involves
the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials,
(V) accumulation or storage of waste oil, anti-freeze or spent lead-acid batteries
which are subject to a general permit issued by the Commissioner under §22a-
208(i) and §22a-454( e)(1) of the Connecticut General Statutes,
(W) production of rubber, resin cements, elastomers or plastic, which involves the
use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials,
(X) storage of de-icing chemicals, unless such storage takes place within a weather-
Town of Putnam Regulations -7- Aquifer Protection Areas
tight water-proof structure for the purpose of retail sale or for the purpose of deicing
parking areas or access roads to parking areas,
(Y) accumulation, storage, handling, recycling, disposal, reduction, processing,
burning, transfer or compo sting of solid waste which is subject to a permit
issued by the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-207b, §22a-208a, and §22a-208c
..of the Connecticut General Statute, except for a potable water treatment sludge
disposal area,
dying, coating or printing of textiles, or tanning or finishing ofleather, which
activity involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials,
(AA) production of wood veneer, plywood, reconstituted wood or pressure-treated
wood, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, and
(Z)
(36)
(37)
- (38)
(~ (39)
(BB) pulp production processes that involve bleaching;
"Release" means "release" as defined in §22a-133k-l of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies; .
"State aquifer protection regulations" means §22a-354i-1 to §22a-354i-IO, inclusive,
of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
"Storage" means the holding or possession of any hazardous material;
"Storage tank" means a stationary device which is designed to store hazardous
materials, and is constructed of non-earthen materials including without limitation
concrete, steel, fiberglass or plastic;
(40) "Topographic feature" means an object, whether natural or man-made, located on the
earth surface and of sufficient size that it appears on a 1:24,000 scale topographic
quadrangle map drawn by the United States Geological Survey;
(41) "Underground" when referring to a storage tank or storage tank component means
that ten percent or more of the volumetric capacity of such tank or component is
below the surface of the ground and that portion which is below the surface of the
ground is not fully visible for inspection;
(42) "Vehicle" or "vehicles" means a "vessel" as defined by §15-170 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, and any vehicle propelled or drawn by any non-muscular power,
including without limitation an automobile, aircraft, all-terrain vehicle, tractor, lawn
mower or snowmobile; j
(43) "Waters" means=waters" as defined in §22a-423 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
(44) "Well field" means "well field" as defined in §22a-,354h of the Connecticut General
Statutes; and
Town of Putnam Regulations -8- Aquifer Protection Areas
(45) "Zoning district map" means any map showing zoning districts prepared in
accordance with maps adopted pursuant to §8-3 of the Connecticut General Statutes. (
SECTION 3. Delineation of Aquifer Protection Area Boundaries
(a) The zoning, planning.or planning and zoning commission shall delineate the aquifer
protection areas on the Town of Putnam zoning district map or, if zoning district maps do
not exist, the inland wetland and watercourse areas map adopted pursuant to §22a42a the
. Connecticut General Statutes. Such delineation shall consist of the combined areas of
contribution and recharge areas as shown on Level A maps approved or prepared by the
Commissioner.
(1) Such boundaries shall be delineated within one hundred twenty (120) days after being
notified by the Commissioner that an aquifer protection area is located partially or .
entirely within the Town of Putnam. . .
Notice of such delineation shall be published in a newspaper having substantial
circulation in the affected area Such notice shall include at least the following:
(2)
(A) a map or detailed description of the subject aquifer protection area; and
. (B) the name, telephone number, and address of a representative of the Agency who
may be reached for further information.
(b) In order to clarify the location of an aquifer protection area boundary, the Agency may (
apply to the .Commissioner to extend such boundary to coincide with the nearest property .
line, municipal boundary or topographic feature pursuant to §22a-354i-4 of the Regulations
of Connecticut State Agencies. Such extension-shall, at a minimum, fully encompass the
aquifer protection areas bounded by the approved level A mapping but shall not exceed the
distance necessary to clarify the location of the aquifer protection area or to facilitate the .
administration of regulations pertaining thereto. An aquifer protection area boundary may
not be extended without prior written approval of the Commissioner.
(1) Any request by the Agency to the Commissioner for extension of an aquifer
protection area boundary shall include at least the following:
(A) A map to scale delineating (i) the aquifer protection area boundary mapped
under Section 3(a) of the APA regulations and (ii) the proposed extension of the
aquifer protection area boundary;
(B). 1}certification by the chairperson or duIy authorized agent of the Agency that
---,'--- -.r.~_---L-,,:,~r.~-'L..- ~~~r_,":,~·!-J~_l,~.-11 ~_T -_ -~r--r--~"""!~1..!- ~1..~.
proposed extended aquifer protection area and all affected water companies in
accordance with the following: .
(i) Such notice shall include at least the following:
-TownofPutnam Regulations -9- Aquifer Protection Areas (
c
c
(aa) A map showing the aquifer protection area boundaries and the
proposed extension of such boundaries,
(bb) the name, address, and telephone number of a representative of the
Agency who ma~ be contacted for further information, and .
a statement that any person may, not later than thirty (30) days·
after said notification, submit to the Agency written comments on
such proposed boundary extension;
(cc)
(ii) Such notice shall be effectuated by the following:
(aa) Delivery of notice by certified mail to those individuals and
entities identified in Subsection (b)(1)(B) of this Section, or
(bb) the publication of a notice in a newspaper having substantial
circulation in the affected area; and posting of notice near the
proposed boundaries of the subject aquifer protection area of at
least four signs each of which shall be at least four square feet in
size (2' x 2'); and
(ill) a summary of comments received by such Agency regarding the proposed
boundary extension and the Agency's response.
(2) Not later than sixty (60) days after receiving the Commissioner's written approval of a
request to extend an aquifer protection area boundary, the Agency shall cause such
boundary to be delineated in accordance with Subsection (a) of this Section.
(c) No person may challenge the boundaries of the aquifer protection area under the APA ..
Regulations unless such challenge is based solely on a failure by the Agency to properly
delineate the boundaries in accordance with §22a-354n of the Connecticut General Statutes.
(d) A map of the location and boundaries of the aquifer protection areas, or regulated areas,
shall be available for inspection in the Office of the City/Town Clerk or the Agency.
(e) If the Level A mapping is amended in accordance with §22a'-354b-l(i) or §22a-354b-lG) of
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, the Agency shall cause the amended aquifer
protection area boundary to be delineated in accordance with Subsections (aJor (b) of this
Section. . .
SECTION 4. Prohibited and Regulated Activities
•
(a) All regulated activities are prohibited in aquifer protection areas, except as specified in
Subsection (b) of this Section.
(b) The following regulated activities are not prohibited in aquifer protection areas:
Town 6fPutnamRegulations -10- Aquifer Protection Areas
(1) A registered regulated activity which is conducted in compliance with §22a-354i-9 of
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 12 of the APA Regulations;
and
(
(2) a regulated activity which has received a permit issued pursuant to §22a-354i-8 of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 9 of the APA Regulations.
(c) The following are not regulated activities: .<
(1) Any activity conducted at a residence without compensation;
.{2) any activity involving the use or storage of no more than two and one-half (2.5)
gallons of each type of hazardous material on-site at anyone time, provided the total
of all hazardous materials on-site does not exceed fifty-five (55) gallons at anyone
time;
(3) any agriculturalactivity regulated pursuant to §22a-354m(d) of the Connecticut
General Statutes;
(4) any activity provided all the following conditions are satisfied:
(A) such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an
impermeable floor,
(B) such activity involves no more than 10% of the floor area in the building where
the activity takes place, ' C
(C) any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such
building at all times,
(D) all waste waters generated by such activity are lawfully disposed through a
connection to a 'publicly owned treatment works, and
(E) such activity does not involve (i) repair or maintenance of internal combustion
engines, including without limitation, vehicles, or equipment associated with
such vehicles, (ii) underground storage of any hazardous material, or (ill) above
ground storage of more than one hundred and ten (110) gallons of hazardous
materials;
(5) any activity solely involving the use oflubricating oil provided all the following
conditions are satisfied:
fA \ «11~h!ll'tt~tv Aoe~not ;nvolve clM'nirlO: of metals with chlorinated solvents at
.the facility,
(B) such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an
impermeable floor, .. .'
Town ofPutnmn Regulations -11- Aquifer Protection Areas
(
C-- "-".
,
(C) any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such
building at all times, and .
(D) such activity does not involve: (i) repair or maintenance ofintemal combustion
engines, including without limitation, vehicles. or equipment associated with
such vehicles, (ii) underground storage of any hazardous material, or (iii) above
ground storage of more than one hundred ten (110) gallons of such lubricating
oil and associated hazardous waste; and
(6) any activity involving the dispensing of oil or petroleum from an above-ground
storage tank or tanks with an aggregate volume of two thousand (2000) gallons or less
provided all the following conditions are satisfied: -,
(A) such dispensing activity takes place solely on a paved surface which is covered
bya roof,
(B) the above-ground storage tank:(s) is a double-walled tank with overfill alarms,
and
(C) all associated piping is either above ground, or has secondary containment.
(d) Determination of a non-regulated activity
c-
(1) Any person proposing to carry out a non-regulated activity, as set forth in Section
4( c) of these regulations, in an aquifer protection area shall; prior to commencement
of such activity, notify the Agency or its duly authorized agent on a form provided by
the Agency. Such form shall provide sufficient information to enable the Agency or
its duly authorized agent to properly determine that the proposed activity is a
regulated activity or a non-regulated activity within the aquifer protection area.'
(2) If such activity is determined to be a non-regulated activity, then no further action
under the APA Regulations is necessary.
SECTION 5. Activities Regulated by the State
(a) The Commissioner shall exclusively regulate activities within aquifer protection areas that
are specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Agency shall
regulate all- other regulated activities.
(b) Any person conducting regulated activities that are within the authority of the
Commissioner shall submit a registration or obtain a permit OI: exemption from the
Commissioner prior to engaging in such' activity. The Commissioner shall process
applications for those regulated activities.
(c) The Agency may submit an advisory decision to the Commissioner for consideration on
.any permit regulated under this Section in accordance with the Connecticut General
Statutes §22a-354p(g).
Town ·ofPutnam Regulations -12- Aquifer ProtectiooArcas .
SECTION 6. Application for an Exemption from Prohibition or Regulation (
(a) The owner or operator of a regulated activity may seek an exemption from the
Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
Ap..yperson seeking an exemption from the Commissioner shall concurrently submit a copy
of the application for, an. exemption to the Agency and any affected water company.
(b) The Agency may submit written comments to the Commissioner on any exemption :
regulated under this Section in accordance with §22a-354i-6(c) of the Regulations of
Connecticut State. Agencies within sixty (60) days of the agency receipt of copy of the
application.
SECTION 7. General Registration, Permit Application and Transfer Procedures
(a) All applications for pe.rmits and registrations shall contain sufficient information for a fair
and informed determination of the issues. The Agency may request additional information
from the applicant for this purpose.
(b) The day of receipt of a registration, pe.rmit application or transfer form shall be the day of
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency. immediately following the day of
submission of the application to the Agency or its duly authorized' agent, or thirty-five (35)
- days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
(c) At any time during the review period, the Agency may require the applicant or registrant to (
provide additional information about the regulated activity. Requests for additional
information shall not stay the time limitations for registrations and permits as set forth in
Sections 8 and 9 of the APA Regulations. .
(d) All permit applications and registrations shall be open for public inspection.
(e) Incomplete permit applications and registrations may be denied without prejudice.
(f) No pe.rmit or registration issued under Sections 8 or 9 of the APA Regulations shall be
assigned or transferred except with written approval by the Agency;
(g) The Agency shall notify the town clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of
any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in
which: (1) any portion of the property affected by a decision of such agency is within fivehundred
feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the
traffic to the completed project 'On the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality
to enter ..or. exit the site; (3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the
project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage
system within the adjoining municipality; or(4) water runoff from the improved site will
impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed
Town ofPutnmrt. Regulations -13- Aquifer Protection Areas c
within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, request or plan. Such
adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing
on any such application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
SECTION 8. Registration Requirements
(a) Any person engaged in a regulated activity which substantially commenced, or was in
active operation within the past five (5) years, or with respect to which a municipal building
permit was issued, either (A) before the effective date of the state aquifer protection
regulations, or (B) before the date an applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a .
municipal zoning district map or inland wetland and watercourse areas map, whichever .
occurs later, shall register the activity in accordance with this Section unless such person
has pending an application for an exemptionpursuant to §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies.
(1) The Commissioner shall process registrations for those regulated activities specified
in§22a-.354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Agency shall process
registrations for all other regulated activities.
c
(2) If the regulated activity is not specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the person engaged in such activity shall submit a registration to the Agency
not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after adoption of regulations pursuant to
§22a-354p of the Connecticut General Statutes, or the designation the aquifer
protection area pursuant to §22a-354i-2 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies, whichever occurs later. Said person shall simultaneously file a copy of the
registration with the Commissioner, Commissioner of Public Health and the affected
water company.
(b) All registrations shall be provided on a form prescribed by the Agency and shall be
accompanied by the correct registration fee in accordance with Section 18 of the APA
Regulations. Such registration forms may be obtained from the Putnam Town Clerk or the
Agency. Such registration forms shall include at least the following information in writing
or on maps or drawings:
(1) The name, business telephone number, street address and mailing address of the:
(A) Registrant; if the registrant is a corporation or limited partnership, the full name.
of the facility and such corporation or limited partnership as registered with the
Connecticut Secretary of State, and any officer or governing or managing body
of any partnership, association, firm or corporation,
(B) owner of such facility if different than the registrant, and
(C) manager or operator overseeing the operations of such facility;
(2) the location of such facility, using street address or other appropriate method. of
location, and a map showing the property boundaries of the facility on a 1:24,000
Town of Putnam Regulations .14- Aquifer Protection Areas
. ....-..,.
scale United States Geological Survey topographic quadrangle base;
(3) an identification of the regulated activity or activities conducted at the facility, as
described in Section 2(a)(35) of the APA Regulations, which regulated activity or
activities shall consist of any regulated activity which substantially commenced, was
in active operation, or with respect to which a municipal building permit was issued
within the past five years; and
(4) a certification by the registrant that the subject regulated activity is in compliance
with the best management practices set forth in Section I2(a) of the APA
Regulations, as follows, signed after satisfying the statements set forth in the
following certification:
(
"I have personally examined and am familiar with-the information submitted in
this registration and all attachments, and I certify, based on reasonable
investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining
the information, the submitted information is true, accurate and complete to the
best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that any false statement made in
this document or certification may be punishable as a criminal offense under
§53a-157b of the Connecticut General Statutes and any other applicable law."
(c) When deemed necessary to protect a public supply well subject to regulation under §22a-
354c or §22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Agency may:
(1) require.•by written notice, any registrant to submit for review and written approval a ('
storm water management plan prepared in accordance with Section l2(b) of the APA
Regulations. If so required, the storm water management plan shall be implemented
by the registrant iminediately upon its approval; or
(2) require, by written notice, any registrant to submit for review and written approval the
materials management plan prepared in accordance with Section l2( a) of the APA
Regulations. If so required, the materials management plan shall be implemented by
the registrant immediately upon its approval.
(d) If the Agency determines that a registration is incomplete, it shall reject the registration and
notify the registrant of what additional information is required and the date by which it shall
be submitted.
(e) If the registration is determined to be complete, and the regulated activity is eligible for
registration, the Agency shall send written notification of such registration to the registrant
Such registration shall be determined to be complete and eligible if the registrant has not
otherwise received a notice of rejection from the Aaencv. not later than one hundred and
eighty (180) days after the.date the registration is received by the Agency.
(f) The following general provisions shall be included in the issuance of all registrations:
(1). The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the registrant
and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or
Town 'Of Putnam RtguIatioD.5 -15- Aquifer Protection Areas (
inaccurate, the registration may be modified, suspended or revoked;
(2) all registrations issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present
or future rights or powers of the Commissioner, Agency, or municipality, and convey
no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject
to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws
or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity;
a complete registration shall expire five (5) years from the date of receipt of such
registration by the Agency; .
(3)
(4) the registrant shall apply to the Agency to renew the registration on a form prescribed
by the Agency for a facility prior to expiration of such registration; and
If a registered regulated activity is out of business or inactive when registration
renewal is required, a five (5) year allowance shall be in effect from the date the
registration expires. If the registrant has not applied to renew the registration within
five (5) years of the date the registration expires, the facility is no longer eligible for
registration.
(5)
(g) If a regulated activity which is eligible for registration in accordance with Subsection (a) of
this Section fails to be registered or if the registrant of an active registered activity fails to
apply for renewal prior to expiration, the Commissioner or municipal aquifer protection
agency, as appropriate, may accept a late registration at their discretion, subject to the
limitations in Subsection (f)(5) of this Section. .~ c (h) Any person wishing to assume the benefits under a registration for regulated activities shall
apply to transfer such registration on a form prescribed by the Agency and submitted to the
Agency.
'SECTION 9. Permit Requirements
(a) Any person may apply for a permit to add a regulated activity to a facility where a -
registered regulated activity occurs.
(b) The Agency shall process permit applications for those registrants that have registered
pursuant to Section 8 of the APA Regulations. The Commissioner shall process permit
applications for regulated activities specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General
Statutes and for those registrants that have registered pursuant to §22a-354i-7(b)(1) of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
! (c) Action shall betaken on permit applications within sixty-five (65) days after.the completion
of a public hearing or in the absence of a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days from the
date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of .
either of these timeframes, provided the total extension of all such periods is sixty-five (65)
days or less. .
.... Town of Putnam Regulations -16- Aquifer Protection Areas
.-., . (d) An application for a permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the Agency and shall be
accompanied by the correct application fee in accordance with Section 18 of the APA
Regulations. Such permit application forms may be obtained from the Town of Putnam
Zoning Office Clerk:or the Agency. Simultaneously with filing an application, the
applicant shall send a copy of the application to the Commissioner, the Commissioner of
. Public Health and the affected water company. An application shan include the following
information:
(l) The information as required fora registration under Section 8(b) of the APA
Regulations shall be provided for the proposed regulated activity;
(2) . a confirmation and certification that the existing and proposed activity:
(A) remains and shall remain in compliance with Section 12(a) of the APA
Regulations,
(B) .shall not increase the number of underground storage tanks used for storage of
hazardous materials, and
(C) remains and shall remain in compliance with all local, state, and federal
environmental laws;
(3) a materials management plan in accordance with Section I2(a) of the APA
Regulations;
(4) . a storm water management plan in accordance with Section 12(b) of the APA
Regulations;
(5) the following environ"mental compliance information with respect to environmental
violations which occurred at the facility where the regulated activities are conducted,
within the :fiveyears immediately preceding the date of the application:
c
(A) any criminal conviction involving a violation of any environmental protection
law,
(B) any civil penalty imposed in any state or federal judicial proceeding, or any
penalty exceeding :fivethousand dollars imposed in any administrative
proceeding,and .
(C) any judicial or administrative orders issued regarding any such violation
together with the dates, case or docket numbers, or other information which
identifies the proceeding. For any such proceeding initiated by the state or
federal government, the Agency may require submission of a copy of any
official document associated with the proceeding, the final judgment or order; .
(6) any additional information deemed necessary by the Agency regarding potential
threats to the .ground water and proposed safeguards; and
Town ofPuttlamReOUlatiOn:i -17- Aquifer Protection Areas
(
' ••••• , 0"
(7). the following certification signed by the applicant and the individual responsible for
preparing the application, after satisfying the statements set forth in the certification:
"I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in
this document and all attachments, and Icertify, based on reasonable
investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining
the information, the submitted information is true, accurate and complete to the ..
best of my knowledge and belief Iunderstand that any false statement made in
the submitted information is punishable as a criminal offense under §53a-157b of
the Connecticut General Statutes and any other applicable law."
(e). TP.e Commissioner, any affected water company or the Commissioner of Public Health
may, not later than thirty (30) days after receiving a copy of an application for a permit
under this Section, submit to the Agency written comments on such application. The
Agency shall give due consideration to any such comments, and shall provide a copy of the
decision to the Commissioner, the affected water company and the Commissioner of PUblic
Health.
(f) To carry out the purposes of the Act, the Agency may grant an application as :filed, grant it
upon such terms, conditions, limitations or modifications necessary, or deny it. The
Agency shall state upon the record the reason for its decision.
(g) The Agency may hold a public hearing on an application for a permit in accordance with
.____ Section lOaf the APA regulations. c ..
(h) The Agency shall not issue a permit unless a complete application has been received and
the applicant demonstrates to the Agency's satisfaction that all requirements of this Section
of the APA regulations have been satisfied and all of the following standards and criteria .
have been met:
(1) the proposed regulated activity shall take place at a facility where a registered
regulated activity occurs;·
(2) the proposed regulated activity shall not increase the number, or storage capacity of
underground storage tanks used for hazardous materials except for the replacement of
an existing underground storage tank in accordance with Section 12(a)(3) of the APA
Regulations;
(3) the materials management plan and storm water management plan have been
satisfactorily prepared in accordance with Sections 12(a) and 12(b) of the APA
Regulations;
C4) the applicant has .submitteda confirmation.and.certificaticn that all regulated
activities remain and shall remain in compliance with all local, state and federal
environmental laws in accordance with Subsection(d)(2) of this Section;
. (5) ..the applicant's compliance record does not indicate CA)that any noncompliance
resulted from indifference to or disregard for the legal requirements, (B) an
Town of Putnam Regulations -18- Aquifer Protection Areas
unwillingness or inability to devote the resources necessary to comply and remain in
compliance, or (C) that instances of noncompliance have led to serious environmental
harm, harm to human health or safety, or a substantial risk of such harm;
(6) the proposed regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with Section 12 of
the APA Regulations;
(7) the existing regulated activity is being conducted in accordance with Section 12 of the
APA Regulations; and
(8) the certification required under Subsection (d)(7) of this Section has been signed by
the applicant and the individual responsible for preparing the application.
(i) The Agency may impose reasonable conditions or limitations on any permit issued under
this Section to assure protection of the ground water, including. but not limited to ~e
following:
(1) best management practices in addition to those set forth in Section 12 of the APA
Regulations; and
(2) ground water monitoring.
..~
G) The following general provisions shall be included in the issuance of all permits: .
(1) the Agency has relied in whole or in.part on information provided by the applicant
and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or
inaccurate, the permit may be,modified, suspended or revoked;
(3)
all permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any presen.~ ~r .
future rights or powers of the Commissioner, Agency, or municipality, and convey no
rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to
any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or
regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity;
the permit shall expire ten (10) years from the date ofissuance of such permit by the
Agency; and
(4) a person shall apply to the Agency to renew the permit on a form prescribed by the
Agency prior to expiration of such permit. Such renewal shall be granted upon
request by the Agency unless a substantial change in the permitted activity is
proposed, or enforcement action with regard to the regulated activity has been taken,
in which case, a new permit application shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.
(k) The Agency shall notify the applicant or permittee within fifteen (15) days of the date of the
decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its
,.-., order in issuance or denial of a permit to be published· in a newspaper having a general
circulation in the municipality in which the aquifer protection area is located.
ToWIlofPutn3m Regulations ·19- Aquifer Protection Areas
(
c
(1) A permittee may request a modification of a permit from the Agency. Such request shall be
on a form prescribed by the Agency, and shall include the facts and reasons supporting the
request. The Agency may require the permittee to submit a new application for a permit or
renewal in lieu of a modification request.
(m) A person wishing to assume the benefits under a permit for regulated activities shall apply
to transfer such permit on a form prescribed by the Agency and submitted to the Agency.
SECTION 10. Public Hearings Regarding Permit Applications
(a) If the Agency decides to hold a public hearing regarding an application for a permit to
conduct a regulated activity within an aquifer protection area., such hearing shall commence
no 'later than: sixty-five (65) days after the receipt of such application.
(b) Notice of the hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2)
days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days and not fewer than ten (10) days, and the last
not less than two (2) days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a
general circulation in each cityltown where the affected aquifer, or any part thereof, is
located.
(c)
.'-~ (,.~ (d)'
(e)
(f)
(g)
The Agency shall send to any affected water company, at least ten (10) days before the
hearing, a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any affected water
company may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any such hearing .
All applications, maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection.
At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard.
The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement
The applicant may consentto an extension of the time frames in Subsections (a) or (f) of
this Section, provided the total extension of all such periods, including any extensions
provided in Section 9(c), totals sixty-five (65) days or less.
(h) In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its
decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the
hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision.
(i) The applicant or permittee shall be notified of the Agency's decision in accordance with
Section 9(k) of the AP A Regulations.
SECTION 11. Bond and Insurance Relevant to Permit Applicants
(a) An applicant may be required to file a bond as a condition of the permit.
Town o£Putnam Regulatioll!: -20- Aquifer Protection Areas
~ (b) Any bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit. (
SECTION 12. Best Management Practices
(a)· Every regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with the following:
(1) hazardous materials may be stored above ground within an aquifer protection area
only in accordance with the following conditions:
(A) hazardous material shall be stored in a building or under a roof that rninjrni zes
storm water entry to the hazardous material storage area, except that a roof is
not required for a bulk storage facility as defined in Section 2 of the APA
Regulations,
(B) floors within a building or under a roof where hazardous material may be stored
shall be constructed or treated to protect the surface of the floor from
deterioration due to spillage of any such material,
(C) a structure which may be used for storage or transfer of hazardous material
shall be protected from storm water run-on, and ground water intrusion,
(D) hazardous ,material shall be stored within an impermeable containment area
which is capable of containing at least the volume of the largest container of such hazardous material present in such area, or lO% of the total volume of all C
such containers in such area, whichever is larger, without overflow of released
hazardous material from the containment area,
(E) hazardous material shall not be stored with. other hazardous materials that are
incompatible and may create a hazard of fire, explosion or generation of toxic
substances,
(F) hazardous material shall be stored only in a container that has been certified to
meet state or federal specifications for containers suitable for the transport or
storage of such material,
(G) hazardous material shall be stored only in an area that is secured against unauthorized
entry by the public, and
(H) the requirements of this subdivision are intended to supplement, and not to
supersede, any other applicable requirements of federal, state, or Iocal lew,
including applicable requirements of the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976;
(2) no person shall increase the number of underground storage tanks used to store -" hazardous materials;
(
Town of Putnam Regulations -21- Aquifer Protection Areas
(3) an underground storage tank used to store hazardous materials shall not be replaced
with a larger tank unless (A) there is no more than a 25% increase in volume of the
larger replacement tank, and (B) the larger replacement tank:is a double-walled tank
with co-axial piping, both meeting new installation component standards pursuant to
§22a-449(d)-1(e) and §22a-449(d)-102 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies, and with interstitial monitoring; .
(4) .no person shall use, maintain or install floor drains, dry wells or other infiltration '
devices or appurtenances which allow the release of waste waters to the ground,
unless such release is permitted by the Commissioner in accordance with §22a-430 or
§22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes; and
(5). a materials management plan shall be developed and implemented in accordance with
the following:
(A) a materials management plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information with respect to the subject regulated activity:
(i) a pollution prevention assessment consisting of a detailed evaluation of
alternatives to the use of hazardous materials or processes and practices
that would reduce or eliminate the use of hazardous materials, and
implementation of such alternatives where possible and feasible,
(ii) a description of any operations or practices which may pose a threat of
pollutionto the aquifer, which shall include the following:
(aa) a process flow diagram identifying where hazardous materials are
stored, disposed and used, and where hazardous wastes are
generated and subsequently stored and disposed,
(bb) an inventory of all hazardous materials which are likely to be or
will be manufactured, produced, stored, utilized or otherwise
handled, and
(cc) a description of waste, including waste waters generated, and a
description of how such wastes are handled, stored and disposed,
(ill) the name, street address, mailing address, title and telephone number of
the individua1(s) responsible for implementing the materials management
plan and the individual(s) who should be contacted in an emergency,
(iv) • a record-keeping system to account for the types, quantities, and
disposition of hazardous materials which are manufactured, produced,
utilized, stored, or otherwise handled or which are discharged or emitted;
such record-keeping system shall be maintained at the subject facility and
shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business
hours by the Commissioner and the municipal aquifer protection agency,
and
(" Town ofPulnamRegulations -22- Aquifer Protection Areas
(v) an emergency response plan for responding to a release of hazardous
materials. Such plan shall describe how each such release could result in
pollution to the underlying aquifer and sball set forth the methods used or
to be used to prevent and abate any such a release;
(
(B) when a materials management plan is required under either Section 8(c) or 9(d)
of the APA Regulations, such materials management plan shall be completed
and certified by a professional engineer or a certified hazardous materials
manager, or, if the facility where the regulated activity is conducted has
received and maintained an ISO i4001 environmental management system
certification, then the registrant may complete and certify the materials
management plan; and
(C) the materials management plan shall be maintained at the subject facility and
shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by
the Conunissioner and the municipal aquifer protection agency.
(b) The development and implementation of a storm water management plan required for
regulated activities in accordance with Sections 8(c) and 9(d) of the APA Regulations, shall
be as follows: A storm water management plan shall assure that storm water run-off
generated by the subject regulated activity is (i) managed in a manner so as to prevent
pollution of ground water, and (ii) shall comply With all of the requirements for the General
Permit of the Discharge of Storm Water associated with a Commercial Activity issued
pursuant to §22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes.
SECTION 13. Other State, Federal and Local Laws
(
(a) Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirement for the applicant to obtain any
other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Putnam,
State of Connecticut and the Government of the United Stites including any approval
required by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Obtaining
such assents, permits or licenses are the sole responsibility of the applicant.
(b) No person shall conduct any regulated activity within an aquifer protection area which
requires zoning or subdivision approval without first having obtained a valid certificate of
,zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, special exception or variance, or other
, documentation establishing that the proposal complies with the Town of Putnam zoning or
subdivision regtilations. '
SECTION 14. Enforcement
(a) The Agency may appoint a duly authorized agentto act in its behalfwith the authority to
'--', issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders.
Town ofPutwun Regulations -23- Aquifer Protection Areas ' (.
.-..,., (b) If the Agency or its duly authorized agent :findsthat any person is conducting or
maintaining any activity, facility or condition which violates any provision of these
regulations, the Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
(1) Issue a notice of violation.
(A.), The notice of violation shall state the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of
the Agency, and the necessary action required to correct the violation including
without limitation halting the activity in the aquifer protection area. .
(B) The Agency may request that the person appear at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a
written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit or
registration. Failure to carry out the actiones) directed in a notice of violation
may result in issuance of an order under Subsection (2) of this Section or other
enforcement proceedings as provided by law.
(2) Issue a written order.
(A) Such order shall be issued by certified mail, return receipt requested to such
person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to
cease such activity immediately or to correct such facility or condition. The
Agency shall send a copy of such order to any affected water company by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
(B) Within ten (10) days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a
hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why
the order should not remain in effect Any affected water company may testify
.at the hearing. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing ...
and, within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing, notify the person by
certified mail, return receipt requested, that the original order remains in effect,
.that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn.
(3) Suspend or revoke registration or permit.
(A) The Agency may suspend or revoke a registration or a permit ifit finds, after a
hearing, that the registrant or permittee has not complied with the terms.
conditions or limitations set forth in the registration or the permit. Prior to
revoking or suspending any registration or permit, the Agency shall issue notice
to the registrant or the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, setting forth the facts or conduct that warrants the intended action.
..-'..
(B) .The Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the registrant or permittee an .
opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its registration or permit. The
Agency shall notify the registrant or permittee of its decision by certified mail
within fifteen (15) days of the date ofits decision. The Agency shall publish .
notice of a suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation
in the Town of Putnam.
(
Town of~am ltegclarloDS -24- Aquifer Protection Areas
(c) • An order issued pursuant to Subsection (b)(2) of this,Section shall be effective upon
issuance, shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises, or withdraws the order,
and shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to Subsection (b)(3) of this Section.
(
(d) A court may assess criminal and or civil penalties to any person who commits, takes part in,
or assists in any violation of any provision of the APA regulations in accordance with §22a-
, 354s(b) and §22a-354s(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
SECTION 15. Amendments
(a) These regulations may be amended, changed or repealed in accordance with §22a-354p(b)
of the Connecticut General Statutes. '
(b) If a complete application is filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the APA
regulations as of the date of its filing, the permit issuedshall not be required to comply with
any changes in regulations taking effect on or after the filing date. The provisions of this
Section shall not apply to the establishment, amendment, or change of the boundaries of the
aquifer protection area or to any changes in the APA Regulations necessary to make the
regulations consistent with Chapter 446i of the Connecticut General Statutes as of the date
of the Agency's decision.
SECTION 17. Conflict and Severance
(a) If there is a conflict between the provisions of the APA Regulations, the provision that
imposes the most stringent standards shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause,
sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations shall not
affect the validity of any other part that can be given effect without such valid part or parts.
(b) If there is a conflict between the provisions of the APA Regulations and the Act, the
provisions of the Act shall govern.
SECTION 18. Registration and Permit Application Fees
. -
.--,
(a) All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Agency by certified check or
money order payable to the Town of Putnam at the time the registration or permit
application is .tiled with the Agency .
, (b) No registration or permit application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the
Town ofPu~am Regulations -25- Aq\lifer Protection Areas (
correct registration/application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver bas been granted by the
Agency pursuant to Subsection (f) oftbis Section.
(c) The registration or permit application fee is nonrefundable.
(d) Registration or permit application fees shall be based on the following schedule:
c
Fee Schedule
Facility Size
Small « 1 acre) Medium (1-5 acres) Large (> 5 acres)
Registrations:
Industrial $150.00 $250.00 $350.00
Commercial $150.00 $250.00 $350.00
Other $150.00 $250.00 $350.00
Fee Schedule (continued)
Facility Size
Small « 1 acre) Medium (1-5 acres) Large (> 5 acres)
Permits:
Industrial $150.00 $250.00 $350.00
Commercial $150.00 $250.00 $350.00
Other $150.00 $250.00 $350.00
Materials Management $150.0Q $250.00
Plan Reviews
Storm. water $150·90 $250.00 $350.00
Management Plan
Reviews
Public Hearing $300.00 $300.00 $300.00
Facility $150.00 $250.00 $350.00
Insnecticn/Monitorina
Rezulation Petition $150.00 $150~OO $150.00
Transfer Fee $100.00 $150.00 $150.00
(e)· Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of Putnam are exempt from all
fee requirements.
(
(f) The registrant or applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed
payment of the fee. Such petitions shall Qe in writing and shall state fully the facts and
circumstances the Agency should consider in its determination under this Section. The
Agency may waive all or part of the application fee if the Agency determines that:
(1) the activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the
environment or to the public health and safety and the registrant or applicant would
reasonably be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the
. amount of the registration or permit application fee; or
Town of Putnam Regulations -26- Aquifer Protection heM
-, . (2) the amount of the registration or permit application fee is clearly excessive in relation
to the cost to the City/Town for reviewing and processing the application.
(
(g) Extra Assessments
. In the event that additional expenses, including but not limited to outside consultants,
experts, or legal advisors are incurred in processing the registration or permit application
the applicant/registrant may be assessed an additional fee not to exceed $ 4000.00 to
cover said costs. Said fees are to be estimated by the duly authorized agent and submitted
with the application fee and held until the application is completely processed after which
time any residual funds pertaining to this assessment are to be returned to the
applicant/registrant.
For the purpose of this assessment, an "outside consultanf' means a professional who is
not an employee of the Town of Putnam including but not limited to engineering,
environmental, hydrogeology and hazardous materials management professionals.
(h) The Agency shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this Section.
SECTION 19. Effective Date of Regulations
The APA Regulations, APA boundaries and amendments thereto, shall become effective upon
(1) the Commissioner's determination that such regulations are reasonably related to the purpose
of ground water protection and not inconsistent with the Regulations of Connecticut State C Agencies §22a-354i-l through §22a-354i-IO and (2) filing in the Office of the City/Town Clerk. .
Effective Date: _
Revision Date: -'-----'---
Town of Putnam Regu1ano1ls -27- Aquifer Protection Areas

TOWN OF PUTNAM
126 Church Street
Putnam, CT 06260
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
REGULATIONS:
1st Edition: Adopted dateJ~ne 27,1974
2nd Edition: Adopted date April 22, 1987
3rd Edition: Adopted date June 14,2007
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3
Section 4
Section 5
Section 6
Section 7
Section 8
Section 9
Section 10
Section 11
~ Section 12
Section 13
Section 14
Section 15
Section 16
Section 17
Section 18
Section 19
Section 20
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Title and Authority 1
Definitio ns ............•.•.•.....•.•....•..................•....•...•..........................•...............................•..2...
Inventory of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses 5
Permitted Uses as of Right & Non-regulated Uses 5
Activities Regulated Exclusively by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection 7
Regulated Activities to be Licensed 7
Application Requirements 8
Application Procedures 11
Public Hearings 12
Considerations for Decision .....•..•........................................•.....•...................................12
Decision Process and Permits 14
Action by Duly Authorized Agent ..................•.....•..................................•.....•...............15
Bonds and Insurance 16
Enforcement 16
Amendments 17
Appeals 19
Conflicts and Severence 19
Other Permits 19
Fees 20
Effective Date of Regulations .•••...•..........................•.............•.......................................2.1
APPENDIX A - Connecticut General Statute section l-l(q) .........................•......................................21
APPENDIX B -Connecticut General Statute section 8-7d ............................................................•.....21
APPEND IX C 23
II
Section I
Title and Authority
1.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and
irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have been endowed.
The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply
of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; to
the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal,
aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in
danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of
material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all of
which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated
activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and
ecology of the state of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the
environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and
benefits of the state for its citizens now and forever more. The preservation and protection of the
wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses,
disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and safety
of the citizens of the state. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens of
the state by making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the inland
wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and
improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local
authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other
beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats
thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of
wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other
public and private uses and values; and protecting the state's potable fresh water supplies from the
dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly
process to balance the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land with the
need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the state,
the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and
enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the
Town of Putnam".
1.3 The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Putnam was established in
accordance with an ordinance adopted February 7, 1974 and shall implement the purposes and
provisions of these regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act in the Town of
Putnam.
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with
the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these regulations.
1.5 The Agency shall enforce the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall issue, issue with
terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in the
Town of Putnam pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
1
Section 2
Definitions
2.1 As used in these regulations:
"Act" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, sections 22a-36 through 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
"Agency" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Putnam.
"Bogs" are watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by peat
deposits, poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
"Clear-cutting" means the harvest of timber in a fashion which removes all trees down to a two
inch diameter at breast height.
"Commissioner of Environmental Protection" means the commissioner of the State of
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
"Continual flow" means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time; this flow
may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the annual
hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession.
"Deposit" includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or emit.
"Discharge" means emission of any water, substance, or material into waters of the state whether
or not such substance causes pollution,
"Essential to the farming operation" means that the proposed activity is necessary and
indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm.
"Farming" shall be consistent with the definition as noted in section l-l(q) of the Connecticut
General Statutes, (see Appendix A)
"Feasible" means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound engineering
principles.
"License" means the whole or any part of any permit, certificate of approval or similar form of
permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive.
"Management practice" means a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility designed to
prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing
environmental quality. Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion and
sedimentation controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction setbacks from
wetlands or watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment
maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of
wetlands and watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining
construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low and fish and
wildlife will not be adversely affected
2
"Marshes" are watercourses that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and the
dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at or above the
ground surface throughout the year and areas of open water, six inches or more in depth are
common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered.
"Material" means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not limited to
soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, sand, refuse or waste.
"Municipality" means the Town of Putnam.
"Nurseries" means places where plants are grown for sale, transplanting, or experimentation.
"Ordinary high water mark" means a mark on the land caused by the presence and action of water,
which presence and action is so common and usual and so long continued in all ordinary years so
as to mark upon the land a distinction between the abutting upland and the watercourse. Such
mark may be found by examining the bed and bank of any watercourse and ascertaining thereon an
abrupt change in the characteristics of soil or vegetation or slope of the land.
"Permit" see license
"Permittee" means the person to whom a license has been issued.
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability
company, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations,
governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
"Pollution" means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or impure of
any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein by
any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with any
waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any filling,
land clearing or excavation activity.
"Prudent" means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be
derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in deciding what is
prudent and farther provided a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative
is imprudent.
"Regulated activity" means any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving
removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution, of such
wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the specified activities in section 22a~40 of the
Connecticut General Statutes. Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving,
excavating, constructing, depositing or removing of material and discharging of storm water on the
land within the following upland review areas is a regulated activity:
1. within 200 feet measured horizontally from the ordinary high water mark of areas depicted as
"Green Belt Protection" as shown on the Town of Putnam Plan of Conservation and
Development, dated 2005, Future Land Use Plan, fig.I, as amended.
2. within 100 feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any other wetland or watercourse
3
_I _J I I
)
LEGEND
TOWN OF PUTNAM
PLAN OF CONSERV AnON
AND DEVELOPMENT
Rural Residential Conservation: single f~\ll1il~ development
seIlSllI\'I! 10 the natural and cultura! resources or COnlC'~"
Preservation: illJili development property or infrastructure
improvements to revitahze the Special Services District Future
Land Use Plan Growth Areas: for more intense developmeru with suniciem
iufne ••nmcturc avuilahihty and capacity
&10 1600 ].lOO f(\(l Gateway Commercial: commercial development or professional (ltlh:e~
(If 3 scatc and ('OI1ICItI C0I1~jst~111with the setting •• &1 SOUR.ce: CT OEf'll£ONN t)~ M'ld Gtog'-.p!c lIiO'l'Ilol\oC"lCbll.ef"
CorrQlrtdb}" . .Iom Fktlik. Nl"N1~r.'I C~IC\I! Cot.~1oi G~"'nnl!"'6 Greenbelt Protection: water. wetland and rloodplain clements
to be pnnected und incorporared FIGURE 1
"Remove" includes, but shall not be limited to drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck, bulldoze,
dragline or blast.
"Rendering unclean or impure" means any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological
properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity
or taste.
"Upland review area" means any non-wetland or non-watercourse area in which certain activity is
likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses. Refer to Appendix C, which contains the DEP
Guidance Document, as amended.
"Significant impact" means any activity, including, but not limited to, the following activities
which may have a major effect:
1. Any activity involving deposition or removal of material which will or may have a substantial
effect on the wetland or watercourse or on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for
which the activity is proposed
2. Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the natural
dynamics of a watercourse system.
3. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetland or
watercourse to: support aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats; prevent flooding; supply
water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage; provide recreation or open space; or perform
other functions.
4. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial turbidity,
siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse.
5. Any activity which causes substantial diminution of flow of a natural watercourse or
groundwater levels of the wetland or watercourse.
6. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution of a wetland or
watercourse.
7. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or such areas
having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
"Soil scientist" means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the federal
Office of Personnel Management.
"Swamps" are watercourses that are distinguished by the dominance of wetland trees and shrubs.
"Submerged lands" means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or more
frequent basis.
"Town" means the Town of Putnam.
"Waste" means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which may pollute
or tend to pollute any of the wetlands and watercourses of the Town.
"Watercourses" means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs,
and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which
4
are contained within, flow through or border upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated
pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the
occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of
recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than
a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
"Wetlands" means land, including submerged land as defined in this section, not regulated
pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, which
consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and
floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of
the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the u.s. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil
moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.
Section 3
Inventory of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
3.1 The map of wetlands and watercourses entitled "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Putnam,
Connecticut" delineates the general location and boundaries of inland wetlands and the general
location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for inspection at the office of the Town
Clerk or the Agency. In all cases, the precise location of wetlands and watercourses shall be
determined by the actual character of the land, the distribution of wetland soil types and location
of watercourses. The Agency may use aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource
mapping, soils maps, site inspection observations or other information in determining the location
of the boundaries of wetlands and watercourses.
3.2 Any person may petition the Agency for an amendment to the map. All petitions for a map
change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and circumstances
which support the change. The petitioner shall bear the burden of proof regarding the proposed
map amendment. Such proof may include, but not be limited to aerial photography, remote
sensing imagery, resource mapping or other available information. The Agency may require
such person to provide an accurate delineation of regulated areas in accordance: with section 15
of these regulations.
3.3 The Agency shall maintain a current inventory of regulated areas within the town. The Agency
may amend its map as more accurate information becomes available.
3.4 All map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in section 15 of these
regulations.
Section 4
Permitted Uses as of Right & Non-regulated Uses
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses, as of
right:
a. grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of three acres or
less essential to the farming operation, and activities conducted by, or under the authority of.
5
Putnam, CT Wetland SOil6
Community Resource Inventory Map Series
Legend
DTowns
- Major Highway
- Primary Route
- Secondary Route
- Ramp
• Alluvial and floodplain soils
Poorly/very poorly drained soils
Water
2.4 _-=::::J_.::::::=======- Miles
0.8 1.6
More Information: Visit http.y/cleer.uconn.edu/projects/crt
Data source: Natural Resrouces Conservation Service (NRCS) by way
of the CT DEP httpr//www.ct.qov/dep/qls/
This project was funded in part by the CT DEPthrough an EPAClean Water Act Section
319 Nonpoint Source Grant. NEMO is an educational program of the Center for Land use
Education and Research (CLEAR) at the University of Connecticut. CLEAR
These maps are intended for general inFormation and planning purposes only. They
contain no authoritative positional information.
Version 4/29/09
the Department of Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse
restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions of this subdivision shall not
be construed to include road construction or the erection of buildings not directly related to the
farming operation, relocation of watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation of
wetlands or watercourses with continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for the expansion
of agricultural crop land, the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or similar material from
wetlands or watercourses for the purposes of sale;
b. a residential home (i) for which a building permit has been issued or (ii) on a subdivision lot,
provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been approved by a municipal
planning, zoning or planning and zoning commission as of the effective date of promulgation
of the municipal regulations pursuant to subsection (b) of section 22a-42a, or as of July 1.
1974, which ever is earlier, and further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of
right pursuant to this subdivision unless the permit was obtained on or before July 1,1987;
c. boat anchorage or mooring;
d. uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property, such property
defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot site permitted
anywhere in the municipality provided that in any town where there are no zoning
regulations establishing minimum residential lot sites, the largest minimum lot site shall be
two acres. Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and
landscaping, but shall not include removal or deposition of significant amounts of material
from or onto a wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse;
e. construction and operation, by water companies as defined by section 16-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for in
-------, Chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities
necessary to the impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public
water supplies except as provided in sections 22a-40 1and 22a-403 of the Connecticut
General Statutes and:
f. maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date of any
municipal regulations adopted pursuant to section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General
Statutes or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is
zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this
subdivision, "maintenance" means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris
whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place.
4.2 The following operations and uses shall be permitted, as non-regulated uses in wetlands and
watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or
watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of water flow or
pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
a. conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish. shellfish and wildlife; and
b. outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trials, nature study,
hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving, camping, boating, water skiing, trapping,
hunting, fishing and shell fishing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated.
4.3 All activities in wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavating, dredging, clear cutting,
clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse not specifically
6
permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by these regulations shall
require a permit from the Agency in accordance with section 6 of these regulations, or for certain
regulated activities located outside of wetlands and watercourses from the duly authorized agent
in accordance with section 12 of these regulations.
4.4 To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing a permitted operation and use
or a non-regulated operation and use shall, prior to commencement of such operation and use,
notify the Agency on a form provided by it, and provide the Agency with sufficient information to
enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation and use is a permitted or non-regulated
use of a wetland or watercourse. The Agency shall rule that the proposed operation and use or
portion of it is a permitted or non-regulated operation and use or that the proposed operation and
use is a regulated activity and a permit is required.
Section 5
Activities Regulated Exclusively by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection
5.1 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over regulated
activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses, undertaken by any department, agency or
instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or regional board of education,
pursuant to sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut General Statues.
5.2 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over tidal
wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
5.3 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over activities
~ authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection under section 22a-402 of the Connecticut General Statutes or a permit issued by the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403 of the Connecticut General
Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or removal order or permit shall not be required
to obtain a permit from a municipal wetlands agency for any action necessary to comply with said
dam order or to carry out the activities authorized by said permit.
5.4 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the
discharge offill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the state pursuant to
section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act. as amended, for activities regulated by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
Section 6
Regulated Activities to be Licensed
6.1 No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit for
such activity from the Inland Wetland and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Putnam.
6.2 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior
authorization of the Agency, or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be
subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in section 14 of these
regulations and any other remedies as provided by law.
7
Section 7
Application Requirements
7.1 Any person intending to conduct a regulated activity or to renew or amend a permit to conduct
such activity, shall apply for a permit on a form provided by the Agency. The application shall
contain the information described in this section and any other information the Agency may
reasonably require. Application forms may be obtained in the offices of the Putnam Town Clerk or
the Agency.
7.2 If an application to the Town of Putnam Planning, Zoning, or Planning and Zoning
Commission for subdivision or resubdivision of land involves land containing a wetland or
watercourse, the applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as
applicable, of the Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a permit to the
Agency in accordance with this section, no later than the day the application is filed with such
planning, zoning, or planning and zoning commission.
7.3 The application shall contain such information as is necessary for a fair and informed
determination thereon by the Agency.
7.4 A prospective applicant may request the Agency to determine whether or not a proposed
activity involves a significant impact activity.
7.5 All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or drawings:
a. the applicant's name, home and business mailing addresses and telephone numbers; if the
applicant is a Limited Liability Corporation or a Corporation the managing member's or
responsible corporate officer's name. address, and telephone number;
b. the owner's name, mailing address and telephone number and written consent of the land
owner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the subject activity is
proposed;
c. the applicant's interest in the land;
d. the geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity and a
description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland wetlands and
watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetlands or watercourses to be disturbed,
soil type(s), and wetland vegetation;
e. the purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and
sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures which may be
considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity including,
but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental
damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order
of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
f. alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses
and why the alternative as set forth in the application was chosen; all such alternatives shall
be diagramed on a site plan or drawing:
g. a site plan showing the proposed activity and existing and proposed conditions in relation to
wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities associated with, or
8
reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the
proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses;
h. names and mailing addresses of adjacent land owners;
i. statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in
the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or
through inaccurate or misleading information;
J. authorization for the members and agents of the Agency to inspect the subject land. at
reasonable times, during the pendency of an application and for the life of the permit;
k. a completed DEP reporting form; the Agency shall revise or correct the information
provided by the applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection in accordance with section 22a-39-14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies;
1. any other information the Agency deems necessary to the understanding of what the
applicant is proposing; and
m. submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established in section 19
of these regulations.
7.6 At the discretion ofthe Agency or its agent, or when the proposed activity involves a significant
impact, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the activity,
including but not limited to the following, is required:
a. site plans for the proposed activity and the land which will be affected thereby which show
existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, land contours,
boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses,
and other pertinent features of the land and the proposed activity, prepared by a
professional engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed by the state, or
by such other qualified person;
b. engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the proposed
activity including any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to
watercourses and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control plan;
c. mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National Cooperative
Soil Survey of the u.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service; the wetlands shall be
delineated in the field by a soil scientist and the soil scientist's field delineation shall be
depicted on the site plans;
d. a description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses
involved with the application and the effects of the proposed activity on these communities and
wetland functions;
e. a description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological
communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application and
each alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or
watercourses, and a description of why each alternative considered was deemed neither
feasible nor prudent;
9
f. analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; and
g. management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the proposed
activity.
7.7 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located within 500
feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining
municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the sewage or
drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private
property within the adjoining municipality.
7.8 Three (3) copies of all application materials shall be submitted to comprise a complete
application unless an applicant is otherwise directed, in writing, by the Agency.
7.9 Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Agency in
accordance with section 8 ofthese regulations at least sixty-five (65) days prior to the
expiration date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend such an existing permit shall
contain the information required under section 7 of these regulations provided:
a. the application may incorporate the documentation and record of the prior application;
b. the application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and the
schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit;
c. the application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated or
completed within the time specified in the permit;
d. the application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or
affecting wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was issued;
e. the Agency may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application to renew
such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the continuation of work beyond the
expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be renewed and the public interest or
environment will be best served by not interrupting the activity;
7.10 Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit holder unless the
Agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new
permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated
activity for which the permit was issued provided no permit may be valid for more than ten years.
10
Section 8
Application Procedures
8.1 All petitions, applications, requests or appeals shall be submitted to the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission of the Town of Putnam.
8.2 The Agency shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes section 8-7d(f), notify the
clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or
plan concerning any project on any site in which:
a. any portion ofthe property affected by a decision ofthe agency is within five hundred feet
of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within
the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow
through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining
municipality; or
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private
property within the adjoining municipality.
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within
seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
8.3 When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an
inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a water company
as defined in section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant shall provide written
notice of the application to the water company and the Commissioner of Public Health in a format
prescribed by said commissioner, provided such water company or said commissioner has filed a
map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the land records of the municipality in which the
application is made and with the inland wetlands agency of such municipality. Such notice shall
be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of
the date of the application. The water company and the Commissioner of Public Health, through a
representative, may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application.
8.4 The date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency, immediately following the day of submission to the
Agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five days after such
submission, whichever is sooner.
8.5 At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional information as
the Agency may reasonably require. Requests for such additional information shall not stay the
time limitations as set forth in subsection 11.2 of these regulations.
8.6 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
--, 8.7 Incomplete applications may be denied.
11
r '
Section 9
Public Hearings
9.1 The inland wetlands agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the inland
wetlands agency determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on
wetlands or watercourses, a petition signed by at least twenty-five persons who are eighteen years
of age or older and who reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is proposed,
requesting a hearing is filed with the inland wetlands agency not later than fourteen days after the
date of receipt of such application, or the inland wetlands agency fmds that a public hearing
regarding such application would be in the public interest. The inland wetlands agency may issue
a permit without a public hearing provided no petition provided for in this section is filed with the
inland wetlands agency on or before the fourteenth day after the date of receipt of the application.
Such hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five days after the receipt of such application. All
applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such
hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard.
9.2 Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two
days, the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not less than
two days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in each
town where the affected wetland and watercourse is located.
Section 10
Considerations for Decision
10.1 The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation
b. Reports from other agencies and commissions including but not limited to the Town of
Putnam
1. Conservation Commission
2. Planning, Zoning Commissions
3. Building Official
4. Health Officer
c. The Agency may also consider comments on any application from the Windham County Soil
and Water Conservation District, the Regional Planning Agency or other regional
organizations (i.e. Council of Elected Officials); agencies in adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical agencies or organizations which
may undertake additional studies or investigations.
d. Non-receipt of comments from state agencies and commissions listed in subdivision 10.1b
and c above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the
Agency.
e. For an application for which a public hearing is held, public comments, evidence and
testimony.
12
10.2 Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to regulating,
licensing and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into consideration all
relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to:
a. the environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses;
b. the applicant's purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed
regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to
wetlands or watercourses.
c. the relationship between the short term and long term impacts of the proposed regulated
activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term
productivity of such wetlands or watercourses.
d. Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would be
caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity would
foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any mitigation
measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity
including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other
environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the
following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse
resources;
e. the character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the reasonable
use of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed regulated activity; and
f. impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for
which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or reasonably related to,
the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity
and which may have an impact on wetlands and watercourses.
10.3 In the case of an application which received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by the
Agency that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a
permit shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and
prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding the Agency shall consider the facts and
circumstances set forth in subsection 10.2 of this section. The fmding and the reasons
therefore shall be stated on the record in writing.
10.4 In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible
and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less adverse impact on
wetlands or watercourses, the Agency shall propose on the record in writing the types of
alternatives which the applicant may investigate provided this subsection shall not be construed
to shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he is entitled to the permit or to present
alternatives to the proposed regulated activity.
10.5 For purposes of this section, (1) "wetlands and watercourses" includes aquatic, plant or animal
life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) "habitats" means areas or environments in
which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
10.6 A municipal inland wetlands agency shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated
activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on
13
aquatic, plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical
characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
10.7 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its
decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the
hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision.
Section 11
Decision Process and Permit
11.1 The Agency, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of these regulations,
may, in accordance with Section. 10 of these regulations, grant the application as filed or grant
it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity designed to
carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the application. Such terms may include
any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which
would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance
existing environmental quality, or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and
create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
11.2 No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Agency may hold a public
hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard
and may be represented by agent or attorney. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five
(35) days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on applications within thirty-five (35)
days after completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be
taken on applications within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the application.
The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection,
---... provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days, or
may withdraw the application. The failure of the Agency to act within any time period specified
in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the
application. An application deemed incomplete by the Agency shall be withdrawn by the applicant
or denied by the Agency.
11.3 The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision.
11.4 The Agency shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its decision
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested,
and the Agency shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, to be
published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or
watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen day
period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
11.5 If an activity authorized by an inland wetland permit also involves an activity which requires a
zoning or subdivision approval, special zoning permit, or variance or special exception, under
sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statues, the Agency shall file a copy
of the decision and report on the application with the Town of Putnam Planning, Zoning
Commissions within fifteen days of the date of the decision thereon.
11.6 Any permit issued by the Agency for the development of land for which an approval is required
under section 8-3,8-25 or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be valid for five years
provided the Agency may establish a specific time period within which any regulated activity
14
- ,
shall be conducted. Any permit issued by the Agency for any other activity shall be valid for
not less than two years and not more than five years.
11.7 No permit issued by the Agency shall be assigned or transferred without the written permission
of the Agency.
11.8 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with section 13 of these regulations, the
Agency may withhold issuing the permit until such bond or insurance is provided.
11.9 General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a. The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and if
such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the
permit may be modified, suspended or revoked.
b. All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future
rights or powers ofthe Agency or the Town of Putnam, and convey no rights in real estate or
material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and
private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the
subject land or activity.
c. If the activity authorized by the Agency's permit also involves an activity which requires
zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance or special exception under sections
8.3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no work pursuant to the wetland
permit may begin until such approval is obtained.
d. In constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such management
practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as needed to control storm
water discharges and to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent
pollution of wetlands and watercourses.
e. Permits are not transferable without the prior written consent of the Agency.
Section 12
Action by Duly Authorized Agent
12.1 The Agency may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or extend a
license for an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such agent finds that
the conduct of such activity would result in no greater that a minimal impact on any wetlands or
watercourses provided such agent has completed the comprehensive training program developed
by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant to section 22a-39 of the
Connecticut General Statutes. Requests for such approval shall be made on a form provided by the
Agency and shall contain the information listed under Section 7.5 of these regulations and any
other information the Agency may reasonably require. Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt
and processing applications prescribed in Sections 8, 9 and 11 of these regulations, such agent may
approve or extend such an activity at any time.
12.2 Any person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of the date of such
approval, publish, at the applicant's expense, notice of the approval in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located or will have an effect. Any
person may appeal such decision of such agent to the Agency within fifteen days after the
15
publication date of the notice and the Agency shall consider such appeal at its next regularly
scheduled meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt by
such Agency or its agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at the meeting
held by the Agency to consider the subject appeal. The Agency shall, at its discretion, sustain,
alter, or reject the decision of its agent or require an application for a permit in accordance with
Section 7 of these regulations.
Section 13
Bond and Insurance
13.1 The Agency may require as a permit condition in order to remedy a violation or to guarantee
payment of complex application fees, the filing of a bond with such surety in such amount and in a
form approved by the Agency.
13.2 The bond or surety, in such form as is acceptable to the Town Treasurer and the Town Attorney
shall be conditioned on compliance with the provisions of these regulations and the terms,
conditions and limitations established in the permit.
Section 14
Enforcement
14.1 The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to issue notices
of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other actions or investigations necessary for
the enforcement of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this section, the Agency or its
duly authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision under section 10.2 of
these regulations.
14.2 The Agency or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours of all regulated
activities for which permits have been issued with the consent of the property owner or the
authorized agent of the owner during the life of the permit.
14.3 In the case in which a permit has not been issued or a permit has expired, the Agency or its
agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours with the consent of the property owner
or the authorized agent of the property owner.
14.4 If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining
any activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these regulations, the
Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
a. issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person conducting
such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately cease such activity or
to correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of such
order the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and
show cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Agency shall consider the facts
presented at the hearing and within ten (to) days of the completion of the hearing notify the
person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in
effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Agency shall publish notice of its decision
in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be
16
effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises or
withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection shall not delay or bar
an action pursuant to section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
b. issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such
facility or condition, stating the nature ofthe violation, the jurisdiction ofthe Agency, and
prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation including, without
limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The Agency may request that the
individual appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting ofthe Agency to discuss the
unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the
necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result
in issuance of the order provided in section 14.3.a or other enforcement proceedings as
provided by law.
14.5 The Agency may suspend or revoke a permit ifit finds that the permittee has not complied
with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the
work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to revoking or suspending
any permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action.
The Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the permittee an opportunity to show that it is in
compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of the permit. The
permittee shall be notified of the Agency's decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by
certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish
notice of the suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the
municipality.
Section 15
Amendments
15.1 These regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of Putnam may be
amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with changes in the Connecticut
General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, or as
new information regarding soils and inland wetlands and watercourses becomes available.
15.2 An application filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the applicable inland
wetlands regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be required
thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetland regulations, including changes to
setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt and any appeal from the
decision of such Agency with respect to such application shall not be dismissed by the Superior
Court on the grounds that such a change has taken effect on or after the date of such receipt.
The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply (1) to the establishment,
amendment or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses or (2) to any change in
regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the
date of such receipt.
15.3 These regulations and the Town of Putnam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map shall be
amended in the manner specified in section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended. The Agency shall provide the Commissioner of Environmental Protection with a copy of
any proposed regulations and notice ofthe public hearing to consider any proposed regulations or
17
, ,
amendments thereto, except map amendments, at least thirty-five days before the public hearing on
their adoption.
15.4 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map,
Putnam, Connecticut, shall contain at least the following information:
a. the petitioner's name, mailing address and telephone number;
b. the address, or location, of the land affected by the petition;
c. the petitioner's interest in the land affected by the petition
d. map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the existing
and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries on such land in accurate detail
together with the documentation supporting such proposed boundary locations; and
e. the reasons for the requested action.
15.5 Any person who submits a petition to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map,
Putnam, Connecticut, shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such
proof may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography and
remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to
the Agency. If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser ofthe land which is
the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner,
developer or purchaser, in addition to the information required in subsection 15.4, the petition
shall include:
a. the name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land and
owner(s) agent or other representative;
b. the names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
c. documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land. Such
documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist documenting the
location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land indicating the flag locations
set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types; and
d. map(s) showing any proposed development ofthe land in relation to existing and proposed
wetland and watercourse boundaries.
15.6 Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist or other qualified
individual.
1 < 7 A 1'"1.,.1;,, han ••;•.•e "hn11 1.,.0hoJJ "'_l"'0i!i:~_o i~ ~_4_.J .•t.; I..J~~~J l.l.T9d~~.JQ ~~.J l:V~",,9~~~~_-D9D
Map. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in
the municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least twice at
intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days, nor less than ten days,
and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. All materials including
maps and documents relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection.
18
"
, I
15.8 The agency shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map within sixty-five days after receipt of such petition. The
hearing shall be completed within thirty-five days after commencement. The agency shall act
upon the changes requested in such petition within sixty-five days after completion of such
hearing. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be
represented by agent or attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any
period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be
for longer than sixty-five days. or may withdraw such petition. Failure of the agency to act within
any time period specified in this subsection or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to
constitute approval of the petition.
15.9 The Agency shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made.
Section 16
Appeals
16.1 Appeal on actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section
22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
16.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection.
Section 17
Conflict and Severance
17.1 If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision which imposes the
most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of
any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations
shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given effect without such invalid part or
parts.
17.2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the Act,
the provisions of the Act shall govern.
Section 18
Other Permits
18.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain any other
assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Putnam, the State of
Connecticut or the Government of the United States including any approval required by the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.s. Army Corps of Engineers.
Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses is the sole responsibility of the applicant.
19
1 t I •
Section 19
Fees
19.1 Method of Payment. All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Agency by
certified check or money order payable to the Town of Putnam at the time the application is filed
with the Agency.
19.2 No application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the correct application fee is
paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Agency pursuant to subsection 19.7 of
these regulations.
19.3 The application fee is not refundable.
19.4 Definitions. As used in this section:
"Residential Uses" means activities carried out on property developed for permanent housing or
being developed to be occupied by permanent housing.
"Commercial Uses" means activities carried out on property developed for industry, commerce,
trade, recreation, or business or being developed to be occupied for such purposes, for profit or
nonprofit.
"Other uses" means activities other than residential uses or commercial uses.
19.5 Fee Schedule. As adopted.
Complex Application Fee The Inland Wetlands Agency may charge an additional fee
sufficient to cover the cost of reviewing and acting on complex applications. Such fee may
include, but not be limited to, the cost of retaining experts to analyze, review, and report on issues
requiring such experts. The Agency or the duly authorized agent shall estimate the complex
application fee which shall be paid pursuant to section 19.1 of these regulations within 10 days of
the applicant's receipt or notice of such estimate. Any portion of the complex application fee in
excess of the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant no later than 30 days after publication of
the agency's decision.
19.6 Exemption. Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of Putnam are exempt
from all fee requirements.
19.7 Waiver. The applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed payment of the
fee. Such petition shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and circumstances the Agency
should consider in its determination under this subsection. The Agency may waive all or part of
the application fee if the Agency determines that:
a. The activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the environment
or to the public health and safety and the applicant would reasonably be deterred from
initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount of the application fee, or
b. The amount of the application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the Town for
reviewing and processing the application.
c. The applicant has shown good cause.
20
Section 20
Effective Date of Regulations
~ 201. These regulation are effective upon filing in the Office of the Town Clerk and publication of a
notice of such filing in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Putnam.
APPENDIX A - Connecticut General Statute section l-l(q)
Except as otherwise specifically defmed, the words "agriculture" and "farming" shall include cultivation
of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity,
including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock, including
horses, bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams,
mussels, other molluscan shellfish or fish; the operation, management, conservation, improvement or
maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of
brush or other debris left by storm, as an incident to such farming operations; the production or
harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an
incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the
construction, operation or maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for
farming purposes; handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing
or delivering to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any
agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in the case of
fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for market or for
~ direct sale. The term "farm" includes farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto, nurseries,
orchards, ranges, greenhouses, hoophouses and other temporary structures or other structures used
primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming operations, the sale of agricultural or
horticultural commodities. The term "aquaculture" means the farming of the waters of the state and tidal
wetlands and the production of protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels and other
mulluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised and public underwater farm lands. Nothing herein shall
restrict the power of a local zoning authority under chapter 124.
APPENDIX B - Connecticut General Statute section 8-7d
Hearings and decisions. Time limits. Day of receipt. Notice to adjoining municipality.
(a) In all matters wherein a formal petition, application, request or appeal must be submitted to a
zoning commission, planning and zoning commission or zoning board of appeals under this chapter, a
planning commission under chapter 126 or an inland wetlands agency under chapter 440 and a hearing is
required or otherwise held on such petition, application, request or appeal, such hearing shall commence
within sixty-five days after receipt of such petition, application, request or appeal and shall be completed
within thirty-five days after such hearing commences, unless a shorter period oftime is required under
this chapter, chapter 126 or chapter 440. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper
having a general circulation in such municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is
located at least twice, at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days or less
21
than ten days and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. In addition to such
notice, such commission, board or agency may, by regulation, provide for notice to persons who own or
occupy land that is adjacent to the land that is the subject of the hearing. All applications and maps and
documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such hearing, any person or persons
may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or by attorney. All decisions on such matters
shall be rendered within sixty-five days after completion of such hearing, unless a shorter period of time
is required under this chapter, chapter 126 or chapter 440. The petitioner or applicant may consent to
one or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such
periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition, application, request
or appeal.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, whenever the approval of a site
plan is the only requirement to be met or remaining to be met under the zoning regulations for any
building, use or structure, a decision on an application for approval of such site plan shall be rendered
within sixty-five days after receipt of such site plan. Whenever a decision is to be made on an
application for subdivision approval under chapter 126 on which no hearing is held, such decision shall
be rendered within sixty-five days after receipt of such application. Whenever a decision is to be made
on an inland wetlands and watercourses application under chapter 440 on which no hearing is held, such
decision shall be rendered within sixty-five days after receipt of such application. The applicant may
consent to one or more extensions of such period, provided the total period of any such extension or
extensions shall not exceed sixty-five days or may withdraw such plan or application.
'-
(c) For purposes of subsection (a) or (b) of this section and section 7-246a, the date of receipt of a
petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of such
commission, board or agency, immediately following the day of submission to such commission, board
or agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five days after such
submission, whichever is sooner. If the commission, board or agency does not maintain an office with
regular office hours, the office of the clerk of the municipality shall act as the agent of such commission,
board or agency for the receipt of any petition, application, request or appeal.
(d) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any action initiated by any zoning or
planning and zoning commission regarding adoption or change of any zoning regulation or boundary.
(e) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if an application involves an activity regulated
pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, and the time for a decision by a zoning commission or
planning and zoning commission established pursuant to this section would elapse prior to the thirtyfifth
day after a decision by the inland wetlands agency, the time period for a decision shall be extended
to thirty-five days after the decision of such agency. The provisions of this subsection shall not be
construed to apply to any extension consented to by an applicant or petitioner.
(f) The zoning commission, planning commission, zoning and planning commission, zoning board of
appeals or inland wetlands agency shall notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency
of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which: (1) Any
portion of the property affected by a decision of such commission, board or agency is within five
hundred feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the traffic to the
completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
(3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and
significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or (4) water
runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the
22
adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall
be mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, request or plan. Such
adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such
application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
APPENDIXC
Guidelines, Upland Review Area Regulations
Connecticut's Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Act, as amended
23
