L
PART II
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 1- 1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated the " Code of Ordinances,
Town of Suffield, Connecticut," and may be so cited.
Sec. 1- 2. Rules of construction and definitions.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the
following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
Board of selectmen, selectmen. Whenever the words " board of
selectmen" or " selectmen" are used, they shall be construed to
mean the board of selectmen of the Town of Suffield, Connecticut.
Business. " Business" includes businesses, professions, trades
and occupations, and all and every kind of calling.
County. The words " the county" or " this county" shall mean
the County of Hartford, in the State of Connecticut.
Engage in. " Engage in" includes commence, engage in, carry
on, conduct, maintain, manage and operate.
First selectman. Whenever the term " first selectman" is used,
it shall be construed to mean the first selectman of the Town of
Suffield, Connecticut.
Gender. The use of any gender shall include the other genders.
Goods. " Goods" includes wares or merchandise.
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3)
or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such persons or offic rs.
State law references—Municipal powers generally, G.S. § 7- 148; powers of
municipalities, G.S. § 7-194; municipal charters and special acts, G.S. §§ 7- 187- 7-201;
municipal ordinances and regulations generally, G. S. §§ 7- 148- 7- 186.
99
1- 2 SUFFIELD CODE
Keeper and proprietor. The words " keeper" and " proprietor"
shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations,
clubs, copartnerships and joint ventures, whether acting by themselves
or through a servant, agent or employee.
License fee. " License fee" shall include any charge imposed for
a license, whether the object be regulation or revenue, or both
regulation and revenue, but when applied to any business, profession,
occupation, trade or calling regulated by the state as a
matter of statewide concern the object shall be revenue only.
Number. The use of the singular shall include the plural and
the use of the plural shall include the singular.
Oath. " Oath" includes an affirmation.
Office. " Office" shall mean the use of the title of any officer,
employee or office of the town, unless otherwise specifically
designated.
Officers, employees. The title of any officer or employee used
herein shall be construed as if the words " of the town" followed
it, and shall include his duly authorized representative.
Operate. " Operate" includes carry on, keep, conduct, maintain
or manage.
Owner. " Owner," when applied to a building or land, shall
include any part owner, joint owner, or owner of a community or
partnership interest, life tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant,
of the whole or a part of such building or land.
Person. " Person" shall mean natural person, joint venture,
joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation,
business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee,
agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them, and shall
include all political subdivisions and governmental agencies (except
the United States of America and the state), and every
department of such political subdivisions, together with every
officer and employee thereof while working in the course of his
employment.
Personal property shall include every species of property except
real property as herein defined.
Property. The word " property" shall include real and personal
property.
100
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1- 2
111110" Public place. The term " public place" shall include any and all
streets, highways and boulevards, alleys or other publicly owned
or controlled ways and any and all publicly owned or controlled
parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sale. " Sale" includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for
sale.
Shall, may, must. " Shall" and " must" are mandatory; " may"
is permissive.
Sidewalk. The word " sidewalk" shall mean the paved portion
of a street between the street right-of-way and the adjacent property
line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
State. The words " the state" or " this state" shall mean the
State of Connecticut.
State law, general law or general statutes shall refer to the
General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended.
Street. " Street" shall mean the entire width between the boundary
lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof
is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular or
pedestrian travel, including, but not limited to, alleys, lanes,
courts, greens, public squares and places, and sidewalks.
Tenant, occupant. The word " tenant" or " occupant" applied to
a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or
oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building
or land, either alone or with others.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the
future as well as the past and present.
Town. Whenever the words " the town" are used, they shall be
construed to mean the Town of Suffield in the County of Hartford
and the State of Connecticut.
Vote, approval or consent. Except as may be otherwise provided
in connection therewith, the phrase " vote, approval or consent"
of the council or other body shall mean the affirmative vote of a
Cie majority of those members present at a meeting having a quorum
in attendance. Whenever such phrase refers to the members of
L 101
1- 2 SUFFIELD CODE
the board of selectmen or other body rather than to the board of
selectmen or body as such, the vote required shall be in relation
to the total membership rather than to those present at the
meeting.
Writing. " Writing" includes any form of recorded message capable
of comprehension by ordinary visual means.
In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, except as otherwise
provided in this Code of Ordinances, words and phrases
shall be construed according to the common usage of the language
and according to the general statutes; technical words and
phrases, and such as have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law, shall be construed and understood accordingly.
State law reference—Rules of construction of terms used in the General
Statutes, G.S. § 1- 1.
Sec. 1- 3. Effect of Code on prior actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal hereby of any
ordinance of this town shall in any manner affect the prosecution
for violation of ordinances, which violations were committed prior
to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any
license or penalty at such effective date due and unpaid under
such ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions
of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such
license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation
thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit
in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant
to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereof appertaining
shall continue in full force and effect.
Sec. 1- 4. Interpretation of section numbers.
In reading a section number from left to right, the digit or
digits to the left of the dash shall designate the chapter number
of this Code. The digits to the right of the dash shall indicate the
section number in such chapter. Figures to the right of a decimal
point shall indicate new sections or chapters inserted between
existing sections or chapters, as the case may be. The decimal
system shall be used in maintaining the numerical order of such
sections and chapters.
102
j
L
L
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1- 8
Sec. 1-5. Headings of sections.
The headings of the several sections of this Code printed in
boldface type are intended to indicate the contents of the sections
and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor
as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided,
shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the
headings, are amended or reenacted.
The headings of chapters, articles, divisions and sections contained
in this Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify
or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the
provisions of any chapter, article, division or section hereof.
Sec. 1- 6. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in
force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution
or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an
offense committed under the ordinance repealed.
Sec. 1- 7. Validity and severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this Code. The board of selectmen hereby declares that it would
have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one ( 1)
or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases ad
been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason
this Code or any part thereof should be declared invalid or unconstitutional,
then the original ordinance or ordinances which
such Code or part thereof supersedes shall be in full force and
effect.
Sec. 1-8. Altering Code.
Of It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by
additions or deletions, any part of this Code of Ordinances or any
L 103
1- 8 SUFFIELD CODE
ordinance of the town or to insert or delete pages or portions
thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner
whatsoever with intent that any provision of this Code or other
ordinance of the town shall be misrepresented or with intent to
commit a fraud thereby.
Sec. 1- 9. Notices; service and proof.
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code,
unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made,
such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to
the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States Mail
in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to
be notified at his last known business or residence address as the
same appears in the public records or other records pertaining to
the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall
be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the
post office, or any United States mailbox. Proof of giving any
notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee
of this town or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen
18) years, which shows service in conformity with this Code or
other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.
Sec. 1- 10. Supplementation of Code.
a) By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code
shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by
the board of selectmen. A supplement to the Code shall include
all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed
by the board of selectmen during the period covered by the supplement
and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of
a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly
into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which
have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages
shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest
ordinance included in the supplement.
b) In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the
Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code
by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
104
L
L
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1- 11
c) When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier
meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare
the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes
in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement,
insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into the
unified Code. For example, the codifier may:
1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
2) Provide appropriate headings and titles for sections and
other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement,
and make changes in such headings and titles;
3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions
to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to
accommodate new material, change existing or other subdivision
numbers;
4) Change the words " this ordinance" or words of the same
meaning to " this chapter," " this article," " this division,"
etc., as the case may be, or to " sections to
inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the
Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the Code); and
5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve
the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into
the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change
in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in
the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
d) The town clerk shall cause copies of each and every such
reprint to be distributed to each distributee and to every purchaser
of the Code who has ordered and paid for maintenance
service.
Sec. 1- 11. General penalty.
a) Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the town,
or rule or regulation promulgated by any officer thereof under
authority vested in him by law or ordinance, any act is prohibited
or is declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act
is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of such ordi-
105
1- 11 SUFFIELD CODE
nance, rule or regulation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
one hundred dollars ($ 100. 00). Each day any such violation
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
b) The imposition of any punishment hereunder shall not prevent
the enforced abatement of any lawful condition by the town.
c) In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is
created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the town
counsel may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense.
d) Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of
any of the provisions of this Code, officially designated as such
and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a
new and separate offense.
State law reference—Penalty limitation, G.S. 7- 148.
Sec. 1- 12. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall
be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of
the following:
1) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money for the town, or any evidence of the town' s indebtedness;
2) Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for
the levy of taxes or for an annual budget;
3) Any ordinance annexing territory to the town or excluding
territory as a part of the town;
4) Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other
right;
5) Any zoning ordinance;
6) Any subdivision ordinance;
7) Any ordinance creating a special services district;
8) Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating
to any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other
instrument;
106 J
11. 11/
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1- 12
9) Any ordinance adopting a preliminary plan or development
plan;
10) Any temporary or special ordinance;
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in
full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length
herein.
L 107
The next page is 157]
4.0
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION*
Art. I. In General, §§ 2-1- 2-15
Art. II. Boards and Commissions, §§ 2-16- 2- 85
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 2-16- 2-30
Div. 2. Retirement Commission, §§ 2-31- 2-45
Div. 3. Board of Finance, §§ 2- 46- 2-60
Div. 4. Commission for Social Services, §§ 2-61- 2- 85
Art. III. Employee Benefits, §§ 2-86- 2- 130
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 2-86- 2- 100
Div. 2. Pension Plan, §§ 2- 101- 2- 130
Art. IV. Officers, §§ 2- 131- 2- 160
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 2-131- 2- 145
Div. 2. Town Clerk, §§ 2- 146- 2- 160
Art. V. Code of Ethics, §§ 2-161- 2- 179
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 2- 161- 2- 175
Div. 2. Board of Ethics, §§ 2- 176- 2- 179
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2. 1. Town seal.
a) The following described seal shall be the official seal of the
town: Perfect concentric circles forming a border and embracing
within them, in an arc in the upper half, the words " Seal of the
Town" and, in an arc in the lower half, the words " Suffield,
Connecticut"; in the center, a shield in which is shown the sun
shining upon a representation of the Connecticut valley and the
Connecticut river; atop the shield, a representation of the first
meeting house in Suffield and an oak tree representing the Charter
Oak; to the left of the shield, an early settler of the town; to the
right of the shield an Indian, the earliest inhabitant of the settlement;
and below the shield, the inscription " Settled in 1670,"
surmounted by tobacco leaves representing an early and impor-
Cross references—Building code board of appeals, § 5-41 et seq.; First School
Society to care for certain burial grounds, * 6-1, civil defense preparedness, Ch. 7;
elections, Ch. 8; housing authority, § 9-16 et seq.; library board of directors, §
10-21 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 13-36 et seq.; planning, Ch. 14;
tax assessor, § 16-21 et seq.
Supp. No. 5 157
2- 1 SUFFIELD CODE
tant product of the town. The border within the two (2) concentric
circles forming the margin of the seal shall be blue: all inscriptions
shall be in black; the pictorial representation shall be in
colors appropriate to the subjects they represent; and all the foregoing
shall be upon a white background.
b) An original drawing of the seal, made in conformity with
the provisions of this section, shall be filed with the town clerk
not less than sixty (60) days following the adoption of this section,
and shall be preserved by the town clerk in a suitable depository
among the archives of the town.
c) The seal of the town shall be used only under the direction.
and with the approval of the chief executive officer of the town or
of the town clerk, for purposes related to the official business of
the town; provided, however, that the chief executive officer or
the town clerk may authorize and approve reproduction of the
seal for memorials and educational purposes.
Ord. of 3- 25-69, §§ 1- 3)
State law reference—Authorized, G.S. § 7- 101.
Sec. 2-2. Uniform fiscal year.
The town agrees to comply with the provisions of chapter 110 of
the general statutes concerning uniform fiscal years and shall
commence operation under the provisions of the chapter on July
1, 1962.
Ord. of 6- 29-61( 1))
Charter reference—Fiscal year, § 801.
Sec. 2- 3. Annual budget meeting.
Adoption of the budget submitted by the board of finance shall
be by vote at the annual town budget meeting held on or before
the second Wednesday of May. An initial public hearing must be
held by the board of finance at least two ( 2) weeks prior to the
town meeting to present the budget. The board of finance may
modify the budget presented at the public hearing prior to the
town meeting. Amendments to the budget, to the extent allowed
Supp. No. 5 158
j
L
46,
ADMINISTRATION § 2- 32
by law, may be passed by the town meeting, and the proposed
budget, and any amendments thereto, must be voted on at the
annual town budget meeting.
Ord. of 4- 13- 62)
Charter references—Budget preparation, § 803; adoption of the budget, §
1005; town meetings, Ch. X.
Secs. 2- 4- 2- 15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 2. 16- 2-30. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. RETIREMENT COMMISSIONt
Sec. 2-31. Established.
A retirement commission for the town is hereby established as
set forth in the retirement plan adopted by the special town
meeting of June 29, 1961 and the same shall be appointed as
provided in the retirement plan.
Ord. of 6- 29-61( 2))
Sec. 2-32. Composition: terms of members; compensation.
The pension plan of the Town of Suffield as herein set forth
shall be administered by the retirement commission consisting of
the first selectmen, the town treasurer, a member of the board of
finance designated by the chairman of the board of finance for his
Charter references—Elected boards and commissions, Ch. III; appointed
boards and commissions, Ch. VII.
Cross references—Board of ethics, § 2- 176 et seq.; building code board of
appeals, § 5- 41 et seq.; board for admission for electors, § 8-2; board of education,
8- 4; housing code enforcement committee, § 9- 39; library commission, § 10-21 et
seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 13-36 et seq.; permanent building commission,
§ 14-31 et seq.; conservation commission, § 14-51 et seq.; historic district
commission, § 14- 76 et seq.; economic development commission, § 14- 101 et seq.;
advisory commission on capital expenditures, § 14-126 et seq.
tCharter reference—Retirement commission, § 706(K).
Supp. No. 5 159
2- 32 SUFFIELD CODE
or her term of office, and three (3) citizens at large appointed as
hereinafter provided. Not more than two (2) of the said three (3)
citizens at large so appointed shall be of the same political party.
Each appointed citizen shall be appointed for a three-year term.
At the end of the term the board of selectmen shall appoint a
successor. The board of selectmen shall appoint successors for the
appointed citizens as may be necessary to fill vacancies resulting
from death or resignation.
Effective July 1, 1989, the police union shall designate one ( 1)
of its members to serve on the retirement commission, also for a
three ( 3) year term. The police union shall appoint successors as
necessary for this position.
Each of the above seven (7) individuals will be voting members
of the retirement commission; with one ( 1) vote for each member.
The board of selectmen shall also appoint one ( 1) " adhoc"
member to the retirement commission. The " adhoc" member will
not maintain a voting privilege.
Effective July 1, 1989, the Retirement Commission agrees to
permit three ( 3) additional ( nonvoting) representatives, one ( 1)
designated by SEIU, one (1) by NAGE, and one (1) by the board of
education, to participate in retirement commission meetings. The
representative designated by the board of education must be a
noncertified employee participating in the pension plan.
The members of the retirement commission shall serve without
compensation. The retirement commission shall employ such actuarial,
medical, clerical, and other services as are needed for the
proper operation of the pension plan.
Ord. of 6- 29-61(3), § II; Ord. of 9- 30-82, § 1; Ord. No. 91- 01, § 16,
4- 25-91)
Sec. 2- 33. Powers and duties.
a) The retirement commission shall submit annually, to the
board of finance of the town, or to the budget -making body, if the
town abolishes the board of finance, a schedule of its estimated
expenses necessary for the administration of this plan, and all
such expenses of administration shall be paid by the town.
Supp. No. 5 160
ADMINISTRATION § 2- 33
b) The retirement commission shall deposit town retirement
funds with a qualified public depository or insurance company
qualified to do business in the State of Connecticut, and the public
depository or insurance company so selected shall manage said
funds. All funds appropriated by the town or contributed by the
employees of the town pursuant to this plan shall be paid over to
the trustee which shall have the right and power to invest and
reinvest the same in securities legal for investment of trust funds
under the general statutes including common trust funds. The
trustee shall make payments from the trust fund from time to
time on the written directions of the retirement commission pursuant
to this plan. The retirement commission shall enter into
written agreement with said trustee specifically outlining the
duties of the trustee which shall be in all respects in accordance
with and consistent with this plan. The retirement commission
shall not be liable for any negligence, misfeasance or malfeasance
on the part of such trustee in managing said fund but shall be
liable only in the event that the board has been negligent in the
selection and appointment of such trustee. Such trustee shall be
paid reasonable compensation for its services rendered for managing,
investing and reinvesting the fund.
c) The retirement commission shall act by a majority of its
members at the time in office, and such action may be taken
either by a vote at a meeting or in writing without a meeting.
d) The retirement commission may authorize any one ( 1) or
more of its members to execute any document or documents on
behalf of the commission, in which event the retirement commission
shall notify the trustee in writing of such action and the
name or names of its member or members so designated. The
trustee thereafter shall accept and rely upon any document executed
by such member or members as representing action by the
retirement commission until the retirement commission shall file
with the trustee a written revocation of such designation.
e) The retirement commission may adopt such by-laws and
regulations as it deems desirable for the conduct of its affairs, and
shall adopt mortality tables and the interest rate to be used as the
basis for all actuarial calculations. The retirement commission
may appoint such actuaries, accountants, counsel, specialists, and
other persons as it deems necessary or desirable in connection
Supp. No. 5
161
2- 33 SUFFIELD CODE
with the adminstration of this plan. The retirement commission
shall be entitled to rely conclusively upon, and shall be fully
protected in any action taken by it and good faith in relying upon,
any opinions or reports which shall be furnished to it by any such
actuary, accountant, counsel or other specialist.
Ord. of 6- 29-61(3), § II; Ord. No. 93- 02, 12- 16-93)
Secs. 2- 34- 2-45. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. BOARD OF FINANCE*
Sec. 2-46. Established.
The town hereby establishes a board of finance under the provisions
of chapter No. 257 of the Public Acts of 1917, the board of
finance to have the terms of office, powers and duties provided in
the act.
Ord. of 9- 7- 17)
Sec. 2. 47. Alternate members.
a) At the biennial election of the town, to be held in November
1977, and quadrennially thereafter, three ( 3) resident electors
and taxpayers of the town, not more than two (2) ofwhom shall be
of the same political party, shall be elected to serve as alternates
on the board of finance, pursuant to the provisions of Public Act
75- 440, enacted by the 1975 session of the general assembly.
b) Within sixty (60) days following the approval of the ordinance
from which this section derives, the board of selectmen
shall appoint three (3) resident electors and taxpayers of the town,
not more than two (2) ofwhom shall be of the same political party,
to serve as alternates on the board of finance, from the date of
their appointment until the biennial election of the town, to be
held in November 1977.
c) Following the approval of the ordinance from which this
section derives, when a regular member of the board of finance is
Charter reference—Board of finances, § 802.
Cross reference—Taxation generally, Ch. 16.
Supp. No. 5 162
ADMINISTRATION § 2- 62
absent or disqualified, such regular member shall designate an
alternate, duly elected or appointed under the provisions of this
ordinance, to serve in his place and stead.
d) Each alternate, elected or appointed under the provisions of
this section shall possess, when seated, all of the powers and
duties set forth in the general statutes, any special act, or any
ordinance of the town, relating to the board of finance, while
serving in the place and stead of a regular member of the board of
Finance who is absent or disqualified.
Ord. of 8- 28-75( 2), §§ I—III)
Secs. 2- 48- 2-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. COMMISSION FOR SOCIAL SERVICES*
Sec. 2-61. Established.
There is hereby created in the town a commission for social
services which shall consist of seven ( 7) resident electors of the
town who shall be appointed by the board of selectmen.
Ord. of 4- 30-74, § 1)
Sec. 2. 62. Terms of office; vacancies.
The members of the commission for social services shall serve
for terms of four (4) years except that the initial terms shall be as
Charter references—Administrator for social services, § 604; commission for
social services, § 706(B).
Supp. No. 5 162. 1
ADMINISTRATION § 2-65
follows: Two ( 2) members of the commission for social services
shall be appointed to serve until the first Monday of November,
1975, three (3) until the first Monday of November, 1977 and two
2) until the first Monday of November, 1979. Any vacancy in the
commission shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by
appointment by the board of selectmen.
Ord. of 4-30- 74, § 2)
Charter reference—Vacancies in appointed boards and commissions, § 703.
Sec. 2-63. Organization.
The members of the commission for social services shall choose
by ballot a chairman, a vice chairman and a secretary from among
its members. The commission for social services shall keep records
of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to
the town in the manner required of other boards, commissions
and agencies of the town.
Ord. of 4-30-74, § 3)
Sec. 2-64. Compensation.
The members of the commission for social services shall serve
without compensation, but the necessary expenses of the commission
for social services shall be paid by the town.
Ord. of 4-30-74, § 4)
Sec. 2-65. Duties.
a) The commission for social services shall evaluate, coordinate
and assist in implementing programs and services for the
elderly, the disabled and the handicapped persons of the town as
those classifications are defined by state statutes and regulations.
It shall study the conditions and needs of elderly, disabled and
handicapped persons in the community in such areas of concern
as housing, health, employment, transportation, recreation, home
care services and other matters respecting the life quality of the
elderly, the disabled and the handicapped. It shall analyze the
services and programs provided and available through public and
private agencies and shall make recommendations to the board of
selectmen regarding the development and integration of such services
and programs in keeping with the needs of the elderly, the
disabled and the handicapped.
Supp. No. 4 163
2-65 SUFFIELD CODE
b) The commission for social services may receive gifts in the
name of the town for the use and benefit of the elderly, the disabled
and the handicapped of the town and shall administer such
gifts for such purposes subject to the terms of such gifts. The
commission may initiate, organize, and carry on such programs
and services for the elderly, the disabled and the handicapped as
it may deem necessary and appropriate subject to approval of the
board of selectmen and the board of finance, and, where required
by law, by the town meeting. It may exchange information with
the appropriate state departments and agencies and may request
such departments and agencies for assistance in planning and
coordinating local services and programs. The commission for social
services may request liaison representation from other town
commissions, committees, departments and agencies concerned
with the aging, the disabled and the handicapped.
Ord. of 4-30- 74, §§ 5, 6)
Secs. 2. 66- 2. 85. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 2. 86- 2. 100. Reserved.
Supp. No. 4 164
J
ADMINISTRATION § 2- 101
DIVISION 2. PENSION PLAN*
Sec. 2- 101. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Accrued benefit means the benefit determined as of any given
date under section 2- 105(a) of this plan and payable at a participant'
s normal retirement date.
Actuarial equivalent means a benefit which is equal in value to
the normal form of benefit and is calculated using the following
actuarial assumptions:
Interest Rate: 6.00%
Mortality for Partici- UP -1984 Table, ages set back
pants: two (2) years
Mortality for Beneficia- UP -1984 Table, ages set back
ries: five (5) years
Actuary means a member of the Society of Actuaries who is
enrolled by the Joint Board for the enrollment of Actuaries.
Annuity commencement date means the first of the month when
annuity payments are to begin under the plan.
Editor's note—An amendment effective July 1, 1989 amended and restated
the pension plan in order to clarify the provisions of the plan and in order to make
certain changes. Except where noted herein, the provisions of this amended and
restated plan shall apply only to employees who terminate employment on or after
July 1, 1989. The rights and benefits of any other employee shall be governed by
the terms of the plan in effect on his date of termination of employment. The
former pension plan, Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2, §§ 2- 101- 2- 118, derived from:
Adoption Adoption
Date Section Date Section
411110 6- 29-61(3) I—XV 6-30-80(2) 1- 3
6- 18-68(4) 1, 2 4-21-82(2) 1, 2
8- 20-70 1- 3 12- 5- 84( 1) 1- 5
2- 26-74 1, 2 L
Supp. No. 4 165
2- 101 SUFFIELD CODE
Average monthly earnings means the average of the monthly
earnings during the three (3) years out of the last seven (7) years
of full-time employment in which employee contributions were
made which produce the highest average immediately preceding
a participant' s actual retirement date.
Beneficiary means any individual or entity most recently designated
to receive benefits upon the death of any person covered
by this plan.
Credited interest means the rate of interest to be credited to
participants' contributions as provided in section 2- 110(i) of this
plan.
Credited service means the service counted for calculating benefits
as determined under section 2- 102(a) of this plan.
Effective date means September 1, 1961.
Employee means any person employed on a full-time basis by
the town, including employees of the board of education. Any
person covered by the State Teachers Retirement System and any
person appointed by the General Assembly or by the Governor of
the State of Connecticut will not be included in this plan. For the
purpose of this definition a person is a full-time employee if he is
regularly employed by the employer for at least twenty (20) hours
per week.
Fiscal year means the twelve (12) months from July 1st of any
year to June 30th of the following year, both dates inclusive.
Monthly earnings means a participant' s monthly compensation
for service to the town, including overtime payments, as reported
on IRS Form W-2. Monthly earnings do not include reimbursement
for accumulated sick time, unused vacation time, or other
special payments made to a participant at retirement or termination
of employment. Monthly earnings also excludes off-duty
pay for police officers and any compensation from which a participant
did not make the contributions required under section
2- 110(h).
For a participant who at any time during the year receives
compensation for less than thirty (30) hours a week, monthly
Supp. No. 4 166
J
J
L
ADMINISTRATION § 2- 101
earnings will be adjusted by multiplying the participant' s monthly
earnings by the following fraction (but less than 1. 000):
Hours for which participant would have received
compensation if employed thirty (30) hours per week
Hours for which participant actually received compensation
Normal retirement date means the date specified in section 4. 01
herein.
Participant means an employee who is eligible to participate
according to Article III of this plan. " Participant" shall not include
retired participant, terminated participant, or any former
participant who has become ineligible for any reason.
Participant contributions means the employee contributions required
for membership into the plan in accordance with section
2- 110.
Pension fund means the assets held by the trustee for the plan
in accordance with any existing trust agreement.
Plan means the pension plan of the town as stated herein and
as it may be amended from time to time.
Plan administrator means the retirement commission as designated
in Article XI.
Plan year means the period beginning each July 1, and ending
each June 30.
Retired participant means a former participant who retired and
commenced receiving benefits in accordance with sections
2- 104(a)—(c) of Article IV or a former terminated member who
retired and commenced receiving benefits in accordance with section
2- 107.
Retirement date means the date a participant terminates service
with the employer for the purposes of retirement benefit
eligibility as provided in section 2- 104.
Service means continuous employment with the Town of Suffield
as provided in section 2- 102 herein. uffield
Spouse means the person to whom a participant, retired participant,
or terminated participant is legally married.
Supp. No. 4 167
2- 101 SUFFIELD CODE
Terminated participant means a former participant who has
terminated employment with the employer and retained a vested
right to a benefit in accordance with section 2- 107.
Town means the Town of Suffield.
Trust agreement means a written declaration of trust between
the town and the trustee.
Trustee means the individuals or entity so designated by the
trust agreement.
Construction: Wherever used herein a pronoun in the masculine
gender shall be considered as including the feminine gender
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, and wherever used
herein a pronoun in the singular form shall be considered as
being in the plural form unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Amend. of 7- 1- 89; Ord. No. 91-01, § 1, 4-25-91)
Sec. 2-102. Credited service.
a) Credited service. Credited service means that portion of a
participant' s service which is used to determine the amount of
retirement benefit he may become eligible to receive, as provided
in section 2- 105. Credited service shall be measured in years and
completed months, each such completed month being one -twelfth
1/ 12) of a year. Credited service shall include:
1) Period of employment during which an employee participates
in this plan by making the contributions required in
section 2- 110, and
2) Service before September 1, 1961 which is subsequent to
the participant' s completion of three ( 3) years of service
and the attainment of age thirty (30).
If at any time during the year a participant receives compensation
for less than thirty (30) hours a week, the above credited
service will be adjusted annually by multiplying it by the following
fraction (but not greater than 1. 000):
Hours for which participant actually received compensation
Hours for which participant would have received compensation
if employed thirty (30) hours per week
Supp. No. 4 168
J
l ADMINISTRATION § 2- 102
b) Military service. Leave of absence caused by military service
in the Armed Forces of the United States of America or any
of its allies shall be included when determining credited service
and the employee on such leave shall be deemed for purposes of
this plan to be continuously employed by the town during such
leave of absence at the salary he was receiving from the town
upon the date of leaving, provided he shall return to active employment
within ninety (90) days of his actual discharge from
military service and shall within one ( 1) year thereafter make
such contributions as would have been required of him had he
remained in the active service of the town at such salary.
c) Reemployment. Except for reemployed employees who did
not withdraw their employee contributions upon prior termination,
reemployed employees shall be considered new employees
for purposes of determining service under the plan. Only credited
service earned after reemployment will be used in calculating the
participant' s retirement benefit.
d) Special credited service " buy back" provision. Active employees
covered under the plan as of March 1, 1985 may elect to
buy back service before age thirty (30) and all but one ( 1) year of
service before they became eligible to participate. The retirement
commission has full authority to set the rules regarding the time
period in which this buy back option may be exercised and the
formula to determine the participant' s contribution required to
buy back the service.
e) Additional special credited service " buy back" provisions.
Active employees covered under the plan as of January 1, 1987
may elect to buy back the first year of service with the town
which previously was used towards the eligibility requirements
to become a participant of this plan. Effective October 31, 1986,
employees may immediately elect to join the plan in accordance
with the plan' s rules for participation.
Police officers may elect to buy back their " supernumery" time
as credited service effective December 1, 1986. Beginning on that
date, earnings and service resulting from " supernumery" duty
will be considered eligible for treatment as monthly earnings and
service for purposes of this plan.
Supp. No. 4 169
2. 102 SUFFIELD CODE
The retirement commission has full authority to set the rules
regarding the time period in which these buy back options may be
exercised and the formula to determine the participant' s contribution
required to buy back the service.
Amend. of 7- 1-89; Ord. No. 91-01, §§ 3- 5, 4-25-91)
Sec. 2- 103. Participation.
a) Eligible employees. An employee who was a participant on
July 1, 1989 will continue to be a participant. Each other employee
will be eligible to become a participant of the plan at any
time during the thirty (30) days following employment. Thereafter,
the employee may elect to commence participation as of any
subsequent July 1.
b) Requiredparticipation. Each eligible employee who entered
the service of the town after September 1, 1961 will be required to
participate in the pension plan unless, within six (6) months after
entering the service of town or within six (6) months after the
establishment of this plan, he shall notify the retirement commission,
in writing, of his intention not to participate in the plan.
If any such employee now or hereafter employed shall give such
notice of his intention not to participate or has not begun making
contributions within the thirty (30) days following employment,
he shall not thereafter be admitted to the pension plan except on
a future service basis and only upon application to participate
starting on the next July lst.
c) Date of participation. An employee will become a participant
as of the first day of the month coinciding with or next
following the date he begins making the contributions required
under section 2- 105.
d) Reemployment. If a participant terminates his employment
with the employer and is subsequently rehired by the employer,
he will become a participant of the plan upon again satisfying the
requirements of subsections (a)—(c) above. However, a reemployed
employee who did not withdraw his employee contributions upon
prior termination is eligible for participation in the plan on his
date of reemployment and needs only to satisfy the requirement
contained in subsection ( c) to again become a participant of the
plan.
Amend. of 7- 1- 89; Ord. No. 91- 01, §§ 6, 7, 4- 25-91)
Supp. No. 4 170
J
1
ADMINISTRATION § 2- 105
Sec. 2- 104. Benefit eligibility.
a) Normal retirement date. A participant' s normal retirement
date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next
following the earlier of the following:
1) Later of a participant' s 55th birthday or upon completion
of ten (10) years of credited service; or
2) Upon completion of twenty-five (25) years of credited service;
or
3) Later of age sixty-five (65) or upon completion of five ( 5)
years of credit service.
b) Early retirement date. Each participant who has attained
age fifty (50) and completed fifteen ( 15) years of credited service
and whose service ceases by reason of retirement may elect, with
the consent of the employer, to receive an early retirement benefit.
Payment of this retirement benefit may be deferred to his
normal retirement date or may commence on the first day of any
month between the date the election is made and the participant'
s normal retirement date, as specified by the participant in
his election. Benefits payable before normal retirement date, as
specified by the participant in his election. Benefits payable before
normal retirement date will be adjusted as described in section
2- 105(c).
c) Late retirement date. A participant may continue employment
after his normal retirement date. The late retirement date
of any participant who is in employment with the employer beyond
his normal retirement date shall be the first day of the
month coincident with or next following the participant' s date of
termination of employment.
Amend. of 7- 1- 89; Ord. No. 91-01, § 7, 4- 25-91)
Sec. 2- 105. Accrued benefits and retirement benefits.
a) Accrued benefit. The monthly accrued benefit of a participant
shall be equal to two (2) percent of the participant' s average
monthly earnings multiplied by his credited service.
b) Normal retirement benefit. The amount of normal retirement
benefit payable to a participant who retires on his normal
Supp. No. 4 171
2- 105 SUFFIELD CODE
retirement date shall be equal to his accrued benefit determined
as of such participant' s normal retirement date.
c) Early retirement benefit. The amount of early retirement
benefit payable to a participant who retires on an early retirement
date shall be equal to one ( 1) of the following:
1) The accrued benefit as of the early retirement date, if benefits
are to commence on the participant' s normal retirement
date.
2) The benefit actuarially equivalent to his accrued benefit
payable on participant' s normal retirement date, if benefits
are to commence before the participant' s normal retirement
date.
d) Late retirement benefit. The amount of late retirement benefit
payable to a participant who retires on a late retirement date
shall be the participant' s accrued benefit based on his average
annual earnings and credited service at his late retirement date.
Amend. of 7- 1- 89; Ord. No. 91-01, § 9, 4-25-91)
Sec. 2-106. Payment provisions and forms of payment.
a) Payment of retirement benefit. A participant' s retirement
benefit will be payable monthly. The first of such monthly payments
shall be made as of the first of the month coincident with
or next following the participant' s retirement date, with subsequent
monthly payments being made as of the first of each month
thereafter.
b) Nonassignment. All retirement benefit payments, or other
payments, are provided for the participant or other payee for the
support and maintenance of such payee, and shall not be assigned,
commuted (except as may be provided herein), or anticipated,
and shall be free from the claims of all creditors to the
fullest extent permitted by law.
c) Normal form ofpayment. Under this plan, retirement benefits
will normally be paid on the modified cash refund form. This
form provides that payments will be made to a participant in a
level amount during his lifetime. Upon the participant' s death,
there will be paid to his beneficiary an amount equal to the ex -
Supp. No. 4 172
J
L ADMINISTRATION § 2- 106
cess, if any, of the participant contributions, together with credited
interest specified in section 2- 110(i) and computed thereon to
his retirement date, over the sum of all retirement benefit payments
made to the participant.
In lieu of receiving his retirement benefit in this form but before
benefit payments commence, a participant may elect to receive
an actuarial equivalent benefit of equal value based on one
1) of the optional forms of payment subsequently described in
this article.
d) Joint annuitant option. The participant who elects this option
will receive a reduced amount of retirement benefit during
his lifetime so that, after his death, retirement benefits equal to
one hundred (100) percent, seventy-five (75) percent, sixty-six and
two-thirds (662/3) percent, or fifty (50) percent thereof (as specified
in the election) will be paid for the life of the joint annuitant
designated by the participant if he survives the participant.
At the participant' s retirement date, if the option is in effect,
the amount of retirement benefit will be the actuarial equivalent
of the normal form of payment.
This option will be inoperative if the joint annuitant is someone
other than the participant' s spouse and the reduced amount of
retirement benefit payable to the member is not more than fifty
50) percent of the amount of retirement benefit which would
have been payable to him had the option not been elected. Such
prohibition is designed to conform the plan to the internal revenue
service requirement that the amount of benefits provided a
beneficiary of an employee, under various optional forms of payment,
must be " incidental" to the basic purpose of providing retirement
benefits to the employee himself.
This option will be inoperative if the joint annuitant dies before
the participant' s retirement date or if the participant dies before
his retirement date.
At any time before his retirement date, the participant may
elect or revoke this option or change the percentage of his benefit
to be continued to his contingent pensioner by filing written notice
with the employer.
Supp. No. 4 173
2- 106 SUFFIELD CODE
e) Ten-year certain and life option. The participant who elects
this option will receive a reduced amount of retirement benefit
during his lifetime so that, if his death occurs within the ten-year
period commencing upon his retirement date, retirement benefits
in the same amount will be paid to the beneficiary designated by
the participant for the balance of this ten-year period.
At the participant' s retirement date, if the option is in effect,
the amount of retirement benefit payable to him will be the actuarial
equivalent of the normal form of payment.
This option will be inoperative if the participant dies before his
retirement date.
At any time before his retirement date a participant may elect
or revoke this option by filing written notice with the employer.
f) Other options. Other optional forms of benefit payments may
be made available to participants only through formal amendment
to this plan.
g) Cost of living increase. Effective January 1, 1985, each participant
who began receiving monthly benefits from this plan on
or before January 1, 1984 and is receiving benefits (or the participant'
s beneficiary is receiving benefits) on January 1, 1985 shall
receive an increase in monthly benefits payable for the same time
period as are the January 1, 1985 pension benefits. The amount of
benefit increase equals one and one-half (11/ 2) percent of the January
1, 1985 pension benefit times the number of full years pension
benefits have been received. Period of pension payments of
less than one ( 1) year shall not be recognized in this formula.
This increase in monthly pension benefits is a one-time increase.
There is no obligation on the part of the town to provide
increases of this type in future years.
Amend. of 7- 1- 89; Ord. No. 91-01, § 10, 4-25-91)
Sec. 2. 107. Termination of employment/withdrawal from
the plan.
a) Vested right after normal retirement date. Aparticipant who
terminates his employment with the town on or after his normal
retirement date shall have a vested right to one hundred ( 100)
Supp. No. 4 174
J
L
1.
ADMINISTRATION § 2- 107
percent of his accrued benefit determined as of such date of termination
regardless of the amounts of his accumulated service.
b) Termination before retirement.
1) Vested rights before retirement. A participant who terminates
employment prior to his normal or early retirement
date and who does not elect a refund of participant contributions
with credited interest thereon, shall be one hundred
(100) percent vested in his accrued benefit payable at
his normal retirement date if he has completed the following
years of service:
Effective Years
7- 1- 88 9
7- 1- 90 8
7- 1- 92 7
7- 1- 94 6
7- 1- 96 5
2) Nonvested rights. A participant who terminates employment
with less than the required years of service for full
vesting shall forfeit all rights to benefits under the plan
except for the return of his participant contributions with
credited interest.
A participant who is vested on his date of termination and
elects a refund of his participant contributions with credited
interest shall forfeit his entire accrued benefit. Such
an election may be made any time prior to actual retirement.
Upon subsequent reemployment, an employee who previously
elected a refund of his participant contributions will
be treated as a new employee for all purposes of this plan.
c) Withdrawal from the plan. A participant who ceases to make
his employee contributions will no longer be an active participant.
Monthly earnings and credited service will not be recognized
after his contributions stop. For purposes of vesting in benefits,
he will be treated the same as a terminated participant,
based upon his credited service at the time his contributions
stopped.
Supp. No. 4 175
2- 107 SUFFIELD CODE
If his employee contributions are returned to him, and he subsequently
elects to again participate in the plan, only service
after his subsequent date of participation will be recognized for
determining his vesting status and his accrued benefit.
d) Vested accrued benefit. A participant' s vested accrued benefit
shall be payable at the participant' s normal retirement date
in a form as determined in accordance with section 2- 106. If a
participant or terminated participant has fifteen (15) or more years
of service as of his date of termination, such participant may
elect, in lieu of a benefit payable at normal retirement date, to
receive a benefit payable on the first day of any month falling
after his fiftieth birthday. Such early retirement benefit will be
equal to the participant' s accrued benefit reduced in accordance
with section 2- 105(c).
Amend. of 7- 1- 89; Ord. No. 91-01, §§ 11- 13, 4-25-91)
Sec. 2- 108. Death benefits.
a) Death of active participant with less than ten ( 10) years of
credited service. If an active participant with less than ten ( 10)
years of credited service, dies before his benefits commence or if a
terminated participant dies before his benefits commence, he shall
not retain any nonforfeitable rights hereunder, other than the
return of any participant contributions with credited interest,
payable to his beneficiary.
b) Death of active participant with more than ten ( 10) years of
credited service. Any active participant in the pension plan who
dies after accruing ten (10) years of credited service as a participant
of the plan shall have a death benefit paid to the participant'
s spouse. The participant' s spouse shall be entitled to a
monthly pension with payment commencing on the first of the
month coincident with or following death, equal to fifty (50) percent
of the participant' s benefit calculated as though the participant
had twenty-five (25) years of credited service. The benefit is
payable until the spouse dies or remarries.
If there is no spouse, or should the spouse die before remarrying,
a death benefit may be payable to the guardian of the
participant' s children. The benefit will be payable monthly, with
the last payment on the first of the month in which falls the
Supp. No. 4 176
3
L ADMINISTRATION § 2- 109
4100 child's eighteenth ( 18th) birthday. The total combined monthly
amount payable will equal the monthly benefit as determined in
the preceding paragraph. Each child' s portion will be determined
by allocating this monthly benefit equally among all the participant'
s children under age eighteen ( 18) on the date of the participant'
s death.
If, upon a participant' s death, there is no surviving spouse or
child meeting the above qualifications, the death benefit payable
will equal the employee' s contributions accumulated with interest
to the date of the participant' s death. The accumulated
contributions will be payable to a beneficiary designated by the
participant, or if no beneficiary is designated, to the participant' s
estate.
c) Death after actual retirement date. If a participant dies after
he has retired, his death benefit will be determined under the
form of payment then in effect. The various forms of payment are
described in section 2- 106.
Amend. of 7- 1- 89)
Sec. 2. 109. Disability.
a) Eligibility for benefits. Any participant in the pension plan
who, after the attainment of age fifty (50) and after ten (10) years
of credited service as an employee of the town shall be totally and
permanently disabled, may be retired for disability, provided such
participant qualified for disability benefits under the Federal Social
Security Act. Such employee retired because of disability
shall receive a pension benefit as provided under section 2- 105
without reduction for the early commencement of such benefit.
b) Occupational disability. In the event that such total disability
is shown to the satisfaction of the retirement commission
to have been sustained during the performance of essential duties
pertaining to his employment with the town and such participant
qualifies for disability benefits under the Federal Social Security
Act, then such participant shall be entitled to retirement for disability
irrespective of his age or the duration of his employment.
Such employee retired because of disability shall receive a pension
benefit as provided under section 2- 105 without reduction for
the early commencement of such benefit, and in no event, shall
Supp. No. 4 177
2. 109 SUFFIELD CODE
such annual disability income benefit be less than one-half (1/ 2)
the annual pay rate of the participant at the time the disability
was incurred, including payments under the Federal Social Security
Act, payments under any Federal or State law pertaining
to workmen' s compensation and payments under any salary or
wage continuance plan financed by the town.
c) Recovery from disability. If a disabled participant should
recover and resume employment as an employee prior to his retirement
date, he shall immediately resume his status as a participant
and his credited service for purposes of computing his
retirement benefit under section 2- 105 shall be resumed where it
stopped on the date of commencement of disability benefit, but he
shall be entitled to no credited service for the period during which
he received disability benefits hereunder.
Amend. of 7- 1- 89; Ord. No. 91-01, § 14, 4-25-91)
Sec. 2- 110. Funding and participant contributions.
a) Town contributions. For the purpose of carrying out the
funding policy in section 2- 110(b), the town will maintain a trust
agreement and will make periodic payments to the pension fund.
b) Contributions by the town. The town shall be liable to the
retirement commission for such an amount on account of future
pensions representing services of employees rendered prior to the
inception of the pension plan and which amount shall be determined
by the retirement commission on sound actuarial principles.
In lieu of full payment initially of such an amount, the town
shall pay periodically, over a definite period not exceeding thirty
30) years, such amounts as the retirement commission shall determine
as necessary to discharge such disability; provided in no
fiscal year shall the payment made on this account be less than
regular interest on the amount of such liability as assumed for
actuarial purposes still outstanding. The town shall pay into the
pension fund such amounts determined by the retirement commission
on sound actuarial principles as necessary, in addition to
contributions of the employees, to provide future pensions on account
of services rendered by employees subsequent to the date
upon which each shall begin participation in the pension plan.
c) Nondiversion. Except as provided in this section, no part of
the pension fund shall be used for or diverted to purposes other
Supp. No. 4 178
ADMINISTRATION § 2- 110
than for the exclusive benefit of participants, their spouses or
their beneficiaries covered under this plan prior to the satisfaction
of all liabilities hereunder with respect to them, provided
that any funds under this plan may be used to pay reasonable
plan administration expenses.
d) Mistake in town contribution. If the town determines that a
contribution to the pension fund has been made by mistake of
fact, the town shall direct the trustee or the insurance company to
return that contribution to the town within one ( 1) year of the
date the contribution was made.
e) Limitation of rights of employees. No person shall have any
interest in or right to the pension fund except as expressly provided
in this plan and trust agreement.
f) Limitation of town liability. While the town intends that the
plan be permanent as distinguished from a temporary program,
the town shall have any liability to make contributions to the
fund. Benefits provided by the plan are to be paid only from the
fund to the extent assets therein permit.
g) Use of forfeitures. No credit or forfeiture arising from the
operation of the plan may be used to increase the benefit of any
participant or group of participants, but will instead be taken into
account in determining contributions to be made by the town.
h) Participant contributions. Immediately prior to July 1, 1989,
participants were required to contribute four and one-half (41/2)
percent of monthly earnings. Effective July 1, 1989, participants
are required to contribute five and one-fourth ( 51/4) percent of
monthly earnings. Participant contributions are payable through
payroll deduction or as otherwise determined by the town. Participant
contributions will stop upon the earlier of:
1) Termination of employment;
2) Actual retirement.
Changes in the rate of contribution to be made by an employee
shall be determined by the retirement commission.
i) Credited interest. Participant contributions shall be paid by
the town to the fund and shall be accumulated therein with credited
interest. Credited interest on participant contributions means
Supp. No. 5 179
2- 110 SUFFIELD CODE
interest for the number of full months from the July 1 following
the date such contributions were made to the date to which it is
being computed. Credited interest will be at the rate of three (3)
percent per annum prior to March 1, 1979. On and after March 1,
1979, credited interest will be at the rate of five (5) percent per
annum.
Amend. of 7- 1- 89; Ord. No. 91- 01, § 15, 4-25-91)
Sec. 2- 111. Administration.
a) The pension plan of the town as herein set forth shall be
administered by the retirement commission consisting of the first
selectmen, the town treasurer, a member of the board of finance
designated by the chairman of the board of finance for his or her
term of office, and three (3) citizens at large appointed as herein
after provided. Not more than two (2) of the said three (3) citizens
at large so appointed shall be of the same political party. Each
appointed citizen shall be appointed for a three-year term. At the
end of the term the board of selectmen shall appoint a successor.
The board of selectmen shall appoint successors for the appointed
citizens as may be necessary to fill vacancies resulting from death
or resignation.
Effective July 1, 1989, the police union shall designate one ( 1)
of its members to serve on the retirement commission, also for a
three-year term. The police union shall appoint successors as necessary
for this position.
Each of the above seven ( 7) individuals will be voting members
of the retirement commission; with one (1) vote for each member.
The board of selectmen shall also appoint one ( 1) " adhoc"
member to the retirement commission. The " adhoc" member will
not maintain a voting privilege.
Effective July 1, 1989, the retirement commission agrees to
permit three (3) additional nonvoting representatives, one ( 1) designated
by SEIU, one ( 1) by NAGE, and one ( 1) by the board of
education, to attend retirement commission meetings. The representative
designated by the board of education must be a noncertified
employee participating in the pension plan.
Supp. No. 5 180
J
ADMINISTRATION § 2- 111
The members of the retirement commission shall serve without
compensation. The retirement commission shall employ such actuarial,
medical, clerical, and other services as are needed for the
proper operation of the pension plan.
b) The retirement commission shall submit annually, to the
board of finance of the town, or to the budget -making body, if the
town abolishes the board of finance, a schedule of its estimated
expenses necessary for the administration of this plan, and all
such expenses of administration shall be paid by the town.
c) The retirement commission shall deposit town retirement
funds with a qualified public depository or insurance company
qualified to do business in the State of Connecticut, and the public
depository or insurance company so selected shall manage said
funds. All funds appropriated by the town or contributed by the
employees of the town pursuant to this plan shall be paid over to
the trustee which shall have the right and power to invest and
reinvest the same in securities legal for investment of trust funds
under the general statutes including common trust funds. The
trustee shall make payments from the trust fund from time to
time on the written directions of the retirement commission pursuant
to this plan. The retirement commission shall enter into a
written agreement with said trustee specifically outlining the
duties of the trustee which shall be in all respects in accordance
with and consistent with this plan. The retirement commission
shall not be liable for any negligence, misfeasance or malfeasance
on the part of such trustee in managing said fund but shall be
liable only in the event that the board has been negligent in the
selection and appointment of such trustee. Such trustee shall be
paid reasonable compensation for its services rendered for managing,
investing and reinvesting the fund.
d) The retirement commission shall act by a majority of its
voting members at the time in office, and such action may be
taken either by a vote at a meeting or in writing without a
meeting.
e) The retirement commission may authorize any one ( 1) or
more of its members to execute any document or documents on
behalf of the retirement commission, in which event the retirement
commission shall notify the trustee in writing of such action
and the name or names of its member or members so designated.
The trustee thereafter shall accept and rely upon any document
Supp. No. 5 180. 1
2- 111 SUFFIELD CODE
executed by such member or members as representing action by
the retirement commission until the retirement commission shall
file with the trustee a written revocation of such designation.
f) The retirement commission may adopt such by-laws and regulations
as it deems desirable for the conduct of its affairs, and
shall adopt mortality tables and the interest rate to be used as the
basis for all actuarial calculations. The retirement commission
may appoint such actuaries, accountants, counsel, specialists, and
other persons as it deems necessary or desirable in connection
with the administration of this plan. The retirement commission
shall be entitled to rely conclusively upon, and shall be fully
protected in any action taken by it in good faith in relying upon,
any opinions or reports which shall be furnished to it by any such
actuary, accountant, counsel or other specialist.
Amend. of 7- 1- 89; Ord. No. 91- 01, §§ 16, 17, 4-25-91; Ord. No.
93-02, 12- 16-93)
Sec. 2- 112. Amendment and termination of plan.
a) Amendment ofplan. The town shall have the right at any
time, and from time to time, to amend, in whole or in part, any or
all of the provisions of this plan. However, no such amendment
shall authorize or permit any part of the trust fund (other than
such part as is required to pay taxes and administration expenses)
to be used for or diverted to purposes other than the exclusive
benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries, and no
such amendment which affects the rights, duties or responsibilities
of the trustee may be made without the trustee' s written
consent. Any such amendment shall become effective upon delivery
of a written instrument, executed by order of the retirement
commission, to the trustee and the endorsement of the trustee
of its receipt or of its written consent thereto, if such consent is
required.
b) Termination ofplan.
1) The town shall have the right at any time to terminate this
plan upon resolution of the town duly enacted at a town
meeting warned and held for that purpose.
2) The plan shall terminate if the town fails to make the
contributions required hereunder for more than two (2) successive
years measured by anniversary dates.
Supp. No. 5 180. 2
L
1
L
ADMINISTRATION $ 2- 112
c) Allocation of contributions. Upon written notice from the
town or upon automatic termination of the plan, the trustee shall
deduct its reasonable compensation and estimated expenses in
administering the trust fund. Then it shall allocate the assets in
the trust fund for the purposes set forth below and in the order set
forth below, to the extent the assets are sufficient. These allocations
may be implemented by the continuance of the trust, despite
termination of the plan, or by the purchase and distribution by
the trustee of insurance company annuity contracts, or by a combination
of these methods. If the allocations produce a benefit of
less than two hundred forty ($240.00) a year for any participant or
contingent beneficiary, the trustee may pay a lump sum of equivalent
actuarial value in lieu of such benefit.
The purposes for which the trustee shall make allocations referred
to above are as follows:
1) To provide the benefits of the plan for retired participants
and their contingent beneficiaries, if any. The allocation
for this purpose shall be based on immediate life annuity
values without death benefits, as determined by the actuary
of the plan. Any reduction in benefits due to insufficient
trust assets shall be determined by the actuary in a
uniform manner on the basis of similar annuity values.
2) If any trust assets remain after complete allocation for the
purposes of (1) above, to provide the benefits of the plan for
participants who have reached their normal retirement
dates when the plan is terminated but have not started to
receive benefits, and their contingent beneficiaries, if any.
The allocation for this purpose shall be based on immediate
life annuity values without death benefits, as provided in
1) above, and any reductions in benefits due to insufficient
trust assets shall be made as provided in (1) above.
3) If any trust assets remain after complete allocation for the
purposes of (1) and (2) above, to provide the benefits of the
plan for participants who are eligible to retire under the
early retirement provisions of the plan when the plan is
terminated but who have not started to receive benefits,
and their contingent beneficiaries, if any. The allocation
for this purpose shall be based on immediate life annuity
Supp. No. 4 180. 3
2- 112 SUFFIELD CODE
values without death benefits, as provided in (1) above, and
any reductions in benefits due to insufficient trust assets
shall be made as provided in (1) above.
4) If any trust assets remain after complete allocation for the
purposes of (1) through (3) above, to provide the benefits of
the plan for participants who are employees when the plan
is terminated and who have acquired vested rights. The
allocation for this purpose shall be based on deferred life
annuity values without death benefits, as determined by
the actuary of the plan. Any reductions in benefits due to
insufficient trust assets shall be determined by the actuary
in a uniform manner on the basis of similar annuity values.
5) If any trust assets remain after complete allocation for the
purposes of (1) through (4) above, to provide the benefits of
the plan for participants who are separated from the town' s
service before the plan is terminated but after they have
acquired vested rights, and for whom the payment of benefits
has been deferred until their normal retirement dates.
The allocation for this purpose shall be based on deferred
life annuity values without death benefits, as provided in
4) above, and any reduction in benefits due to insufficient
trust funds shall be made as provided in (4) above.
6) If any trust assets remain after complete allocation for the
purposes of (1) through (5) above, to provide the benefits for
all other participants who are employees at the time of
termination of the plan and who do not have vested rights
but do have pension interests because of their respective
credits for past and future service at the time of such termination.
The allocation for this purpose shall not exceed
the value of their interests, on a basis proportionate to the
actuarial value of such interests.
d) Residual assets. If any balance of assets in the trust fund
remains after the trustee has made all of the allocations described
in subsection (c)( 1) through (6) above, and after all liabilities with
respect to participants and retired participants and their contingent
beneficiaries, if any, are satisfied, then the trustee shall
return such balance to the town and the trust shall terminate.
Supp. No. 4 180.4
J
ADMINISTRATION § 2- 113
e) Obligations after termination. Upon making such distribution,
the trustee shall be discharged from all obligations under
the trust and no participant shall have any further right or claim
therein.
Amend. of 7- 1- 89)
Sec. 2- 113. Miscellaneous.
a) Annual report. The retirement commission shall file with
the board of selectman an annual report showing the financial
condition of the retirement system as of the end of the last completed
fiscal year, including an actuarial valuation of assets and
liabilities, and setting forth such other facts, recommendations
and data as may be of value to the participants of the plan and the
town.
b) The commission may, if it shall determine the same to be
for the best interests of any participant, direct the payment of any
amount due to any participant hereunder to the conservator of
such participant or to adult spouse or blood relative of the participant
for the benefit of such participant.
c) Neither the establishment of this plan or any modification
thereof nor the creation of any trust or fund or account nor the
payment of any proceeds shall be construed as giving to any employee,
participant or other person any legal or equitable right
against the town or any officer or employee thereof or the trustee
or any officer or employee thereof except as herein provided.
d) This plan is intended to meet the requirements for qualification
under section 401(a) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code.
Any modification or amendment to the plan may be made by the
town, retroactively if necessary, to establish and maintain such
qualification.
e) ( 1) It is expressly understood and agreed by each employee
who becomes a participant hereunder, that except for its or
their willful neglect or fraud, neither the town nor the
trustee shall in any way be subject to any suit or litigation
or to any legal liability, for any cause or reason or thing
whatsoever, in connection with this trust or its operation,
and each such employee hereby releases the town and all
Supp. No. 4 180. 5
2- 113 SUFFIELD CODE
its officers and agents from any and all liability or obligation.
2) In any action or proceeding involving the trust fund, or any
property constituting part or all thereof, or the administration
thereof, the town, the retirement commission, and
the trustee shall be the only necessary parties and no employees
or former employees of the town or their beneficiaries
or any other person having or claiming to have an
interest in the trust fund or under the plan shall be entitled
to any notice of process.
3) Any final judgment which is not appealed or appealable
that may be entered in any such action or proceeding shall
be binding and conclusive on the parties hereto, the retirement
commission, and all persons having or claiming to
have any interest in the trust fund or under the plan.
Amend. of 7- 1- 89; Ord. No. 91-01, § 18, 4-25-91)
Secs. 2-114- 2- 130. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. OFFICERS*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 2. 131- 2- 145. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. TOWN CLERKt
Sec. 2. 146. Salary.
Pursuant to section 7-34b of the general statutes the town clerk
shall receive a salary commencing on July 1, 1980, as fixed by the
Charter references—Elected town officers, § 302; appointive personnel, Ch.
VI.
Cross reference—Tax assessor, § 16-21 et seq.
tCharter reference—Town clerk, § 301(B).
State law reference—Town clerks, G.S. §§ 7- 16- 7-35.
Supp. No. 4 180. 6
L ADMINISTRATION § 2. 161
legislative body of the town, in lieu of all fees and other compensation
provided for in the general statutes.
Ord. of 6-30-80(1))
Secs. 2-147- 2- 160. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. CODE OF ETHICS*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-161. Declaration of policy.
a) The purpose of these standards is to guide town officials,
elected and appointed, town employees, and citizens by establishing
standards of conduct for persons in the decision-making
process. It is intended to strengthen the tradition of good government
in the town.
b) Good government depends upon decisions which are based
upon the merits of the issue and are in the best interests of the
town as a whole, without regard to personal gain.
Ord. of 3- 11- 86, § 1)
Charter reference—Conflict of interest and code of ethics, Ch. XI.
State law reference—Municipal authority to adopt a code of ethics, G. S. §
7- 148(c)( 10)(B).
Supp. No. 4 180. 7
ADMINISTRATION § 2- 165
Sec. 2-162. Definitions.
41101 As used in this article the following words or phrases shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
Confidential information is any information concerning the
property, business or affairs of the town not generally available
to the public.
Employee is any person receiving a salary, wages or compensation
from the town for services rendered.
Official is any person holding elective or appointive town office
including members and alternate members of town agencies,
boards, and commissions, and committees appointed to oversee
the construction or improvement of town facilities, or any other
board, commission or agency that exercises legislative or judicial
functions or financial authority.
Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1- 2.
L
Sec. 2- 163. Use of town assets restricted.
No official or employee shall use or permit the use of town
funds, services, property, equipment, owned or leased vehicles, or
materials for personal convenience or profit, except when such
services are available to the public generally or are provided in
conformance with established town policies for the use of such
officials or employees.
Ord. of 3- 11- 86, § 3)
Sec. 2-164. Fair and equal treatment.
No official or employee shall grant or accept any special consideration,
treatment or advantage to or from any person beyond
that which is available to every other person.
Ord. of 3- 11- 86, § 4)
Sec. 2-165. Conflict of interest.
a) Disqualification in matters involving a personal or proprietary
interest. No employee or official shall participate in the
hearing or decision of the board or commission of which he is a
member upon any matter in which he is directly or indirectly
181
2- 165 SUFFIELD CODE
interested in a personal or financial sense. In the event of such
disqualification, such fact shall be entered on the records of the
commission or board. No employee or official shall appear for or
represent any person in any matter pending before the commission
or board of which he is a member. Nothing contained herein
shall be construed as to prevent any elected or appointed official
or employee from submitting a competitive sealed bid in response
to an invitation to bid from any commission, board or agency of
the town provided such person does not violate subsection (b) of
this section.
b) Disclosure of confidential information. No official or employee
shall disclose or use any confidential information obtained
in an official capacity for the purpose of advancing the financial
or personal interest of himself or others.
c) Gifts and favors. No official or employee or member of his
immediate family shall solicit or accept any gift having a substantial
value, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, promise
or any other form, from any person or persons who to his
knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner
whatsoever in business dealings with the town.
d) Use of influence. No official or employee shall solicit any
business, directly or indirectly, from another official or employee
over whom he has any direct or indirect control or influence with
respect to tenure, compensation or duties.
e) Representation of private interests. No official or employee
shall appear on behalf of private interests before any board,
commission or agency of the town as defined in section 2- 162, nor
shall he represent private interests in any action or proceeding
against the town in any litigation when such appearance or
representation would be in conflict with or would impair his
independence of judgment and action in the performance of his
official duties as such officer or employee.
f) Disclosure of interest. Any. official or employee who has, or
feels he has a real, pecuniary or personal beneficial interest in
any matter coming before any board, commission, or agency of
the town shall make the same known to such body and such
interest shall be disclosed on the records of such body.
Ord. of 3- 11- 86, §§ 5. 1- 5. 6)
182
ADMINISTRATION
Secs. 2- 166- 2- 175. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. BOARD OF ETHICS*
Sec. 2-176. Established.
2-177
a) There is hereby established a board of ethics consisting of
five (5) members who shall be electors of the town, no more than
two (2) of whom shall be of the same political party. The members
shall be appointed by the first selectman with the approval of the
board of selectmen and shall serve for a term of five ( 5) years,
except that of the initial board a member shall be appointed
seriatum for a term of one ( 1) year, two (2) years, three (3) years,
four (4) years and five ( 5) years. No member shall serve as a
member of any other town board, commission, authority, or committee
or the board of education nor be employed by the town or
board of education.
b) Alternate members. In addition to the regular members,
the first selectman shall appoint two (2) alternate members with
the approval of the board of selectmen. The two ( 2) alternate
members shall serve in the absence of a regular member on a
rotational basis with the same powers and authority as a regular
member. No alternate member shall serve as a member of any
other town board, commission, authority, or committee or the
board of education nor be employed by the town or board of
education. The initial appointments shall be for a term to expire
on July 1, 1990. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for fouryear
terms.
Ord. No. 88-02, §§ 1, 2, 3- 15-88)
Sec. 2-177. Organization and procedure.
The board of ethics shall elect a chairman and a secretary and
shall establish its own rules and procedures, which shall be available
to any elector of the town upon request to the board. The
first rules and procedures shall be established within six ( 6)
months of the date this ordinance becomes effective. The need to
Charter reference—Code of ethics, § 1102.
Cross reference—Boards and commissions, § 2- 16 et seq.
State law reference—Authorized, G.S. § 7- 148h.
Supp. No. 1 183
2- 177 SUFFIELD CODE
maintain confidentiality in order to protect the privacy of public
officials and employees and citizens shall be considered when
establishing the rules and procedures. It shall keep records of its
meetings and shall hold meetings at the call of the chairperson
and at such other times as it may determine.
Sec. 2-178. Powers and duties.
a) The board of ethics shall render advisory opinions with
respect to the applicability of this code of ethics to specific situations
to any agency, or any officer, official, employee or individual
pursuant to a written request or upon its own initiative. The
board of ethics may also issue guidelines on such issues for example,
ex parte communication. Such opinions and guidelines,
until amended or revoked, shall be binding on the board of ethics
and reliance upon them in good faith is an absolute defense in
any action brought under the provisions of this section or the
town charter. Any request or opinion, the disclosure of which
invades the personal privacy of any individual ( as that term is
used in section 1- 19(bX2) of the general statutes, by the state
freedom of information commission and the courts) or the provisions
of section 10- 151c of the general statutes, shall be kept
confidential in a personnel or similar file and shall not be subject
to public inspection or disclosure. The board may make available
to the public such advisory opinions which do not invade an
individual' s privacy and take other appropriate steps in an effort
to increase public awareness of this code of ethics.
b) The board of ethics shall establish procedures by which the
public may initiate complaints alleging a violation of this code.
The board of ethics itself may also initiate such a complaint. The
board of ethics shall have the power to hold hearings concerning
the application of this code and its violation and may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. Such
hearings shall be closed to the public unless the respondent requests
otherwise. If the board of ethics determines the respondent
has, in fact, violated the provisions of this code, it shall file a
memorandum of decision which may include a recommendation
for action with the board of selectmen or the appropriate agency,
board or commission. In the case of a consultant, it shall also be
Supp. No. 1
184
J
6,
L
ADMINISTRATION § 2 179
filed with the contracting agency. The recommended action may
include reprimand, public censure, termination or suspension of
employment, removal or suspension from appointive office, or
termination of contractual status, except that no action may be
recommended which would violate the provisions of the state or
federal law. In the case of union employees, such recommended
action does not constitute a unilateral change in conditions of
employment. No such recommendation shall limit the authority
of the board of selectmen under the charter of the town or under
any ordinance, statute, or any other law, and the actions hereunder
shall be supplemental to any authority the board of selectmen
have under any ordinance, statute, or any other law. Any.
discussion by the board of selectmen or other agency, board or
commission or contracting agency of an individual affected by the
memorandum of decision shall be in executive session, unless the
individual affected requests that such discussion be held in open
session.
Ord. of 3- 11- 86, § 6)
Sec. 2-179. Appeals.
A decision of the ethics commission may be appealed in the
manner allowed by the general statutes.
Ord. of 3- 11- 86, § 7)
Supp. No. 1
185
The next page is 2351
Chapter 3
41/ ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
l
Sec. 3-1. Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages.
The selling of alcoholic beverages between the hours of 12: 00
noon and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays, in hotels, restaurants and clubs
as provided for in section 30-91 of the general statutes, is hereby
allowed.
Ord. of 5- 28-47)
Cross references—Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations,
Ch. 11; alcoholic beverages in parks, § 13-6; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 17.
State law references—Liquor permits, G. S. §§ 30- 14- 30-62a; classes of liquor
permits, G.S. § 30-15; liquor manufacturer' s permit, G.S. § 30-16; liquor wholesaler'
s permit, G.S. § 30- 17; hotel liquor permits, G. S. § 30-21; restaurant liquor
permits, G.S. § 30-22; tavern permits, G.S. § 30-26; druggist liquor permit, G.S. §
30-36; storage of liquor; approval required, G.S. § 30-38; application for liquor
permit, G.S. § 30-39; liquor permit fees, G. S. § 30-41; granting and denial of
liquor permits, G.S. § 30-43; permit to specify location and revocability, G.S. §
30-52; revocation of liquor permit, G.S. §§ 30-55- 30-59; prohibition against unauthorized
sale of liquor, G.S. § 30-74; sales to minors, intoxicated persons and
drunkards, G.S. § 30-86; hours and days of closing, G.S. § 30-91.
The next page is 285]
235
1
L
Chapter 4
AMUSEMENTS*
Art. L In General, §§ 4-1- 4-15
Art. II. Bingo, §§ 4-16- 4-25
Art. III. Bazaars And Raffles, § 4-26
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 4- 1- 4-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BINGO
Sec. 4-16. Permitted.
a) The playing of bingo within the town, until September 15,
1948, under and subject to the provisions and restrictions of
section 7- 169 of the general statutes is hereby permitted and
such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the conduct of
the game as may be necessary shall be made.
b) The playing of bingo within the town, until September 15,
1959, under and subject to the provisions and restrictions of
section 7- 169 of the general statutes is hereby permitted and
such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the conduct of
the game as may be necessary may be made.
Ord. of 10-6-47; Ord. of 10-4-48)
Editor' s note—Under the terms of the general statutes, bingo may be played
indefinitely in any municipality if favorably voted upon for two ( 2) successive
years by the governing body of the municipality.
Secs. 4-17- 4-25. Reserved.
Cross references—Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations,
Ch. 11; games of chance in parks, § 13- 5.
State law references—Authority to provide for amusements, G.S. § 7- 148(cX4XC);
authority to regulate and license amusement parks and arcades, G. S. §
7- 148(cX7XHXvi); authority to prohibit, restrain, license and regulate sports, exhibitions,
public amusements and performances and all places where games may be
played, G.S. § 7- 148(cX7)(HXvii); amusements, in general, G.S. §§ 29-129- 29-143a.
285
4-26 SUFFIELD CODE
ARTICLE III. BAZAARS AND RAFFLES*
Sec. 4-26. Adoption of state law.
Public Act No. 409 passed by the 1955 session of the general
assembly and entitled " An Act Concerning Bazaars and Raffles",
is approved and adopted and a special election shall be held on
September 13, 1955 as provided in such act.
Ord. of 8-23-55)
Cross reference—Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations,
Ch. 11.
The next page is 337]
286 J
Chapter 5
410, BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*
Art. I. In General, §§ 5- 1- 5- 15
Art. II. Building Permits, §§ 5- 16- 5-40
Art. III. Building Code Board of Appeals, §§ 5-41- 5-49
Art. IV. Building Numbers, §§ 5-50- 5-52
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 5-1. State building code adopted.
Pursuant to section 19-395 of the general statutes, the town
hereby adopts the state building code.
Ord. of 5- 27- 65(3))
Secs. 5-2- 5- 15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BUILDING PERMITSt
Sec. 5-16. Application.
All applications for permits required by this article from the
building department shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the town.
Ord. of 12-5- 84(2), § 1)
Sec. 5-17. Fees—Basic rate.
Unless otherwise prescribed in this article the building permit
fees shall be six one -thousandths of a dollar ($.006) for every dollar
of the estimated retail value of the work rounded to the nearest
whole dollar amount, hereinafter known as the basic rate.
Ord. of 12-5- 84(2), § 2)
Charter reference—Building inspector, § 610.
Cross references—Housing, Ch. 9; library, Ch. 10; planning, Ch. 14; streets,
sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B.
State law reference—State building code applicable to all municipalities, G. S.
29-253.
tCross reference—Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations,
Ch. 11.
Supp. No. 2 337
5- 18 SUFFIELD CODE
Sec. 5- 18. Same—New buildings and additions.
The fee for all new buildings and additions shall be based on
the type of construction, use group and gross square footage of
the building and shall be computed by multiplying the gross
square footage of the building by the appropriate " fee per square
foot" factor from the permit fee table compiled by the town,
which table shall be derived from the current tables of the Boca
Basic/National Building Code published by the Building Officials
and Code Administrators International, Inc., which is a periodic
publication. Copies of the permit fee table shall be available from
the building department. The fee thus computed shall be rounded
to the nearest whole dollar amount.
Ord. of 12- 5- 84(2), § 3)
Sec. 5-19. Same—Additional.
In addition to any other fees prescribed in this article, the
following shall be charged for all occupancies except one- and
two-family dwellings:
Item Fee
Sprinkler systems, per square foot of sprinkled
area $ . 006
Fire detection and alarm systems per square foot
of protected area . 006
Water standpipes 6.00
Emergency power generators, per kilowatt hour
output 1. 28
Ord. of 12- 5- 84(2), § 4)
Sec. 5-20. Same—Miscellaneous.
In addition to any other fees prescribed in this article, the
following shall be charged:
Item Fee
Barns, unfinished interiors, per square foot of building
area $ . 016
Demolition, per square foot of building area . 016
Fences per linear 400 ft. (excl. those not req. permit)
. 04
Fuel storage tanks, per gallon capacity . 01
Supp. No. 2
338
j
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS § 5- 24
Item Fee
Garages, residential, per square foot of building
area . 06
Solar systems, excluding panel type Basic Rate
Solar systems, panel type per sq. ft. collector area . . 35
Signs, all kinds per square foot per face 1. 00
Storage sheds, per square foot building area . 016
Swimming pools, aboveground, per square foot water
surface area . 03
Swimming pools, in ground, per square foot water
surface area . 05
Wood burning stoves, solid -fuel burning appliances,
fireplaces, chimneys 6. 00
Windmills, per linear foot of total blade length 1. 00
Ord. of 12-5- 84(2), § 5)
Sec. 5-21. Same—Unclassified.
Any code -regulated structure, appliance, appurtenance, device
or work not otherwise provided for in this article shall have its
permit fee calculated from the basic rate.
Ord. of 12-5-84(2), § 6)
Sec. 5-22. Same—Limits.
The minimum fee for any permit charged pursuant to this
article shall be six dollars ($ 6. 00). The maximum fee shall be
unlimited.
Ord. of 12-5- 84(2), § 7)
Sec. 5-23. Included fees.
The fees for building permits derived pursuant to section 5- 18
shall include the footings, foundations, structure, plumbing, heating,
electrical fees and certificate of use and occupancy fees.
Ord. of 12-5- 84(2), § 8)
Sec. 5-24. Late fees.
Any work regulated by the state building code which has commenced
before a permit is applied for and before permission
339
5-24 SUFFIELD CODE
given by the building official to commence such work, shall be
subject to the following late filing fee in addition to any other fee
required:
Industrial, commercial and residential buildings
and additions thereto $ 100. 00
All other work including plumbing, heating and
electrical 50.00
The late filing fee shall be due and payable when the permit is
applied for and shall prevent the permit from being issued until
it is paid in full.
Ord. of 12- 5- 84(2), § 9)
Sec. 5-25. Exemption.
The town shall be exempt from paying any fee pursuant to this
article.
Ord. of 12- 5-84(2), § 10)
Secs. 5-26- 5-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS*
Sec. 5-41. Established.
There is hereby established in the town, pursuant to section
29-266 of the general statutes a building code board of appeals,
which shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom shall meet
the qualifications set forth in the state building code.
Ord. of 8- 8- 85, § 1)
Sec. 5-42. Terms of office and alternates.
a) The members of the building code board of appeals shall be
appointed by the board of selectmen and shall serve a term of
four (4) years, except that the initial terms shall be as follows:
Two (2) members shall be appointed for a term to end June 30,
1986; one ( 1) member for a term to end June 30, 1987; one ( 1)
member for a term to end June 30, 1988; and one (1) member for a
term to end June 30, 1989.
Charter reference—Building code board of appeals, § 706(0).
Cross reference—Boards and commissions, § 2- 16 et seq.
340
L
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 5-49
b) The board of selectmen shall appoint alternate members
who may sit on the building code board of appeals in the absence
of any regular members. The number of alternate members shall
equal the number of regular members. Such alternates shall
meet the same qualifications as required for regular members of
the board and, while sitting on the board, shall have the full
power and authority of the regular member.
Ord. of 8- 8- 85, § 2)
Sec. 5-43. Powers and duties.
When the building official rejects or refuses to approve the
mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or the
materials to be used in the erection or alteration of a building or
structure, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the state
building code do not apply or that an equally good or more desirable
form of construction can be employed in specific case, or
when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the state
building code and regulations have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the permit, in whole or in part, having been refused
by the building official, the owner of such building or structure,
whether already erected or to be erected, or his authorized agent
may appeal in writing from the decision of the building official to
the board of appeals. The powers and duties of the building code
board of appeals shall be subject to change in accordance with
general statute section 29-266 and the state building code, as
may be amended from time to time.
Ord. of 8- 8- 85, § 3)
Sec. 544. Organization; conduct of hearings.
The building code board of appeals shall select one ( 1) of its
members as chairman, and the building official shall designate a
clerk to serve as secretary and keep a detailed record of all
proceedings. All hearings shall be organized and conducted according
to the state building code, section 126. 0 and the general
statutes, as may be amended from time to time.
Ord. of 8- 8- 85, § 4)
Secs. 545- 549. Reserved.
Supp. No. 2
341
5- 50 SUFFIELD CODE
ARTICLE IV. BUILDING NUMBERS*
Sec. 5-50. Owners' duty.
It shall be the duty of the owners of all buildings to affix numerals
indicating the street number which has been previously
assigned to such buildings by the town.
Ord. No. 89-02, § 1, 10-3-89)
Sec. 5-51. Size and location of building numbers.
In affixing building numbers, the property owner shall conform
with the following specifications:
1) Building numbers shall be plain block numerals. Script or
written numbers shall not count toward satisfaction of this
article.
2) All numerals shall be at least four (4) inches in height.
3) Numerals shall be of a color contrasting with the color of
the background provided by the material to which they are
affixed. Owners are encouraged, but not required, to use
numbers made of reflective material and to illuminate
building numbers so as to be easily visible at night.
4) If a building is less than one hundred ( 100) feet from the
center line of the street on which it fronts, building numbers
shall be located on the front of the building which they
identify or on a sign, post, mailbox or other device located
between the building and street such that numbers shall
be visible and readable from both left and right approaches.
5) If a building is set back more than one hundred (100) feet
from the center line of the street on which it fronts, or if the
numerals cannot be read from such center line because of
obstruction, the aforesaid numerals shall be affixed to a
post, sign, mailbox or other device which shall be located
within ten (10) feet of the driveway or walkway entrance to
the premises and which shall otherwise conform to the specifications
herein.
Cross references—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15; zoning,
App. A; subdivisions, App. B.
Supp. No. 2
342
L
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 5-52
6) In general, when affixed, all building numerals shall be
positioned not less than three (3) feet nor more than twelve
12) feet from the surface of the ground directly below them.
Exception to this provision of this article may be granted
by the building official in cases where he determines visibility
is adequate.
7) On a corner lot, the building number shall face the street
named in the address.
Ord. No. 89-02, § 2, 10-3-89)
Sec. 5-52. Failure to comply.
In the event the owner fails to affix the number referred to
above within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this article,
the owner shall be subject to a fine of one dollar ($1. 00) for
each day of neglect or refusal.
Ord. No. 89-02, § 3, 10-3-89)
Supp. No. 2 343
IThe next page is 3911
L
Chapter 6
CEMETERIES*
Sec. 6-1. First School Society to care for certain burial
grounds.
The town hereby carries over the care and control of the grounds
known as the old burial grounds located in the center of the town
to the First School Society now having the care and control of all
burial grounds within the limits of the First School Society except
the burial ground on Hastings Hill.
Ord. of 10-7- 1889)
Sec. 6-2. Management of money for cemeteries.
The town shall receive and hold in trust, money, the income of
which is to be used for the care and improvement of its cemeteries
or private lots within such cemeteries or elsewhere under the
act concerning the care of cemeteries passed during the January
session of the general assembly 1895.
Ord. of 10-7- 1895)
Cross references—Administration, Ch. 2; parks and recreation, Ch. 13; planning,
Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15; zoning, App. A.
State law reference—Authority to preserve and care for burial grounds and
regulate the burial or disposal of the dead, G. S. § 7- 148(cX6XA).
The next page is 4411
391
4,
Chapter 7
CIVIL DEFENSE PREPAREDNESS*
Sec. 7- 1. Establishment of office.
There is hereby established for the town pursuant to the general
statutes Title 28, an office of civil preparedness. Such office
shall consist of a director, appointed by the first selectman with
the approval of the board of selectmen, as hereinafter more particularly
set forth, and an advisory council of six (6) members.
Ord. of 8- 19-76, § I; Ord. of 12-28-82(1), § I)
Sec. 7-2. Advisory council—Composition; terms; vacancies.
The advisory council shall consist of the chief of police, fire
chief, ambulance director, first selectman and two ( 2) resident
electors of the town who shall serve for terms of four (4) years and
until their successors have been duly appointed and qualified.
Any vacancy in the advisory council shall be filled for the unexpired
portion of the term by appointment by the first selectman,
with the approval of the board of selectmen.
Ord. of 8- 19-76, § II; Ord. of 12-28-82(1), § II)
Sec. 7-3. Same—Organization; meetings; annual report.
The members of the advisory council shall choose by ballot a
chairman, a vice chairman, and a secretary from among its members.
The council shall keep records of its meetings and activities
and shall make an annual report to the town in the manner
required of other boards, commissions and agencies of the town.
Ord. of 8- 19-76, § V)
Sec. 74. Same—Compensation of members.
The members of the advisory council shall serve without compensation,
but the necessary expenses of the advisory council
Charter reference—Office of civil preparedness, § 706(F).
Cross reference—Administration, Ch. 2.
State law references—Civil preparedness, G.S. § 2- 1 et seq.; local organizations
for civil preparedness, G.S. § 28-7.
441
7- 4 SUFFIELD CODE
shall be paid by the town, to the extent that they are not paid by
the state or federal government.
Ord. of 8- 19-76, § VI)
Sec. 7-5. Director—Appointment; term; vacancy.
The director of civil preparedness shall be appointed by the
first selectman with the approval of the board of selectmen, and
shall serve for a term of four (4) years and until his successor has
been duly appointed and qualified. Any vacancy in the directorship
shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by
appointment of the first selectman, with the approval of the
board of selectmen.
Ord. of 8- 19-76, § III)
Sec. 7-6. Same—Compensation.
The director of civil preparedness shall receive such compensation
for the performance of his duties as may be determined in
the same manner as compensation for members of the board of
selectmen is determined.
Ord. of 8- 19-76, § VII)
Sec. 7-7. Powers and duties of advisory council and director.
The powers and duties of the advisory council and the director
shall be those set forth as to them in Title 28 of the general
statutes, as the same may be amended from time to time. Subject
to the provisions of the statutes, the director shall be responsible
to the first selectman.
Ord. of 8- 19-76, § IV)
The next page is 493]
442 J
Chapter 8
ELECTIONS*
Sec. 8- 1. Two shifts of election officials for polling places
established.
There is hereby established two (2) shifts of election officials for
each polling place located within the limits of the town with the
exception of the moderator as provided in section 9-258a of the
general statutes.
Ord. of 4- 9-80)
Sec.. 8. 2. Board for admission of electors.
The board for admission of electors shall consist of the town
clerk, and the registrars of voters.
Ord. of 7- 5-73)
Charter reference—Board of admission of electors, § 205.
Cross reference—Boards and commissions, § 2- 16 et seq.
Sec. 8- 3. Constables.
a) Pursuant to section 9-185 of the general statutes constables
serving the town shall be appointed by the board of selectmen.
b) On the Tuesday after the first Monday of January, there
shall be appointed by the board of selectmen six (6) constables,
who shall hold office for terms of two (2) years from such date, the
political affiliations of these six (6) constables shall not be inconsistent
with the provisions of section 9- 167a of the general statutes
and such constables shall have no criminal jurisdiction.
Ord. No. 7- 27-45, § 5; Ord. of 5- 18-83)
Charter reference—Constables, § 608.
Sec. 8- 4. Board of education; composition, terms of members.
The board of education shall consist of nine (9) members and at
the election of the town to be held on the first Tuesday after the
Charter references—Elections, Ch. II; elected officers, boards and commissions,
Ch. III.
Cross reference—Administration, Ch. 2.
State law reference—Elections, G.S. Title 9.
Supp. No. 5 493
8- 4 SUFFIELD CODE
first Monday in November, 1983, there shall be elected three ( 3)
members of the board of education, two ( 2) of such members to
hold office for a term of four (4) years, each from date of election,
and one ( 1) such member to hold officer for a term of two (2) years
from date to election. At the town election to be held on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday of November, 1985, there shall be
elected four (4) members of such board, to hold office for a term of
four (4) years, each from the date of election. At the town election
to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November,
1987, there shall be elected five ( 5) members of such
board, to hold office for a term of four (4) years, each from the date
of election, and at each town election thereafter, there shall be
elected members of such board in place of the members whose
terms expire, each for a term of four (4) years from the date of
their election and until their successors are elected and have
qualified.
Ord. of 7- 27-45, § 6; Ord. of 2. 23-82(2))
Charter reference—Board of education, § 301F.
Cross reference—Boards and commissions, § 2-16 et seq.
The next page is 5151
Supp. No. 5 494
w
Chapter 8. 5
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Art. I. In General, §§ 8. 5- 1- 8. 5-20
Art. II. Collection and Transportation of Refuse and Operation of Landfill,
§§ 8. 5-21- 8. 5-30
Art. III. Recycling, §§ 8. 5-31- 8. 5-40
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 8. 5- 1- 8. 5-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION
OF REFUSE AND OPERATION OF LANDFILL*
Sec. 8. 5- 21. Definitions.
The following words and terms used in this article shall have
the meanings ascribed thereto, unless the context clearly indicates
a different meaning.
Ashes shall mean the solid residue of combustion of any type of
fuel.
Commercial refuse collector shall mean any natural person, firm,
partnership or corporation licensed by the board of selectmen to
engage in the business of collecting, transporting and disposing of
refuse in the town.
Commercial septic waste collector shall mean any natural person,
firm, partnership or corporation licensed by the board of selectmen
to engage in the business of removing, collecting, transporting
and disposing of septic wastes in the town.
Editor' s note—Ord. No. 89-01, §§ 1- 9, adopted March 2, 1989, did not specifically
amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as §§ 8. 5- 21- 8. 5- 29 was the 'discretion
of the editor.
Cross references—Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; utilities, Ch.
8. 5.
Supp. No. 5 515
8. 5- 21 SUFFIELD CODE
Construction wastes shall mean waste and portions thereof re'' 41141111)
sulting from clearing, evacuating, demolition, construction or reconstruction
performed by any person, firm or governmental
agency.
Garbage shall mean any animal or vegetable matter or product
or the putrefaction or decomposition thereof, which accumulates
in the preparation of food and any offal or refuse of meats, fish,
fowl, vegetable or spoiled foods and other refuse or waste subject
to decay.
Garden and lawn refuse shall mean small branches, prunings
from trees and bushes, lawn trimmings, etc.
Hazardous wastes shall mean those solid sand/or liquid wastes
as defined by the Department of Environment Protection of the
State of Connecticut and the United States Environmental Protection
Agency, including wastes in the following classifications:
1) Explosives.
2) Pathogenic or pathological wastes.
3) Radioactive wastes.
4) Cleaning fluids, insecticides, fungicides, pesticides, commercial
fertilizers, acids, poisons or other chemical wastes
which either create an immediate safety hazard to persons
disposing of the waste or which by virtue of their chemistry
and/or method of disposal present a threat to the quality of
the air and/or ground or surface waters.
Landfill commission shall mean the landfill management commission.
Person shall mean any natural person, partnership, firm, or
corporation.
Refuse shall be construed to be all inclusive and shall include,
but not be limited to, all solid wastes of the community including
all garbage, ashes, rubbish, trade wastes, salvageable trade wastes,
papers, cardboard, plastics, metal cans, glass, bottles, garden and
lawn refuse, excelsior, furniture, bedding, rubber, leather, etc.
Refuse shall not include body wastes, septic waste or hazardous
wastes.
Supp. No. 5 516
L
1
L
GARBAGE AND REFUSE § 8. 5-22
Rubbish shall mean refuse such as paper, rags, plastics, cartons,
boxes, wood, rubber, glass, bottles, tin cans, metal food containers,
tinware, scrap metal, auto parts, pipe, other metallic substances,
rocks, sod, cinder blocks, earthenware, brick, concrete,
plaster, and other mineral substances.
Salvageable trade wastes shall mean all refuse that has use or
value to a person, firm, corporation or establishment or other
than those producing the same.
Selectmen shall mean the board of selectmen of the Town of
Suffield.
Septic waste shall mean materials removed from sewers, septic
tanks, cesspools and other devices used for the capture and treatment
of putrefactive material.
Town shall mean the Town of Suffield.
Trade wastes shall mean all wastes and portions thereof from
wholesale and retail establishments, end products of manufacturing,
end products of food preparations for sale, or scraps of
leftovers of nonsalable portions thereof
Ord. No. 89-01, § 1, 3- 2-89)
Sec. 8. 5-22. Conformance.
a) From and after the effective date of this article, and for
reasons of health and sanitation, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to dispose of or to accumulate or to
permit to accumulate upon private property in town, any refuse,
septic waste, or hazardous wastes except in conformance with the
provisions of this article.
b) For the purposes of this article, activities usually connected
with gardening and agriculture, such as compost, fertilizing and
storage of lawn and garden refuse as defined in section 8. 5- 21,
garden and lawn refuse, shall not be deemed to be violations of
the above section.
Ord. No. 89-01, § 2, 3- 2- 89)
Editor' s note—The effective date of this article shall be April 7, 1989.
Supp. No. 2 517
8. 5- 23 SUFFIELD CODE
Sec. 8.5-23. Licenses and permits.
a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
collect septic waste, or hazardous wastes in the town without first
obtaining a license or permit to do so. It shall also be unlawful for
any persons, firm or corporation to remove or dispose of refuse,
septic waste or hazardous waste in the town without first obtaining
a license or permit to do so. The landfill commission, upon
approval of a completed application, may issue a license or permit
to said person.
b) Every person desiring to engage in the business of collection,
transportation or disposal of refuse, septic wastes or hazardous
wastes for a fee shall make written application to the
landfill commission on a form provided for that purpose setting
forth the name of such person and of his business, his residence
address, the address of his place of business, the number of commercial
vehicles he intends to operate in the town, and other
information related to the collection, transportation and disposal
of same.
c) A license issued under the preceding sections shall expire
on the first day of January of each year. Licenses may be renewed
annually in the same manner upon payment of the original fee,
unless revised in accordance with the terms of this article.
d) A resident' s permit issued under the provisions of this article
shall be valid for the period January 1 to December 31 of
each year, and shall be issued only to the residents of the Town of
Suffield. A permit shall entitle the bearer to collect, transport and
dispose of any refuse generated by his own residence. Permits
may be renewed annually in the same manner and upon payment
of a like annual fee as herein provided.
e) Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person engaged in construction,
remodeling, or demolition of a building on real property
located in the Town of Suffield, may upon approval of an application
and the payment of a fee as hereinafter provided, transport
and dispose of building materials generated by such construction,
remodeling and demolition.
f) All licenses and permits shall be nontransferable.
Supp. No. 2
518
J
L
L
L.
GARBAGE AND REFUSE 4 8. 5- 23
g) As a condition of a Class A license or permit issued pursuant
to this article, the licensee or permittee shall agree to collect
and transport to the sanitary landfill site all properly bundled
magazines and newspapers. No licensee or permittee shall
collect and transport to the sanitary landfill site, loose or unbundled
newspapers or magazines.
h) License and permit fees on the following basis shall be established
by the landfill commission
Class A permit— Commercial collector, shall include one regular
route truck and satellite pickup trucks of no larger than
three-fourths ton capacity. Any additional regular route trucks
shall require an additional permit.
Class B permit— License for transportation and disposition of
building and demolition materials by the following vehicles:
1) Pickup or small dump truck (max. one and one-half ton
water level body).
2) Six (6) wheel open/closed body truck.
3) Ten ( 10) wheel open/closed body truck.
4) Tractor trailer open/ closed body.
5) Roll -off containers.
Class C permit—Residents permit, includes the following vehicles:
1) Private passenger vehicles and station wagons.
2) Any passenger and/or camper registered vehicle.
3) Light duty van and/or pickup used exclusively for the personal
benefit of the resident and not used in the course of
business.
i) The annual fee schedule adopted each year by the landfill
commission shall become a part of this article by reference, as
Exhibit A attached hereto, and shall continue in full force and
effect until amended by the landfill commission. The landfill commission
may review, as necessary, the fee schedule on thirty -
Supp. No. 2
519
8. 5- 23 SUFFIELD CODE
days' notice, by publication all the newspapers serving the Town
of Suffield, and after a public hearing, may amend the fee.
j) Each licensed commercial collector shall file with the landfill
commission by January 1 annually, a schedule of basic rates
for collection and the route schedule which he maintains for the
collection of refuse. Collectors shall notify the landfill commission
in writing ten (10) days prior to any rate change.
k) Collection of refuse from residence within the Town of Suffield
may be carried out only between the hours of 6: 00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays.
1) No permit shall be issued by the landfill commission unless
it first determines that the issuance of that permit will not endanger
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town
of Suffield and will not result in a violation of any environmental
law.
Ord. No. 89-01, § 3, 3- 2-89)
Sec. 8. 5-24. Vehicles and equipment used by commercial
refuse collectors.
a) No vehicle shall be approved for license or renewal of license
by the landfill commission or its agent until after it has
been inspected for safety equipment by the Suffield Police Department,
in conformance with the Motor Vehicle Laws of the
State of Connecticut.
b) No vehicle shall be approved for license or renewal of license
by the board of selectmen until after it has been inspected
for sanitary requirements, as stated in subsections ( c) and (d) of
this section, by the director of the North Central Health District,
or his agent.
c) Any refuse, other than garbage and other putrescible waste,
may be transported in nonwatertight vehicles when such vehicles
are sufficiently covered to prevent the escape of materials being
transported.
All vehicles used for transportation of garbage or any type of
putrescible wastes must be equipped with covered watertight
Supp. No. 2
520
J
L
L
GARBAGE AND REFUSE § 8. 5-25
metal containers unless the vehicle itself is of closed construction
on the bottom, front, rear and sides.
The interior body of such closed -construction vehicles shall have
a watertight lining of metal on the entire bottom and on the front
and sides, or the entire body shall be of metal, with a metal
tailgate not less than twelve (12) inches in height. All such vehicles
shall be equipped with metal covers and/or loading doors
constructed to prevent leakage, access of flies, or the scattering of
contents. All covers, loading doors, and like openings of said vehicles
and equipment shall be kept closed except when loading
and unloading and except during portal-to-portal pickups on local
streets between houses.
d) All vehicles and equipment used for refuse disposal by commercial
refuse collectors shall be kept clean and sanitary at all
times and shall meet the requirements of the North Central Health
District and the Department of Environmental Protection of the
State of Connecticut. From May 1 to November 1 of each year
such vehicles shall be swept and washed out daily. During the
rest of the year this care shall be given as needed, but at least
once per week. The North Central Health District or its agent
may at any or all times require the commercial refuse collector to
spray his vehicle or vehicles with an approved insecticide and or
deodorizing compound.
e) In addition to the initial inspection before licensing, all vehicles
and equipment used for the collection and transportation of
refuse within the town shall be subject to spot inspection at any
time by the North Central Health District or its agent.
Ord. No. 89-01, § 4, 3- 2-89)
Sec. 8.5-25 Financial responsibility.
Before any license is issued to any commercial refuse or septic
waste collector, said collector shall provide the town with certificates
of public liability insurance in an amount not less than one
million dollars ($1, 000,000.00) and property damage insurance in
an amount of not less than one million dollars ($ 1, 000,000.00).
Ord. No. 89-01, § 5, 3- 2-89)
Supp. No. 2
521
8. 5- 26 SUFFIELD CODE
Sec. 8.5-26. Separations and container provisions.
a) Every person who contracts with a commercial refuse collector
to collect and dispose of his refuse, etc., shall prepare the
same as follows:
1) All refuse shall be drained of liquid insofar as practical,
and shall be placed in sanitary, leakproof covered containers
made of nonabsorbent material, provided with
closely fitting covers.
2) The same shall not exceed thirty (30) gallons in size and
shall be of a rust -resistant material.
3) The containers shall be furnished by the customer and shall
be replaced by the customer when no longer in good condition.
b) Newspapers and magazines shall be properly bundled and
separated from regular refuse or garbage. The newspapers shall
be tied in bundles not to exceed twelve ( 12) inches in height and
secured with twine or string in such a way as to be readily removable
and secure.
c) Ashes, vacuum cleanings, disposable diapers, pet litter and
other like items of garbage and refuse shall be placed in sealed,
watertight bags. All such assembled, boxed or bundled refuse
shall be of units which can be handled by one person and shall be
placed or assembled in such a way as to facilitate collection.
d) All refuse shall be assembled, boxed or bundled in such a
way that it will not be disseminated by wind or otherwise, while
awaiting collection.
e) The content of any container shall not exceed thirty-five (35)
pounds in weight.
Ord. No. 89-01, § 6, 3- 2-89)
Sec. 8.5-27. Public or private dumps.
a) No person other than the town shall use or permit to be
used any location or place within the town as a public or private
dump for refuse or other waste materials.
Supp. No. 2
522
J
l
L
GARBAGE AND REFUSE § 8. 5- 28
b) No person within the town shall bury refuse, septic waste or
hazardous wastes upon public or private property.
Ord. No. 89-01, § 7, 3- 2-89)
Sec. 8. 5-28. Operation of the sanitary landfill.
a) No person or vehicle shall be admitted to the landfill without
first displaying a valid license or permit for admission issued by
the landfill commission.
b) No material originating outside of the Town of Suffield will
be accepted at the landfill.
c) The vehicle entrance to the landfill will be closed by a fence
and gate, and said gate will be open only:
1) When an authorized town employee is on the premises.
2) Between such hours as determined by the landfill commission,
such hours to be posted at the entrance to the landfill
site.
d) The landfill will be open on Saturday for residents only and
no commercial vehicles will be allowed to use the facility, except
that the landfill manager or his agent may upon four (4) hours
notice permit the landfill to be open to commercial vehicles on
Saturdays.
e) The landfill will be closed on all Sundays and certain holidays
designed by the landfill commission, except in times of emergency
declared to be such by a majority of the members of the
landfill commission.
f) Any unauthorized person who enters or otherwise causes
entry of a vehicle or other persons at the landfill in violation of
any provision of these regulations will be prosecuted to the full
extent of the law.
g) The landfill will be operated in conformity with the applicable
regulations of the state department of environmental protection.
h) Licensed collectors or their agents and residents must, when
at the landfill, obey the directions of the landfill manager, or his
assistants, in section 8. 5-29.
Supp. No. 2
523
8. 5-28 SUFFIELD CODE
i) Separate sites will be maintained at the landfill for the disposal
of specified categories of material.
j) The following items will be accepted at the site and will be
prepared and sorted by the individual into the following categories:
1) Stumps will be cut flush with the ground prior to dumping.
2) Green brush delivered by residents will be bundled, tied
with twine or rope with the cut ends facing in the same
direction and must be free of other refuse.
3) Green brush from commercial operators or delivered by
licensed collectors must be in chipped form.
4) Dead brush and leaves may be mixed; the maximum length
of any item of brush shall be thirty-six (36) inches.
5) Logs will be cut into ten -foot lengths or less and stacked
when dumped.
6) Rocks, boulders and clean fill.
7) Building and construction materials.
8) Products of building demolition.
9) Scrap metal and metal appliances.
10) Bulky items, such as furniture, rugs, bedding and similar
nonmetallic items.
11) Papers and magazines stacked and tied four (4) ways into
bundles no higher than twelve (12) inches.
12) Glass bottles.
13) Tires.
14) Corrugated board, cardboard and similar packing materials,
tied in bundles not exceeding five (5) feet by three (3)
feet by twelve ( 12) inches.
k) The following items will not be accepted at the site: Hazardous
wastes or sludge from septic systems. The landfill commission
hereby reserves the right to refuse to accept at the landfill
site any of the items defined in section 8. 5- 21 at any time,
Supp. No. 2
524 J
GARBAGE AND REFUSE § 8. 5- 30
without notice if it is deemed inadvisable, dangerous or unhealthy
to deposit such materials, such determination to be made
by the landfill commission, North Central Health District or State
of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
1) Residents may dispose of household garbage at the site. All
household garbage deposited by residents shall be contained in
plastic bags whose openings are tied.
m) The attendant at the site will personally inspect and approve
each load of material before it is removed from the vehicle.
Vehicles containing materials not conforming to the above regulations
will not be allowed access to the site.
Ord. No. 89- 01, § 8, 3- 2-89)
Sec. 8. 5-29. Penalties and enforcement.
a) Violators of any provision of this article shall be regulated
as described below. In addition, any violation shall be subject to a
fine of not more than ninety-nine dollars ($ 99.00) for each day
and/or license or permit revoked for a duration as decided by the
landfill commission as long as each violation or failure to comply
continues.
b) The landfill commission, or his agent, will issue a written
warning to any individual, collector or commercial operator who
violates any of the provisions of this article, or any pertinent
regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection or
the North Central Health District. Subsequent violations by the
same individual, collector, or commercial hauler shall result in
the revocation of any license or permit issued under the provisions
of this article provided, however, any person alleged to have
violated any section of this article shall be given seven ( 7) days'
notice thereof by the landfill commission and an opportunity for
a hearing before the landfill commission. The landfill commission
at that hearing may grant to such licensee or permittee a reasonable
period of time to correct such violation. The landfill commission
shall render a decision on such hearing within seven (7) days.
Ord. No. 89-01, § 9, 3- 2-89)
Sec. 8. 5-30. Reserved.
Supp. No. 5 525
8. 5- 31 SUFFIELD CODE
ARTICLE III. RECYCLING
Sec. 8. 5-31. Purpose.
In response to the increasing problem of solid waste disposal,
the State of Connecticut has mandated that each town in the
state reduce its solid waste stream by twenty-five percent. To that
end, certain items have been identified by the state and the town,
for mandatory recycling. The items, as defined in the Connecticut
General Statutes, are set forth in section 8. 5-32.
Ord. No. 93-01, § 1, 6- 15-93; eff. 7- 11- 93)
Sec. 8. 5- 32. Definitions.
a) Cardboard means corrugated boxes and similar corrugated
materials which have a minimum of contamination by food or
other materials.
b) Glass food and beverage containers means glass bottles or
jars of any size or shape used to package food products suitable for
human or animal consumption.
c) Metal food and beverage containers means any aluminum,
bimetal, steel, tin-plated, or other metallic can, plate, or tray of
any size or shape used to package food products suitable for human
or animal consumption.
d) Newspapers means used or discarded newsprint which has a
minimum of contamination by food or other material.
e) Office paper means used or discarded high-grade white paper
and manilla paper including, but not limited to, paper utilized for
file folders, tab cards, writing, typing, printing, computer printing,
and photocopying, which is suitable for recycling and which has a
minimum of contamination.
f) Scrap metal means used or discarded items which consist
predominantly of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead
chromium, tin, nickel, or alloys thereof, including, but not limited
to, white goods ( appliances) and metal food containers.
g) Storage batteries means lead acid batteries or other batteries
used in motor vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes, boats,
recreational vehicles, tractors, and like applications.
Supp. No. 5 526
GARBAGE AND REFUSE § 8. 5- 34
LIO0'( h) Waste oil means crankcase oil that has been used in internal
combustion engines.
ire ( i) Leaves means foliage of trees and bushes.
4
s1
j) Plastic means No. 1 & 2 plastic such as milk containers and
juice containers.
k) Refuse means all solid waste of the town including, but not
limited to, all garbage, ashes, rubbish, trade wastes, salvageable
trade wastes, papers, cardboard, plastics, metal cans, glass, bottles,
garden and lawn refuse, excelsior, furniture, bedding, rubber
and leather. Refuse shall not include body wastes, septic waste or
hazardous waste.
1) Refuse collectors means and includes any person, firm or
corporation licensed by the board of selectmen to engage in the
business of collecting, transporting and disposing of solid waste,
including recyclable materials, within the town.
m) Recyclable materials means items (a) through (j) above are
designated recyclable materials. However, established markets
for recycling of all of the recyclable materials may not be available.
Consequently, the commission may designate the recyclable
materials to be collected in the Town of Suffield.
Ord. No. 93-01, § 2, 6- 15-93; eff. 7- 11-93)
Sec. 8. 5- 33. License required for refuse collections.
All refuse accumulated in the town shall be collected, conveyed
and disposed of by persons licensed in accordance with chapter 8. 5
of this Code.
Ord. No. 93-01, § 3, 6- 15-93; eff. 7- 11- 93)
Sec. 8. 5- 34. Recyclable materials containers.
a) Provisions for containers. The owner of each premises where
recyclable materials is created or generated shall provide, at a
suitable place upon such premises, sufficient receptacles for receiving
and holding such recyclable materials during the intervals
between collections. Recyclable materials containers shall be
maintained in good condition free of holes and fissures in accordance
with rules promulgated by the landfill management commission.
Supp. No. 5 527
8. 5- 34 SUFFIELD CODE
b) Loose materials. The town shall not be obligated to collect
any loose materials.
c) Containers not conforming to the above requirements or which
may be a sanitary or accident hazard, may be left unemptied and
the occupant of the premises notified.
Ord. No. 93-01, § 4, 6- 15-93; eff. 7- 11-93)
Sec. 8. 5- 35. Location of containers.
The persons having custody or control of residential premises
from which recyclable materials is offered for collection shall see
that the same is placed at the side of the nearest public road, not
earlier than twenty-four (24) hours before the scheduled time of
collection for said road not later than 6 a.m. on scheduled collection
days, in such containers and bundles as are herein described,
and in such a manner that said containers and bundles do not
constitute a travel or health hazard or nuisance of any sort, and
after said containers have been emptied, shall be removed from
the side of the road within twelve (12) hours after the material
therein have been collected.
All recyclable materials collected or transported within the
Town of Suffield shall be carried in tightly covered vehicles, or in
tightly covered containers in or on such vehicles. Any such materials
which are collected or transported in open top vehicles
shall be suitably covered so as to prevent scattering litter upon
the streets. All vehicles used for the collection or transportation
of recyclable materials within the town shall be subject to the
approval of the landfill management commission.
Ord. No. 93-01, § 5, 6- 15-93; eff. 7- 11- 93)
Sec. 8. 5. 36. Storing of recyclable materials.
a) Public places. No person shall place any recyclable materials
in any street, alley or other public place or upon any private
property, whether owned by such person or not, within the town
except in proper containers or otherwise properly prepared for
collection or under express approval granted by the landfill management
commission. No person shall throw or deposit any such
refuse in any stream or other body of water.
Supp. No. 5 528
j
1
GARBAGE AND REFUSE § 8. 5- 38
b) Accumulation of recyclable materials. Any uncontained accumulation
of recyclable materials on any premises is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any
uncontained accumulation of refuse within two ( 2) days after
written notice to remove same shall be deemed a violation of this
article.
c) Scattering of refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep or
deposit anywhere within the town any such [ refuse] in such a
manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon
or in any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public
place, or into any occupied premises.
Ord. No. 93- 01, § 6, 6- 15- 93; eff. 7- 11- 93)
Sec. 8. 5-37. Fees.
Fees for the disposal of recyclable material at the town landfill,
if any, shall be established by the landfill management commission
by regulation from time to time in accordance with Chapter
8. 5 of the Town Code of Ordinances.
Ord. No. 93-01, § 7, 6- 15-93; eff. 7- 11-93)
Sec. 8. 5-38. Source Separation and Recycling.
a) Curbside or commercial collection.
1) Separation of materials; collection. Recyclable materials
shall be separated from the remainder of the refuse and
placed at the curb or other designated collection place for
collection on the days designated by the refuse collector.
2) Separation at dumpsters. Multifamily dwelling units and
each commercial, industrial or other nonresidential entity
not utilizing curbside collection shall provide, or shall require
its refuse collector to provide separate dumpsters or
other collection containers for refuse and for each recyclable
material accumulated on the premises. Containers
shall be placed immediately adjacent to each other and
labeled as to the material intended for each with stencilling
in a prominent location.
Supp. No. 5 529
8. 5- 38 SUFFIELD CODE
3.) Methods of separating and packing. All recyclable materials
shall be separated from the remainder of the refuse in
the following manner:
1. Refuse pickup. Suffield residents, owners, occupants or
businesses whose refuse is removed by a refuse collector
shall use appropriate recycling containers provided
by the refuse collector and approved by the landfill
management commission. The following recyclable
materials shall be placed in such containers:
a. Cardboard: Corrugated cardboard, free of foreign
materials such as packaging labels or plastic.
Boxes must be flattened.
b. Glass food and beverage containers: Clean glass
food and drink containers with covers or lids and
rings removed. Labels may be left on. Note: Pyrex,
mirrors, light bulbs, ceramics, crystal and plate
window) glass cannot be recycled.
c. Metal food and beverage container: Clean metal
food and drink containers.
d. Newspapers and magazines: Must be left tied in
four (4) ways.
e. Plastic: Clean number 1 and number 2 plastic containers
with the labels removed will be accepted.
The numbers are found on the bottom of these
containers.
f. Vehicle batteries: Automobile, tractor, boat and
truck batteries will be accepted.
g. White office paper: Businesses only - used or discarded
white office paper such as that used for
photocopying or with computers, or for writing,
printing and typing.
b) Depositing refuse at Suffield Landfill.
1) Materials accepted for recycling. In addition to cardboard,
glass food and beverage containers, metal food and beverage
containers, newspapers and magazines, plastic and
vehicular batteries as set forth in subsection (a) above, the
Suffield Landfill will also accept waste motor oil, grass
clippings and scrap metal.
Supp. No. 5 530
j
GARBAGE AND REFUSE § 8. 5- 40
2) Separation of materials. All recyclable materials shall be
placed in landfill areas designated for these by the landfill
management commission. Regulations regarding the separation
of the recyclable materials have been set forth by
the landfill management commission. Those disposing of
recyclable materials should check with the landfill operators
to determine the requirements for each type of recyclable
material.
Ord. No. 93-01, § 8, 645-93; eff. 7- 11-93)
Sec. 8. 5-39. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The landfill management commission may promulgate additional
rules regarding all collection and disposal procedures from
time to time as it deems proper, but such rules shall not be inconsistent
with this article.
Ord. No. 93- 01, § 9, 6- 15-93; eff. 7- 11-93)
Sec. 8. 5-40. Violations and penalty.
Any person violating the terms of this article shall be fined not
more than ninety-nine dollars ($99.00) for each offense, in addition
to any other penalty imposed hereunder. Refuse placed out
for collection not in accordance with this article and said regulations
may not be collected in the discretion of the Director or the
board of selectmen.
Ord. No. 93- 01, § 10, 6- 15-93; eff. 7- 11-93)
Supp. No. 5 531
The next page is 545]
L
Chapter 9
HOUSING*
Art. I. In General, §§ 9- 1- 9-15
Art. II. Housing Authority, §§ 9-16- 9-30
Art. III. Housing Code, §§ 9-31- 9-42
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 9-1- 9-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. HOUSING AUTHORITY#
Sec. 9-16. Established; appointment, terms of members.
a) There is a shortage of safe or sanitary dwelling accommodations
within the town available to families of low income at
rentals they can afford.
b) There is need for a housing authority within the town.
c) In accordance with the foregoing determinations, findings
and declarations, and in pursuance of the authority vested in the
board of selectmen by statute, five ( 5) persons are hereby appointed
to serve as commissioners of the housing authority of the
town from the first day of July, 1965 for staggered terms and
until their successors have been appointed and have duly qualified.
Res. of 5- 27-65, §§ 1, 2)
Secs. 9-17- 9-30. Reserved.
Charter reference—Housing authority, § 706(I).
Cross references—Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations,
Ch. 5; planning, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15;
utilities, Ch. 18; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B.
State law references—Creation of housing authorities, G. S. § 8-40; powers of
housing authorities, G. S. § 8-44; state grants-in-aid for housing code enforcement,
G. S. § 8-208.
tCharter reference—Housing authority, § 706(I).
Cross reference—Boards and commissions, § 2- 16 et seq.
545
9-31 SUFFIELD CODE
ARTICLE III. HOUSING CODE*
Sec. 9-31. Adopted.
This article shall be known as a housing code of the town. No
person shall, within the town, occupy as owner -occupant and no
person shall rent, lease or let to another for occupancy any dwelling
or dwelling unit which does not comply with the requirements
of this article, except that the owner of any existing dwelling
or dwelling unit which does not conform to the requirements
of this article shall have a reasonable time within which to
remedy such nonconformance.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(2), § 1)
Sec. 9-32. Maintenance of buildings, dwellings and dwelling
units.
a) Foundations, floors, walls, ceilings, and roofs of dwellings
or dwelling units within the town, shall be reasonably weathertight,
watertight, and rodentproof, shall provide reasonable privacy
for the occupants thereof, and shall be maintained in reasonable
repair. Rainwater shall drain from roofs so as not to
cause dampness in walls, ceilings, or floors of any habitable
room, bathroom or water closet compartment.
b) Windows, exterior doors, ventilators, skylights, and hatchways
shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and rodent -
proof, and shall be maintained in reasonable repair.
c) Inside and outside stairs, porches, and all appurtenances
thereto shall be maintained in sound condition, and each dwelling
unit shall have safe unobstructed means of egress leading to
open space at ground level.
d) All required utilities, facilities and equipment, including
plumbing fixtures, chimneys and flues, and piping, and heating
and lighting systems and equipment, shall be so installed and
maintained as to function in a safe, sanitary, and effective manner,
and they shall not be removed or shut off or discontinued
except temporarily or for repairs or after approval by the director
of health.
Cross reference—State building code adopted, § 5- 1.
State law reference—Authority to make rules relating to maintenance of safe
and sanitary housing, G. S. § 7- 148(cX7XAXi).
546
L
L
HOUSING § 9-33
e) Each dwelling unit and all common areas in buildings with
more than one (1) dwelling unit shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, free of pests, rodents, or other infestations.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(2), § 2)
Sec. 9-33. Minimum standards for basic equipment and
facilities.
Each dwelling and dwelling unit forming a single habitable
unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating shall be provided with at
least the following:
1) Kitchen facilities, including space for a stove and refrigerator,
storage space for dry goods and utensils, and a kitchen
sink;
2) Bathroom facilities, consisting of a flush water closet, lavatory
basin, and tub or shower, combined in one ( 1) room or
in more than one ( 1) room, so long as privacy shall be
afforded to the person within the room;
3) The kitchen sink and bathroom fixtures shall be connected
to a hot and cold pressure water system and sewage disposal
facilities and to a hot water heater capable of furnishing
water at not less than one hundred twenty (120)
degrees Fahrenheit to all connected fixtures;
4) Adequate rubbish storage facilities, and adequate garbage
disposal facilities or garbage storage containers, provided
by the occupant of a single dwelling or by the owner of a
building with two (2) or more dwelling units;
5) Heating facilities capable of safely and adequately heating
all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments
to a temperature of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit
at a distance three ( 3) feet above floor level when the
outside temperature is zero degrees Fahrenheit. Gasoline
shall not be used as fuel;
6) In each habitable room, a window or windows facing directly
out-of-doors, with a minimum area of ten ( 10) percent
of the floor area served, with at least one half the
547
9-33 SUFFIELD CODE
window area available for unobstructed ventilation, unless
other approved means of ventilation are provided. Bathrooms
and water closet compartments shall conform to the
above unless other means of lighting are approved. Ventilating
portions of windows, and exterior doors, shall have
insect screens and screen doors installed during the warm
months of the year;
7) Each habitable room in a dwelling unit, and all public
areas, common hallways and stairways in buildings with
more than one dwelling unit, shall be adequately lighted
with electric service and fixtures to provide one lumen at
floor or stair tread level. Every habitable room shall have
service and outlets to provide at least three (3) watts per
square foot of floor area, with at least one ( 1) wall type
convenience outlet for each sixty (60) feet or fraction thereof
of floor area, and in no case less than two (2) outlets per
room. Each water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry
room, furnace room, and public hall shall have one supplied
wall or ceiling type electric light fixture.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(2), § 3)
Sec. 9-34. Minimum standards for occupancy.
a) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred fifty
150) square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and
at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor space for
every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated
on the basis of the total habitable room area.
b) Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant
shall contain not less than seventy (70) square feet of usable floor
area and each room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall contain not less than fifty ( 50) additional
square feet of usable floor area for each permanent additional
occupant thereof.
c) No portion of a building, the floor level of which is below
grade, shall be used as a dwelling or dwelling unit unless, in
addition to the other provisions of this article:
1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground
and surface runoff water and insulated against
dampness; and
548
HOUSING § 9-37
2) The minimum aggregate glass area of windows as required
is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining
such window area.
Ord. of 5-27-65(2), § 4)
Sec. 9-35. Heating and lighting of rented or leased buildings.
When any building or part thereof is rented or leased and
occupied as a home or place of residence (or as an office or place of
business, either mercantile or otherwise) a temperature of less
than seventy ( 70) degrees Fahrenheit in such building or part
thereof occupied shall, for the purpose of this section, be deemed
injurious to the health of the occupants thereof.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(2), § 5)
Sec. 9-36. Sanitation of rented or leased buildings.
a) As used in this section, " rented or leased buildings" shall
mean any structure or part thereof, which is rented, leased, let
out or to be occupied as a home or place of residence ( or as an
office or place of business, either mercantile or otherwise).
b) When any defect in the plumbing, sewerage, water supply,
drainage, lighting, ventilation, or sanitary condition of a rented
or leased building, or of the premises on which it is situated, in
the opinion of the director of health, constitutes a danger to life
or health, the director of health or his designated assistant shall
order the responsible party to correct the same in such manner as
he specifies.
c) When the director of health certifies that such rented or
leased dwelling or premises are unfit for human habitation, by
reason of defects which may cause sickness or endanger the health
of the occupants, he shall issue an order requiring the rented
dwelling, premises, or any portion thereof to be vacated within
not less than twenty-four (24) hours or more than ten (10) days.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(2), § 6)
Sec. 9-37. Abatement of nuisances or hazardous health
conditions.
41010 The director of health shall examine and investigate into all
L
nuisances and hazardous health conditions injurious to the pub -
549
9-37 SUFFIELD CODE
lic health, cause such nuisances and hazardous health conditions
to be abated and cause to be removed all such nuisances and
hazardous health conditions which, in his judgment, may endanger
the health of the inhabitants of the town, and all expenses for
the abatement or removal of such nuisance or hazardous health
condition shall be paid by the person who caused or permitted
such nuisance or condition. When any such nuisance or hazardous
health condition is found on private property, the director of
health shall notify the owner or occupant of such property to
remove or abate the same at his expense, within such time as the
director of health directs. The director of health may enter all
places within his jurisdiction where there is just cause to suspect
any nuisance or hazardous health condition to exist.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(2), § 7)
Sec. 9-38. Administration and enforcement.
The director of health shall administer the housing code and
shall be empowered to designate such number of agents or assistants
as he may reasonably require to assist him in the enforcement
of this article. In order that he may effectively safeguard
the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the
general public, the director of health, or his designated agent or
assistant, is hereby authorized to make inspections to determine
the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and
premises located within the town. For the purpose of making
inspections, the director of health, or his designated agent or
assistant, may enter, examine and survey, at all reasonable times,
any dwelling, dwelling unit, or premises within the town. The
owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming
unit, or the person in charge thereof shall give the director of
public health, or his designated agent or assistant, free access to
such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises, at
all reasonable times, for the purpose of such inspection, examination,
and survey. Each occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to
any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises, at all
reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions
of this article, or any lawful order issued pursuant to the
550
J
MO/
HOUSING § 9-39
provisions of this article. If violations of this article are found to
Col exist, the director of health or his agent or assistant who conducted
the inspection shall give notice of such alleged violations
to the person or persons responsible therefor. Such notice shall be
in writing; include a statement of the reason why it is being
issued; and allow a reasonable time for the performance of any
act it requires.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(2), § 8; Ord. of 10-3-66; Ord. of 3-9-67)
1
L
Sec. 9-39. Housing code enforcement committee; created,
powers.
a) There is hereby created a housing code enforcement committee
which shall consist of the first selectman who shall serve
as chairman, and two (2) other electors of the town who shall be
appointed by the board of selectmen and who shall serve for
terms of two ( 2) years from the date of their appointment and
until their successors have been appointed and have qualified.
b) Any person aggrieved by any act, order or notice of the
director of health in enforcing compliance with the provisions of
this article may appeal to the code enforcement committee. The
housing code enforcement committee, by a majority vote, shall
sustain, modify or withdraw the order or notice, or may grant an
extension or variance in accordance with the following conditions:
1) The time for performance of any act required by the order
or notice may be extended for not more than eighteen (18)
months subject to appropriate conditions and based on evidence
relating to the particular case:
a. That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of
any provisions of this article;
b. That such extension is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this article in securing the public
health, safety and general welfare.
2) A variance may be granted in a specific case and from a
specific provision of this article subject to appropriate conditions
and where the housing code enforcement committee
makes specific findings of fact based on evidence related
to the particular case:
551
9-39 SUFFIELD CODE
a. That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of
the provision;
b. That the effect of the application of the provisions
would be arbitrary in the specific case;
c. That an extension would not constitute an appropriate
remedy for these practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships and this arbitrary effect;
d. That such variance is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this article in securing the public
health, safety and general welfare.
c) If the order or notice is sustained, modified, or extended, it
shall become an order as so sustained, modified, or extended. Any
notice served pursuant to section 9-38 shall become an order if a
written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the
chairman of the code enforcement committee within twenty (20)
days after such notice is served.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(2), § 9; Ord. of 3-9-67)
Sec. 9-40. Annual reports required.
The director of health and the code enforcement committee
shall each submit annually a report of their respective activities
to the town, which reports shall be printed in the annual town
report.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(2), § 10)
Sec. 9-41. Conflict with other laws.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit or modify the
powers of the director of health, the fire marshal, the zoning and
planning commission, or other duly constituted authorities, to
make orders or initiate other action permitted by law with reference
to dwellings or dwelling units which are damaged, decayed,
dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or unfit for human habitation, or
a menace to the public health and safety.
Ord. of 5-27-65(2), § 11)
Sec. 9-42. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or
any order of the director of health in the enforcement of this
552 J
HOUSING § 9-42
article may be fined in accordance with section 1- 11. Each day' s
neglect or refusal to comply with an order of the director of
health or of the code enforcement committee shall constitute a
separate offense.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(2), § 12)
553
The next page is 603]
L
1
L
Chapter 10
LIBRARY*
Art. I. In General, §§ 10-1- 10-20
Art. II. Commission, § 10-21
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. Free public library established.
A free public library is hereby established in the town the use
of which shall be free to all the inhabitants thereof as provided
for in an act of the legislature signed and approved June 1, 1893.
Ord. of 6- 1- 1893)
Sec. 10-2. Management of funds.
a) All funds which have heretofore been given or may hereafter
be given to or for the benefit of the free public library in the
town, known as the Kent Memorial Library shall be deposited in
a custodian account with the Hartford National Bank and Trust
Company, pursuant to section 7- 403 of the general statutes. Any
stocks or other securities held by the custodian may be registered
and held in the name of a nominee or nominees of such custodian
pursuant to the provisions of section 36-81 of the general statutes.
b) The supervision of the investment and reinvestment of such
funds pursuant to section 7-403 of the general statutes shall be
vested in the library commission appointed by the town. The
commission shall review the investment of such funds at least
twice annually. Purchases, sales and transfers of securities shall
be made only upon authorization of the library commission act -
Charter reference—Library commission, § 706(N).
Cross references—Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations,
Ch. 5; planning, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15; zoning,
App. A.
State law references—Authority to make appropriations for libraries, G.S. §
7- 148(cX2XE); establishment of public libraries by towns, G.S. § 11-20; directors of
town public libraries, G. S. § 11-21.
603
10-2 SUFFIELD CODE
ing at any regular meeting or at any special meeting duly warned
and held for such purpose. Any assignments, endorsements or
documents necessary in connection herewith shall be signed on
behalf of the library by such officer thereof as shall from time to
time be designated by the library commission.
Ord. of 10-7- 57, §§ 1, 2)
Sec. 10-3. Kent Memorial Library—Designated as principal
public library.
The Kent Memorial Library established by ordinance on March
14, 1894 and named " Kent Memorial Library" by 1947 Special
Act No. 270, is hereby designated as the principal public library
of the town as the phrase " principal public library" is used in
general statutes section 11- 24a as the same may be amended
from time to time.
Ord. of 4-25-72, § I)
Sec. 10-4. Same—Agency of government.
The Kent Memorial Library is hereby designated an agency of
the town; provided however, that this designation shall not be
construed to mean that it was not such an agency prior to such
designation.
Ord. of 4-25-72, § II)
Secs. 10-5- 10-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. COMMISSION*
Sec. 10-21. Powers and duties.
The library commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
1) To establish policies for the operation and use of the library;
2) To employ a chief librarian who shall act as advisor to the
library commission on policies and shall serve as its chief
Charter reference—Library commission, § 706(N).
Cross reference—Boards and commissions, § 2- 16 et seq.
State law reference—Directors of town public libraries, G. S. § 11-21.
604
1
L.
LIBRARY § 10-21
executive in the administration of such policies, in employment
and supervision of staff, and in the provision of
library service to the public;
3) To review, revise, approve or adopt a budget as submitted
by the chief librarian;
4) To present such budget with appropriate statements and
presentations of need to the board of finance;
5) To expend for library purposes monies appropriated, credited
or accruing to the library under its jurisdiction and, in
the exercise of such power, to transfer funds between line
items in the appropriated budget, and generally to do all
things it deems necessary for the establishment, maintenance
and improvement of the library under its jurisdiction;
6) To establish and maintain a main library, branches, library
stations, and traveling library service as needed
within the town;
7) To authorize the appointment and compensation of all employees
of the library and approve job descriptions and
recommend pay classifications of library employees included
in a civil service system;
8) To accept any bequest, gift, or endowment upon the conditions
connected with the same, provided such conditions
shall not remove any portion of the library from the control
of the board or its successors or in any manner limit
the free use of the library, or, in the opinion of the board,
fail to further the purposes of the library;
9) To report annually in writing to the board of selectmen,
which report shall be published in the annual report of the
town and copies which report shall be placed on file in the
state library.
Ord. of 4-25- 72, § IV)
605
The next page is 655]
Chapter 11
LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS
BUSINESS REGULATIONS*
Art. I. In General, §§ 11- 1- 11- 15
Art. II. Peddlers, §§ 11- 16- 11- 41
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 11- 16- 11- 30
Div. 2. Permit, §§ 11- 31- 11- 42
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 11- 1- 11- 15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PEDDLERSt
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 11- 16- 11- 30. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
Sec. 11- 31. Required.
No person shall bend, peddle or hawk upon the public streets of
the town, any goods, wares or other merchandise at public or
private sale or auction, or vend, peddle or hawk such articles
from house to house within the town limits without securing a
permit in accordance with the provisions of this division.
Ord. of 11- 30-81, § 1)
Cross references—Building permits, § 5-16 et seq.; alarm systems, § 12-21 et
seq.; building sewer permit required, § 18-41; sewer permits generally, § 18-101
et seq.
State law references—Auctioneer' s licenses, G. S. §§ 21- 1- 21- 5; itinerant vendors'
licenses, G.S. §§ 21- 27- 21- 35; junk dealers' licenses, G.S. §§ 21- 9- 21- 14;
package store permits, G. S. § 30-20; pawnbrokers, G.S. § 21- 39- 21- 47; peddlers,
G.S. §§ 21- 36- 21- 38; regulation of vending machines, G. S. § 21a-43.
tCross references—Parks and recreation, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other
public places, Ch. 15.
State law reference—Authority to regulate the business of peddlers, G. S. §
7- 148(cX7XH)(iv).
Supp. No. 1 655
11-32 SUFFIELD CODE
Sec. 11- 32. Term.
No permit shall be issued to include more than one ( 1) person.
Each person shall apply for his individual permit. The permit
shall be valid for one ( 1) year from the date of issue.
Ord. of 11- 30-81, § 2)
Sec. 11- 33. Application—Required.
A person shall make an application to the chief of police or his
agent in order to obtain a permit required under the provisions of
this division. The chief of police or his agent shall furnish the
applicant a permit application which the applicant shall complete
entirely. Any intentional misstatement or misrepresentation
shall render the application and subsequent permit null and
void.
Ord. of 11- 30-81, § 3)
Sec. 11- 34. Same—Denial; appeal.
The chief of police or his agent shall review the application
required by this division and upon being satisfied that the requested
permit is for a lawful purpose shall date and sign the
application. Any person who has an application denied by the
chief of police or his agent because the chief or his agent were not
satisfied that the requested permit was for a lawful purpose, may
appeal to the board of selectmen. If a majority of the selectmen
determine that the application was improperly denied, then the
majority shall date and sign the application. After the application
has been properly signed and dated by either the board of
selectmen or chief of police or his agent, the chief of police or his
agent shall grant the permit upon receipt of the required fee.
After issuing the permit the chief of police or his agent shall
maintain a copy of the application with the permit number.
Ord. of 11-30-81, § 3; Ord. No. 88-04, § 1, 4- 19-88)
Sec. 11- 35. Chief of police to sign.
No permit required by the provisions of this division shall be
valid unless signed by the chief of police or his agent, and no
permit shall be valid for any person other than the one named on
such permit, and the permit shall be valid only for the purpose
specified upon the application.
Ord. of 11- 30-81, § 3; Ord. No. 88-04, § 2, 4-19-88)
Supp. No. 1 656
C
LICENSES, PERMITS, BUSINESS REGULATIONS 11-38
Sec. 11- 36. Fee; display; hours of use.
a) The permit fee required for the activities stated in section
11- 31 shall be twenty-five dollars ($ 25. 00). Persons performing
those actions stated in section 11- 31 shall show their permit upon
request of any individual who is being solicited or upon request of
any police officer. Each person shall carry their permit upon
their person at all times while engaging in those activities stated
in section 11-31.
b) No person engaging in those activities stated in section
11- 31 shall perform those actions before the hour of 9: 00 a.m. or
after the hour of 9:00 p.m.
Ord. of 11- 30-81, § 4)
Sec. 11-37. Revocation; appeal.
a) Upon receipt of a complaint regarding a person performing
those activities stated in section 11- 31, the chief of police or his
agent shall conduct an investigation and if it is determined that
such person violated any state, federal or local law or ordinance,
the chief or his agent may confiscate and revoke such person' s
peddler permit.
b) Any person who has his peddler' s permit revoked by the
chief of police or his agent may appeal the revocation decision to
the board of selectmen in writing within five ( 5) days of such
revocation. If a majority of the selectmen determine that the
permit was improperly revoked, they may reinstate such permit
without additional fee to the person. If a permit is revoked and a
majority of the selectmen uphold the revocation, such decision
shall be final. The board of selectmen shall issue a written decision
within three (3) days after the written appeal is received.
c) Any person whose permit is revoked shall not be allowed to
reapply for any permit to perform those activities stated in section
11- 31 for a period of one ( 1) year from the date of revocation.
Ord. of 11- 30-81, § 5)
Sec. 11-38. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to sales by farmers and gardeners
of the produce of their farms and gardens, or to the sale, distribu-
Supp. No. 1 657
11- 38 SUFFIELD CODE
tion and delivery of milk, teas, coffees, spices, groceries, meats
and bakery goods, to sales on approval, to conditional sales of
merchandise, or to the taking of orders for merchandise for future
delivery when full payment is not required at the time of
solicitation.
Ord. of 11- 30-81, § 6)
Sec. 11- 39. Proration of fee.
If more than one ( 1) person makes application for a permit and
they are representing the same company or organization, then
the chief of police or his agent may prorate the twenty-five dollar
25. 00) permit fee among such persons so that the total does not
exceed twenty-five dollars ($25. 00); each person involved shall be
issued an individual permit.
Ord. of 11-30-81, § 8; Ord. No. 88-04, § 3, 4- 19-88)
Sec. 11-40. Waiver of fee.
The chief of police or his agent may waive the required fee for
any person upon a satisfactory showing that the person is vending,
peddling or conducting a public auction for the benefit of a
local civic group or nonprofit organization which is a tax exempt
organization. The chief of police or his agent may require that a
copy of the tax exemption certificate be filed at the time the
application is presented.
Ord. of 11- 30-81, § 9; Ord. No. 88-04, § 4, 4-19-88)
Sec. 11-41. State, federal permits required.
Any person desiring to perform those activities stated in section
11- 31 which are regulated by additional federal, state or
local ordinances and laws shall obtain the proper permits in
addition to a permit from the town.
Ord. of 11- 30-81, § 7)
Sec. 11- 42. Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be
fined in accordance with section 1- 11.
Ord. of 11- 30-81, § 7)
Supp. No. 1
658
The next page is 709]
Chapter 12
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS*
Art. I. In General, §§ 12- 1- 12-20
Art. II. Alarm Systems, §§ 12-21- 12-29
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 12- 1. Loitering and prowling.
Any person who loiters or prowls in a place, at a time, or in a
manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances
that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity, shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). Among
the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether
such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight
upon appearance of a peace officer, refuses to identify himself, or
manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless
flight by the actor or other circumstances makes it impracticable,
a peace officer shall prior to any arrest for an offense under this
section afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify
himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be
convicted of an offense under this section if the peace officer did
not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial
that the explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed
by the peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
Ord. of 6- 18-68(5), § 1)
State law reference—Authority to regulate loitering and trespassing, G. S.
7- 148(cX7XF).
Sec. 12-2. Obstruction of streets, sidewalks.
Any person who stands, loiters, or walks on any street, sidewalk,
or other public passage so as to obstruct free passage over,
on, or along the street, sidewalk, or other public passage and
who, after having been requested by a police officer to move on,
Cross references—General penalty for Code violations, § 1- 11; traffic aril
motor vehicles, Ch. 17.
Supp. No. 3 709
12-2 SUFFIELD CODE
refuses to do so and continues to obstruct free passage, shall be
fined in accordance with section 1- 11.
Ord. of 6- 18-68( 5), § 2)
Cross reference—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15.
Sec. 12-3. Parking vehicles on premises of another.
Any person who shall bring or park any vehicle upon the
premises of another without prior permission from the owner,
lessee, or authorized agent of the owner or lessee of the premises,
and after a request from the owner, lessee, or authorized agent to
remove said vehicle shall fail to move it, shall be fined in accordance
with section 1- 11. The posting by the owner, lessee, or
authorized agent on the premises of a clear and legible sign
forbidding the presence of vehicles without prior permission shall
suffice as a request to remove vehicles.
Ord. of 6- 18-68(5), § 3)
Cross references—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15; traffic
and motor vehicles, Ch. 17.
Secs. 12-4- 12-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ALARM SYSTEMS*
Sec. 12-21. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide uniform standards of
control and regulations for the installation, use and maintenance
of alarm systems or devices.
Ord. No. 90-04, § 1, 11- 27-90)
Sec. 12-22. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any person, business
firm or corporation who operates, maintains, leases or owns
any alarm system or device that is intended to summon police
Editor' s note—Ord. No. 90-04, §§ 1- 9, adopted November 27, 1990, rescinded
former Art. II, §§ 12- 21- 12-25, and enacted new provisions therefor.
Former Art. II was concerned with similar provisions, and derived from Ord. No.
87-2, §§ 1- 5, adopted August 13, 1987. The effective date of this article shall be
January 1, 1991.
Supp. No. 3 710
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS § 12-24
and/or fire emergency vehicles and/or personnel of the Town of
Suffield in response to an alarm signal.
Ord. No. 90-04, § 2, 11- 27-90)
Sec. 12-23. Definitions.
a) Alarm user: Any person, business, corporation, union, association,
firm, partnership, committee, club or other organization
or group of persons who owns or occupies premises within the
Town of Suffield, upon which is maintained an alarm system or
device.
b) Alarm system or device: An assembly of equipment and devices
arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent
attention and to which police or fire personnel are expected to
respond. In this article the term " alarm system" or " device,"
shall include but not be limited to the terms " Automatic tape
dialing device", " burglary alarm systems," " hold-up alarm
system," " manual holdup alarm systems" and " fire alarm
systems" as those terms are commonly used.
c) Contractor: Any person, business, corporation, firm or partnership
in the business of supplying, installing, servicing and
maintaining alarm systems or devices.
d) False alarm: The activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence
of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of the owner' s
or lessee' s employees or agents or of any alarm user as previously
defined herein. Such terminology does not include alarms caused
by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, or other violent conditions
or acts of nature. False alarms shall not mean alarms transmitted
because of a water main break or similar causes that occur
outside of protected property and are not within the control of the
alarm user.
Ord. No. 90-04, § 3, 11- 27-90)
Sec. 12-24. Registration.
a) Each alarm user shall register the alarm system with the
Suffield Police Department prior to use, provided that alarm systems
already in use as of the effective date of this article may be
Supp. No. 3 711
12-24 SUFFIELD CODE
registered no later than sixty ( 60) days from such date. Each
alarm user shall be required to apply for and receive written
approval from the chief of police prior to installation of any new
alarm system.
b) Alarm system registration shall be accomplished by completing
a form provided by the Suffield Police Department to include
such information as the chief of police deems relevant.
c) July 1 shall be the anniversary date for all registrations. All
registrations shall expire three ( 3) years after they are issued.
Re -registrations shall be processed in the same manner as applications
for the initial registration.
d) It shall be the responsibility of each alarm user to notify the
chief of police in writing of any changes in registration information
within fifteen (15) days of said change.
Ord. No. 90-04, § 4, 11- 27-90)
Sec. 12-25. Disclaimer of liability.
a) Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the Town of
Suffield, its departments, officers, agents and/or employees shall
be under no obligation whatsoever concerning the adequacy, operation
or maintenance of any alarm system or of the alarm -
monitoring facilities at police and fire department locations. No
liability whatsoever is assumed for the failure of such alarm systems
or monitoring facilities or for the failure to respond to alarms
or for any other omission in connection with such alarm systems.
b) Each alarm user agrees to be responsible for the alarm system'
s operation and shall be deemed to hold and save harmless
the Town of Suffield, its departments, officers, agents and employees
from any liability whatsoever in connection with such
alarm system or in regard to the town' s response to any alarm
signal.
Ord. No. 90-04, § 5, 11- 27-90)
Sec. 12. 26. Enforcement and false alarm charges.
a) The enforcement and administration of this article, and any
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be the function
of the alarm review board.
Supp. No. 3 712
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS § 12- 26
b) Upon registration and initial installation there shall be a
thirty (30) day grace period prior to the calculation of false alarms.
Said grace period shall be waived after the receipt of seven ( 7)
false alarms during that period.
c) No more than four (4) false alarms from any one protected
property per calendar year after the termination of the grace
period shall be permitted without the imposition of a fine.
d) After a finding by the chief of police of a third false alarm
from any one protected property per calendar year, the alarm
user may be notified in writing by the police department. Such
notification shall require that the alarm system be inspected by
the installing alarm contractor or if impossible, by an alarm systems
contractor in good standing who shall review alarm procedures
with all employees or members of the household. After said
notice is sent, the user shall forward to the police department
proof that the alarm system has been inspected and is in good
working order.
e) Upon receipt of the fifth false alarm from any one protected
property per calendar year the alarm user shall be fined twentyfive
dollars ($25.00); a twenty-five dollar ($25. 00) fine shall also
be imposed for the sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth false alarm
received in that calendar year. For false alarms number 10, 11, 12
and 13, a fine of fifty dollars ($ 50.00) per false alarm shall be
imposed. For false alarms number 14, 15, 16 and 17, a fine of
seventy-five dollars ($75. 00) per false alarm shall be imposed. For
any subsequent false alarm in that calendar year said alarm user
shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100. 00) for said false alarms.
The police department shall send written notice of the fine to the
alarm user registered at said property.
f) In addition to any other penalty set forth in this article, if an
alarm user fails to comply with any requirement of this article,
the police chief may order by written notice the alarm user to
disconnect his alarm system from the police department and to
remove any equipment or indicators connected in the police department
and may indicate in said order that failure to obey shall
result in disconnection by the town. If he fails to obey the order
within three (3) days from the receipt of the order, exclusive of
Supp. No. 3 713
12-26 SUFFIELD CODE
Saturday, Sunday and holidays, the town may disconnect the
alarm system and remove any equipment or indicators at the
expense of the violator.
g) the Town of Suffield, upon notification by the alarm review
board, may institute civil proceedings to enforce the provisions of
this article. Any alarm user deemed to be in violation of this
article shall be liable for all collection costs, including reasonable
attorney fees.
Ord. No. 90-04, § 6, 11- 27-90)
Sec. 12-27. Alarm review board.
There shall be an alarm review board of the Town of Suffield,
which shall have the powers and duties granted to it under this
article. The alarm review board shall consist of three ( 3) members,
specifically the chief of police, the fire chief and an elector of
the Town of Suffield who shall be appointed by the board of selectmen
for a term of four (4) years to be served without compensation
commencing January 1, 1991. Three ( 3) members of said
board shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. All decisions
shall be by a majority vote.
Ord. No. 90-04, § 7, 11- 27-90)
Sec. 12-28. Appeals process.
a) Any alarm user accused of violating any provision of this
article and/or aggrieved because of the imposition of any fines
under this article may appeal within ten ( 10) days of the date of
the written notice issued by the Town of Suffield by mailing a
written request for appeal within said ten-day period. When an
appeal is timely filed, the Suffield Police Department shall
schedule a hearing before the alarm review board and shall mail
notice of the time and place of said hearing to the accused alarm
user at the address provided in the registration form at least
fifteen (15) days before said hearing. Said notice shall also be filed
with the Suffield Town Clerk' s office.
b) On the basis of information provided by the alarm user or
any other information allowed to be introduced at the hearing,
the board shall affirm the fines or disconnection, if it finds that
the fines and/or disconnection were properly imposed, or rescind
Supp. No. 3
714
L.„ OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS § 12-29
the fines or disconnection if it finds that said penalties were improperly
imposed. Upon the board' s determination, written notice
shall be sent to the alarm user within seven (7) days of the board' s
decision.
c) An appeal shall not deter appropriate police and/or fire department
action during the appeal period. Referral to the town
attorney to institute civil proceedings to enforce the provisions of
this article may be deferred until the appeal to the alarm review
board is completed.
Ord. No. 90-04, § 8, 11- 27-90)
Sec. 12-29. Compilation of record..
a) The chief of police with the cooperation and approval of the
fire chief shall compile a continuous record of all false alarms,
disconnections and of all written notices and orders given to alarm
user and/or alarm system contractors. Such record shall indicate
the number and frequency of false alarms and may also include
information concerning particular alarm systems or devices, alarm
system contractors or the factual source of false alarms, so attributable
to false alarms or alarm system problems.
b) Information included in this record concerning particular
alarm users, alarm system contractors or factual sources causing
false alarms shall be divulged without the written consent of the
alarm user or if deemed necessary by the chief of police or fire
chief to protect and promote the public welfare or if deemed necessary
to comply with the State of Connecticut Freedom of Information
Laws.
c) Information included in this record shall include a calculation
of all fines and costs collected under this article. All such
monies shall be turned over to the town treasurer for deposit into
the town' s general funds.
Ord. No. 90-04, § 9, 11- 27-90)
Supp. No. 3
715
The next page is 7611
t.,
Chapter 13
PARKS AND RECREATION*
Art. I. In General, §§ 13-1- 13-35
Art. II. Commission, §§ 13-36- 13-45
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 13-1. Hours when parks and recreational areas are
open.
The parks and recreational areas within the town shall be open
during such hours as the conservation commission shall determine.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 1)
Sec. 13-2. Hunting and firearms.
No person shall hunt, or use or carry firearms in any public
park or recreational area of the town.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 2)
Sec. 13-3. Fishing.
No person shall fish in or upon any of the waters on any public
park or recreational area of the town except in accordance with
rules and regulations established by the state board of fisheries
and game and the conservation commission.
Ord. of 5-12-66, § 3)
Sec. 13-4. Boats.
No power -driven craft shall be used upon any waters in any
park or recreational area of the town.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 4)
Charter reference—Parks and recreation commission, § 706(E).
Cross references—Planning, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
Ch. 15; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A.
State law references—Authority to provide for entertainment, amusements,
concerts, celebrations and cultural activities, G.S. § 7- 148(cX4XB); authority to
establish, maintain, etc., parks, playgrounds, playfields, etc., G.S. § 7- 148(cX6XAXi).
761
13-5 SUFFIELD CODE
Sec. 13-5. Dogs.
No person shall bring or cause to be brought into any park or
recreational area of the town any dogs unless the same shall be
on leash or under the control of such person.
Ord. of 5- 12- 66, § 5)
Sec. 13-6. Alcoholic beverages.
The sale, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on
park or recreational areas of the town is prohibited; provided
however, that the board of selectmen, after consultation with and
prior approval by the conservation commission, may issue a permit
to sell beer or wine on park or recreational areas of the town
provided that all of the following conditions exist:
1) The applicant for such permit is a local organization comprised
principally of residents of the town, which has been
in existence and active in the town for at least three ( 3)
years prior to the filing of the application;
2) The applicant is civic, charitable, or nonprofit organization;
3) The permittee and those engaged in the sale of such beer
or wine are all residents of the town;
4) The applicant specifies the particular park or recreational
area in which the sale is to occur, to which particular park
or recreational area the permit shall be limited;
5) The sale is for the purpose of raising funds for such organization,
or for another such civic, charitable, noncommercial
or nonprofit organization or purpose described in the
application;
6) The event at which the sale is to occur is open to the
general public;
7) The application is for a period not to exceed three (3) days;
8) The applicant makes adequate provision, specified in its
application, for the removal from the park or recreational
area at its own expense of all refuse or rubbish generated
by the sale, possession or consumption of beer or wine sold,
and of all personal property brought into the park or recreational
area for the purposes of such sale;
762
PARKS AND RECREATION § 13- 10
9) The applicant has not been issued more than three (3) such
permits in this same calendar year;
10) Any permission granted by such permit shall be conditioned
upon issuance to the applicant by the state liquor
control commission of a permit appropriate for the purposes.
Beer or wine may be possessed or consumed at such park or
recreational area during the period such beer or wine are being
sold pursuant to such permit. The board of selectmen may establish
a fee for issuance of the permit.
Ord. of 8-28-75(3))
Cross reference—Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3.
Sec. 13-7. Refuse and rubbish.
No person shall dump, deposit or cause to be left in or upon the
waters and grounds of any park or recreational area of the town
any rubbish, refuse, garbage or waste material except in receptacles
marked and provided for such purpose.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 7)
Cross reference—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15.
Sec. 13-8. Injury to property.
No person shall destroy, deface, remove or injure in any manner
any structure, tree, shrub, flowers, fern or moss of any facilities
or installations upon the waters or grounds of any park or
recreational area of the town.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 8)
Sec. 13-9. Interference with wildlife.
No person shall destroy, molest, injure, capture or interfere
with birds, game or wild life upon any park or recreational area
of the town.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 9)
Sec. 13-10. Notices, signs or posters.
No person shall erect or post in or upon the grounds of any
park or recreational area of the town any notice, sign or poster
except such notices, signs or posters as may be authorized by any
state agency or the conversation commission.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 10)
763
13- 11 SUFFIELD CODE
Sec. 13-11. Trailers and camp vehicles.
No person shall drive or cause to be driven into any park or
recreational area of the town any trailer, camp vehicle or other
mobile facility designed to provide camping or living facilities.
Ord. of 5- 12- 66, § 11)
Cross reference—Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 17.
Sec. 13-12. Camping.
No person shall camp or remain upon the grounds of any park
or recreational area of the town after the evening closing hours of
any such park or recreational area without having obtained permit
in writing from the conservation commission or from the
superintendent of such park or recreational area to do so.
Ord. of 5- 12- 66, § 12)
Sec. 13-13. Open fires.
No person shall kindle, use or maintain any open fire upon any
park or recreational area of the town except at locations and in
receptacles specifically designated for such purpose. No person
shall leave any fire in any fireplace or receptacle provided for
such purpose unattended or unextinguished.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 13)
Sec. 13-14. Sale of articles.
No person shall sell or offer for sale any article on park or
recreational areas of the town or advertise or solicit for any
purpose therein, unless specifically authorized in writing by the
commission, to do so.
Ord. of 5- 12- 66, § 14)
Cross reference—Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations,
Ch. 11.
Sec. 13-15. Games of chance.
No person shall play, engage in, conduct or participate in or
cause to be played, conducted or engaged in any game of chance
or have any instrument or instrumentality of gambling upon
park or recreational areas of the town.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 15)
Cross reference—Amusements, Ch. 4.
764
PARKS AND RECREATION § 13-36
41111/110" Sec. 13-16. Operation and parking of motor vehicles.
person shall operate or park any motor vehicle upon park or
recreational areas of the town except in compliance with such
rules and regulations as may be posted or displayed upon such
areas under the direction of the conservation commission.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 16)
Cross references—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15; traffic
and motor vehicles, Ch. 17.
Sec. 13-17. Disorderly conduct.
No person shall engage in disorderly conduct, obscene or indecent
conduct or behavior in any park or recreational area of the
town.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 17)
Cross reference—Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 12.
Sec. 13-18. Eviction for violation of ordinance.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article may
be evicted from the park or recreational area in which such
violation shall have occurred.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 18)
Sec. 13-19. Adoption of regulations.
The parks and recreation commission is authorized and empowered
to adopt and publish from time to time such rules and
regulations as it may deem necessary and appropriate in the
implementation of the provisions of this article.
Ord. of 5- 12-66, § 19)
Secs. 13-20- 13-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. COMMISSION*
Sec. 13-36. Established; composition.
There is hereby established for the town a parks and recreation
commission. The commission shall consist of seven ( 7) regular
Charter reference—Parks and recreation commission, § 706(E).
Cross reference—Boards and commissions, § 2- 16 et seq.
765
13-36 SUFFIELD CODE
members and two ( 2) alternate members all of whom shall be
appointed as provided in this article. Each regular and alternate
member of the parks and recreation commission shall be a resident
elector of the town holding no salaried municipal office.
Ord. of 5- 27-65( 1), § 1)
Sec. 13-37. Compensation.
No regular or alternate member of the parks and recreation
commission shall receive any compensation for his services but
necessary expenses, incurred in the performance of their official
duties, shall be reimbursed.
Ord. of 5- 27-65( 1), § 1)
Sec. 13-38. Powers.
The parks and recreation commission shall, except as provided
in section 13-44, provide, conduct, and supervise public playgrounds,
athletic fields, recreation centers, and other recreation facilities
and activities on any of the properties owned or controlled by the
town, or on other properties with the consent of the owners and
authorities thereof. It shall have the power to conduct, or to
cooperate with other agencies in conducting, any form of recreation
that will employ the leisure time of the people in a constructive
and wholesome manner. It shall have the power to
sponsor and conduct or to participate with others in sponsoring
and conducting drives or campaigns for voluntary contributions
for the purchase, maintenance and operation, by the town through
the parks and recreation commission, of recreation sites, facilities
or programs and for the advancement of the purposes of this
chapter. Any funds received by the parks and recreation commission
by way of gift, whether solicited or otherwise shall be held or
deposited in the name of the town and shall be paid out only by
the town treasurer, within the limits of appropriations duly made
by the town, provided that any gift received for any specified
purpose or subject to particular terms or conditions shall be held
or expended only for such purpose and subject to such terms and
conditions. Gifts of tangible personal property or real property
shall be held in the name of the town, and, in the case of real
estate, shall be subject to approval by a town meeting. The parks
and recreation commission shall have the right to reject any gift,
766
j
PARKS AND RECREATION § 13-42
if, in its opinion, the purposes, terms or conditions thereof are
such that it would be inadvisable for the town to accept the same.
Ord. of 5- 27-65( 1), § 2)
Secs. 13-39, 13-40. Reserved.
Editor' s note—Sections 13-39 and 13-40 have been deleted as being superseded
by the provisions of charter sections 705 and 706E. Former §§ 13-39 and 13-40
pertained to appointment of regular and alternate members of the parks and
recreation commission and derived from Ord. of May 27, 1965( 1), §§ 3, 4.
Sec. 13-41. Organization.
Within thirty (30) days after the appointment of the members of
the parks and recreation commission they shall meet, organize,
and from among the regular members of the parks and recreation
commission elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and a clerk. Thereafter
annually during the month in which the original chairman,
vice-chairman and clerk were elected as provided herein the parks
and recreation commission shall elect from among its regular
members a chairman, a vice-chairman, and a clerk. Alternate
members of the parks and recreation commission shall not participate
in any election of officers of the parks and recreation
commission. In all other matters, when a regular member of the
parks and recreation commission is unable to act because of absence,
illness, or disqualification, he shall notify the chairman
who shall forthwith designate one (1) of the alternate members to
serve in place of such regular member, and such alternate member
shall thereupon exercise all the powers and duties of such regular
member until the absence, illness, or disqualification of the regular
member shall have been terminated.
Ord. of 5-27- 65( 1), § 5)
Sec. 13-42. Removal of regular or alternate member.
Any member of the parks and recreation commission may be
removed by the board of selectmen for cause, but upon request of
such member, such removal shall become effective only after public
hearing.
Ord. of 5- 27- 65( 1), § 6)
Supp. No. 5 767
13-43 SUFFIELD CODE
Sec. 13-43. Meetings; records; reports; assistants; consultants.
a) The parks and recreation commission shall fix the time and
place for its regular meetings, and may hold such special meet -
Supp. No. 5 768
L
PARKS AND RECREATION § 13-45
ings as may from time to time be required. The parks and recreation
commission shall keep a record of its proceedings, deliberations,
and actions. It shall make an annual report to the board of
selectmen which report shall be published in the annual report of
the town. The parks and recreation commission shall prepare an
annual budget and may request an annual appropriation which
shall be submitted to the board of finance for approval as provided
by law.
b) The parks and recreation commission may, within the limits
of appropriations made for the purpose by the town, employ
clerical and technical assistance or consultants. It shall have the
power to appoint or designate to act as superintendent of recreation
such person as the parks and recreation commission may
find is trained and properly qualified for the duties of the position,
and it shall have the power to appoint and designate such
other personnel as it deems necessary or desirable for the proper
discharge of its responsibilities. The presence of four (4) regular
members or, in the absence of proper designation of an alternate
or alternates as provided by the terms of this article, the presence
of four (4) regular and alternate members shall constitute a quorum.
No resolution or vote except a vote to adjourn or to fix the
time and place of its next meeting shall be adopted by less than
three (3) affirmative votes.
Ord. of 5- 27-65( 1), § 7)
Sec. 13-44. Exempted acts.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit or interfere
with the maintenance and execution by the board of education of
the town of sports or recreational programs or activities for students
attending the public schools of the town.
Ord. of 5- 27-65( 1), § 8)
Charter reference—Board of education, § 302(F).
Sec. 1345. Prohibited use.
No use by the parks and recreation commission shall be made
of any premises in a residence zone which shall create any objectionable
noise or which shall interfere with the peaceable enjoyment
of any adjoining premises, including premises separated
769
13-45 SUFFIELD CODE
from the used premises by a highway. Any owner of adjoining
premises aggrieved by any act of the parks and recreation commission
may appeal to a review committee composed of the first
selectman, the chairman of the zoning and planning commission
and the director of health, which committee shall have power to
reserve, rescind or modify any act or decision of the parks and
recreation commission.
Ord. of 5- 27-65( 1), § 9)
The next page is 821]
770
L
Chapter 14
PLANNING*
Art. I. In General, §§ 14- 1- 14- 15
Art. II. Capitol Region Council of Governments, §§ 14-16- 14-30
Art. III. Permanent Building Commission, §§ 14-31- 14-50
Art. IV. Conservation Commission, §§ 14-51- 14-75
Art. V. Historic District Commission, §§ 14- 76- 14- 100
Art. VL Economic Development Commission, §§ 14-101- 14-125
Art. VII. Advisory Commission on Capital Expenditures, §§ 14-126- 14-150
Art. VIII. Capitol Region Planning Agency, §§ 14- 151- 14-165
Art. IX. Landfill Management Commission, §§ 14- 166- 14- 180
Art. X. Flood and Erosion Control Board, §§ 14-181- 14-190
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 14- 1- 14-15. Reserved.
Charter references—Zoning and planning commission, § 302(L); appointed
boards and commissions, Ch. VII.
Cross references—Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations,
Ch. 5; cemeteries, Ch. 6; housing, Ch. 9; streets, sidewalks and other public
places, Ch. 15; utilities, Ch. 18; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B.
State law references—Municipal planning commission, G.S. §§ 8- 18- 8-30a;
creation of planning commissions, G. S. § 8- 19; plan of development, G. S. § 8- 23;
requirement that municipal improvement proposals must be referred to planning
commission, G.S. § 8-24; requirement that proposals concerning subdivisions of
land be approved by planning commission, G. S. § 8-25; requisite of approval of
subdivision plans by planning commission, G.S. § 8-26; appeals from planning
commission, G.S. § 8-30; municipal redevelopment generally, G.S. § 1 8- 124- 8-139;
authority for urban renewal projects, G. S. § 8- 141; urban renewal plan, G. S. §
8- 142; powers of redevelopment agency, G. S. § 8- 143; powers of municipality
concerning urban renewal, G.S. § 8- 144; state aid for city redevelopment and
urban renewal, G.S. §§ 8- 151- 8- 162; federal aid for city redevelopment and
urban renewal, G. S. §§ 8- 163- 8- 169.
Supp. No. 1 821
14- 16 SUFFIELD CODE
ARTICLE II. CAPITOL REGION COUNCIL OF
GOVERNMENTS*
Sec. 14-16. Established.
The town hereby adopts sections 4- 124i through 4- 124p of the
general statutes, ( 1971 Public Act No. 821), providing for the
formation of a regional council of governments within a planning
region as defined or redefined by the director of the office of state
planning, and hereby adopts Special Act 73- 79 of the 1973 session
of the general assembly, and hereby further joins the capitol
region council of governments duly established in accordance
with such statutes upon the adoption of such statutes by not less
than sixty (60) percent of all municipalities within the planning
region of which the town is a part.
Ord. of 10-18-73, § I)
Sec. 14-17. Representation.
In accordance with the provisions of the general statutes, the
first selectman of the town shall be the representative of the
town on the capitol region council of governments. In addition,
there shall be a member of the zoning and planning commission
appointed by the commission with the concurrence of the board of
selectmen to serve on the regional planning commission. The
representatives shall consult periodically with the board of selectmen
and the zoning and planning commission respectively,
and shall specifically seek their advice before any final vote on
any major planning matter or program before the regional council
or regional planning commission.
Ord. of 10- 18- 73, § II)
Sec. 14-18. Filing by town clerk.
The town clerk is directed immediately to prepare and file with
the director of the office of state planning a certified copy of this
article.
Ord. of 10- 18- 73, § III)
Secs. 14-19- 14-30. Reserved.
Cross reference—Administration, Ch. 2.
Supp. No. 1 822
L
L
PLANNING § 14-31
ARTICLE III. PERMANENT BUILDING
COMMISSION*
Sec. 14-31. Established; organization; terms of members; quorum;
meetings.
a) There is created in and for the town a commission to be known
as the permanent building commission which is authorized to be
generally responsible for the planning, construction and renovation
of public buildings under the direction of the board of selectmen.
b) The permanent building commission shall consist of six (6)
members and two (2) alternates, all of whom shall be electors of
the town.
c) Following the approval of this article by duly qualified
electors of the town, the board of selectmen shall appoint three (3)
members to the permanent building commission who shall serve
two-year terms and three (3) members to the permanent building
commission who shall serve four-year terms and biennially thereafter
the board of selectmen shall appoint three (3) members to the
permanent building commission who shall serve four-year terms
and until their successors are appointed.
d) At the first meeting the commission shall elect one (1) of its
members to be chairperson and one ( 1) of its members to be
secretary who shall keep a record of the commission' s meetings.
Meetings shall be held upon the call of the chairperson or a
majority of the members of the commission.
e) A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute
a quorum.
f) The commission may appoint subcommittees composed of
its own members to assist in the formulation of its program and
may establish its own regulations for the conduct of its business.
The permanent building commission shall conduct its business in
accordance with the provisions of section 1- 15 et seq., of the
general statutes.
Ord. of 2- 23-82( 1), § I; Ord. of 4- 24-86, § I)
Charter reference—Permanent building commission, § 706(G).
Cross references—Boards and commissions, § 2- 16 et seq.; buildings and
building regulations, Ch. 5; housing, Ch. 9; library, Ch. 10; zoning, App. A;
subdivisions, App. B.
Supp. No. 1 823
14-32 SUFFIELD CODE
Sec. 14-32. Powers and duties.
a) The permanent building commission shall make a study of
the public building needs of the town and shall formulate a
program which shall be submitted to the board of selectmen for
the alteration, renovation or expansion of existing public buildings,
structures and appurtenant facilities within the town and
for the construction of new public buildings, structures and appurtenant
facilities. Upon request of the board of selectmen the
permanent building commission shall investigate, survey and
determine the availability of sites and building locations and
make appropriate recommendations regarding the sites. Subject
to the approval of the board of selectmen, the permanent building
commission shall supervise and direct the sale, demolition or any
other disposition of buildings or structures located upon sites
determined by the town to be used for the construction of new
buildings, structures and appurtenant facilities deemed to be in
furtherance of the public building program formulated by the
permanent building commission.
b) Subject to approval of the project by the board of selectmen
and the limits of the appropriations allocated to the permanent
building commission by the board of finance the permanent building
commission shall prepare construction plans as needed for
each project; employ architects, engineers and such other professional
services as may be required; procure competitive bids as
needed for each project and recommend awards in accordance
with the commission' s best judgments; arrange for adequate supervision
of each project; and generally supervise and direct any
alterations, renovations, expansion or construction authorized by
the board of selectmen.
c) The permanent building commission shall coordinate the
functions and approvals of the various town boards, agencies or
departments which may be or may become concerned with the
alteration, expansion, sale, demolition or construction of public
buildings, structures and appurtenant facilities within the town.
Supp. No. 1 824
j
L
PLANNING § 14-51
The permanent building commission shall cooperate with state
and federal agencies and may, with the approval of the town and
the board of selectmen, make application for and enter agreements
for any building or construction benefits which may become
available from any state or federal agencies.
Ord. of 2- 23-82(1), § II; Ord. of 4-24-86, § II; Ord. of 6- 26-86, § 1)
Sec. 14-33. Reporting.
The permanent building commission shall annually on or before
the first day of July, and at such other times the town shall
prescribe, submit a written report to the board of selectmen of the
progress of the public building program, an accounting of the
expenditures made in furtherance of the building program and
define plans concerning future building needs and such report to
be included in the annual town report.
Ord. of 2- 23-82( 1), § III)
Secs. 14-34- 14-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. CONSERVATION COMMISSION*
Sec. 14-51. Established; membership; compensation.
There is hereby established for the town a conservation commission
for the development and conservation of natural resources,
including water resources, within the territorial limits of the
town. The conservation commission shall consist of five (5) regular
members and two (2) alternate members all of whom shall be
appointed as hereinafter provided. Each regular and alternate
member of the conservation commission shall be a resident elector
of the town holding no salaried municipal office. No regular
or alternate member of the conservation commission shall receive
any compensation for his services; but necessary expenses,
incurred in the performance of their official duties, shall be
reimbursed.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(4), § 1)
Charter reference—Conservation commission, § 706(A).
Cross reference—Boards and commissions, § 2- 16 et seq.
State law reference—Conservation commissions, G.S. § 7- 131a.
825
14-52 SUFFIELD CODE
Sec. 14-52. Powers.
The conservation commission shall conduct researches into the
utilization and possible utilization of land areas of the town and
may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for
similar purposes, and may advertise, prepare and distribute books,
maps, plans and pamphlets as necessary for its purposes. It shall
keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, for the
purpose of obtaining information on the proper use of such areas,
and may from time to time recommend to the zoning and planning
commission plans and programs for the development and
use of such areas, which include the acquisition of conservation
easements. It may acquire land in the name of the town for any of
its purposes as set out in this article. It shall keep records of its
meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to the
board of selectmen, which report shall be published in the annual
report of the town. It may receive gifts in the name of the town
for any of its purposes and shall administer the same for such
purposes subject to the terms of the gift. It may exchange information
with the commissioner of agriculture and natural resources.
It may request the commissioner to assign technical personnel to
it for assistance in planning its overall program and for coordinating
state and local conservation activities. It may in the name
of the town apply for state and federal grants for the advancement
of its purposes.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(4), § 2)
Sec. 14-53. Acquisition of open space land.
The conservation commission in the name of the town may,
after a vote of the town meeting duly warned and held and
approving the same, by purchase, condemnation, gift, devise,
lease or otherwise, acquire any land in any area designated as an
area of open space land on any plan of development of the town
adopted by the zoning and planning commission or any easements,
interests, or rights therein and enter into covenants and
agreements with owners of such open space land or interests
therein to maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or
otherwise conserve such open space land. As used in this section,
826 J
PLANNING § 14-58
land", " lands", and " open space land" shall be defined as set
forth in section 7- 131d of the general statutes.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(4), § 3)
Secs. 14-54, 14-55. Reserved.
Editor' s note—Section 14-54 was deleted as being superseded by the provision
of charter sections 705 and 706A. Former §§ 14-54, 14-55 pertained to appointment
of regular and alternate members, terms and vacancies of the conservation
commission and derived from Ord. of May 27, 1965(4), §§ 4, 5.
Sec. 14-56. Removal of regular or alternate members.
Any member of the conservation commission may be removed
by the board of selectmen for cause, but upon request of such
member, such removal shall become effective only after a public
hearing.
Ord. of 5-27-65(4), § 6)
Sec. 14-57. Organization.
Within thirty (30) days after the appointment of the members of
the conservation commission they shall meet, organize and from
among the regular members of the commission elect a chairman,
a vice-chairman and a clerk. Thereafter annually during the month
in which the original chairman, vice-chairman, and clerk were
elected as provided herein, the conservation commission shall
elect from among its regular members a chairman, a vicechairman,
and a clerk. Alternate members of the conservation
commission shall not participate in any election of officers of the
conservation commission. In all other matters, when a regular
member of the conservation commission is unable to act because
of absence, illness, or disqualification, he shall notify the chairman
who shall forthwith designate one ( 1) of the alternate members to
serve in the place of such regular member, and such alternate
member shall thereupon exercise all the powers and duties of
such regular member until the absence, illness, or disqualification
of the regular member shall have been terminated.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(4), § 7)
Sec. 14-58. Meetings; assistants; consultants; quorum.
The conservation commission shall fix the time and the place of
its regular meetings, and may hold such special meetings as may
Supp. No. 5 827
14-58 SUFFIELD CODE
from time to time be required. The conservation commission shall
prepare an annual budget and may request an annual appropriation
as provided by law. The conservation commission may,
within the limits of appropriations made for the purpose by the
town, employ clerical and technical assistance or consultants. The
presence of three (3) regular members or, in the absence of proper
designation of an alternate or alternates as provided by the terms
of this article, the presence of four (4) regular and alternate members
shall constitute a quorum. No resolution or vote except a
vote to adjourn or to fix the time and place of its next meeting
shall be adopted by less than three (3) affirmative votes.
Ord. of 5- 27-65(4), § 8)
Sec. 14-59. Designation as agent of town.
The conservation commission is hereby designated as the agency
of the town to implement the provisions of section 7(c) of Public
Act No. 155 of the 1972 general assembly (commonly known as
An act concerning inland wetlands and water courses"), as the
same may be amended from time to time. The conservation commission
is hereby further designated as the agent of the town to
effectuate the provisions of section 7(b) of the act, as the same
may be amended from time to time; provided however, that no
such acquisition of wetlands or water courses or any interest
therein shall be consummated until the same shall have been
approved by a vote of a town meeting, duly warned and held for
such purpose.
Ord. of 10- 2- 72)
Secs. 14-60- 14-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION*
Sec. 14- 76. Historic district—Established.
In order to promote the educational, cultural, economic and
general welfare of the town through the preservation and protec-
Charter reference—Historic district commission, § 706(H).
Cross reference—Boards and commissions, § 2-16 et seq.
Supp. No. 5 828
J
PLANNING § 14- 78
tion of buildings and places of historic interest by the maintenance
of such as landmarks in the history of the town, of the state
and of the nation, and through the development of appropriate
settings for such buildings and places, an historic district within
the town as more particularly described in section 14- 77 is hereby
established pursuant to the provisions of sections 7- 147a to 7- 147k
inclusive of the general statutes.
Ord. of 5- 27-63, § 1)
Sec. 14-77. Same—Boundaries.
The boundaries of the historic district as set forth on a map
entitled " Proposed Historic District, Suffield, Connecticut" prepared
by Close, Jensen & Miller, Civil Engineers, and dated January,
1963, are hereby established and approved as the bound,
aries of such historic district. The map is made a part of this
article by reference.
Ord. of 5- 27-63, § 2)
Sec. 14-78. Commission established; composition; compensation
of members.
The historic district commission, hereinafter referred to as the
commission," is hereby established. The commission shall consist
of five ( 5) regular members who shall be appointed as provided
in section 14-79 and two (2) alternate members who shall be
appointed as provided in section 14-80. Each regular and alternate
member of the commission shall be a resident elector of the
town holding no salaried municipal office. Not less than three (3)
of the five (5) regular members of the historic district commission
shall be residents within the historic district and not less than
one ( 1) of the two (2) alternate members shall be a resident of the
historic district. The historic district commission shall possess the
powers and perform the duties and functions of an historic district
commission as provided in the general statutes and as more particularly
set forth in this article. No regular or alternate member
of the historic district commission shall receive any compensation
for his service.
Ord. of 5- 27-63, § 3)
Supp. No. 5 829
14- 79 SUFFIELD CODE
Secs. 14- 79, 14-80. Reserved.
Editor's note—The provisions of §§ 14- 79 and 14-80 have been deleted as being
superseded by the provisions of charter sections 705 and 706H. Former §§ 14- 79
and 14-80 pertained to appointment of regular and alternate members of the
historic district commission and derived from an ordinance of May 27, 1963, §§ 4,
5.
Sec. 14-81. Organization.
Within thirty (30) days after the appointment of the members of
the historic district commission they shall meet, organize and,
from among the regular members of the historic district commission,
elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and a clerk. Thereafter
annually during the month of September the historic district commission
shall elect from among its regular members a chairman,
a vice-chairman and a clerk. Alternate members of the historic
district commission shall not participate in any election of officers
of the historic district commission. In all other matters, when a
regular member of the historic district commissionis unable to
act because of absence, illness or disqualification, he shall notify
the chairman who shall forthwith designate one ( 1) of the alternate
members to serve in the place of such regular member and
such alternate member shall thereupon exercise all the powers
and duties of such regular member until the absehce, illness or
disqualification of the regular member shall have been terminated.
Ord. of 5- 27-63, § 6)
Sec. 14-82. Powers; quorum.
The historic district commission shall exercise the powers and
responsibilities imposed upon an historic district commission by
the provisions of the general statutes. It shall fix the time and
place of its regular meetings and may hold such special meetings
as may from time to time be required. The historic district commission
shall keep a record of its proceedings, deliberations and
actions and shall annually report to the town respecting its work.
The historic district commission shall adopt rules of procedure
not inconsistent with the provisions of the general statutes and
may, within the limit of appropriations made for the purpose by
the town, employ clerical and technical assistance or consultants.
Supp. No. 5 830
J
J
J
1.
PLANNING § 14-83
The presence of four (4) regular members or, in the case of proper
designation of an alternate or alternates as provided by the terms
of this article, the presence of four (4) regular and alternate members
shall constitute a quorum. No resolution or vote except a
vote to adjourn or to fix the time and place of its next meeting
shall be adopted by less than three (3) affirmative votes.
Ord. of 5- 27-63, § 7)
Sec. 14. 83. Certificate of appropriateness generally.
No building or structure shall be erected, altered, restored,
moved or demolished within the Suffield historic district until
after an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior
architectural features has been submitted to the historic
district commission and approved by the historic district commission.
" Exterior architectural features" shall include such portion
of the exterior of a structure as is open to view from a public
street, way or place. The style, material, size and location of
Supp. No. 5 831
PLANNING § 14-85
outdoor advertising signs and bill posters within the historic
district shall also be under the control of the historic district
commission. The provisions of this section shall not be construed
to extend to the color of paint used on the exterior of any building
or structure.
Ord. of 5- 27-63, § 8; Ord. of 1- 7- 64, § 1)
Sec. 14-84. Application for certificate of appropriateness;
hearing; approval.
a) The historic district commission shall hold a public hearing
upon each application for a certificate of appropriateness. Notice
of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by publication
in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in a newspaper
having a substantial circulation in the town at least seven (7)
days before such hearing. Within not more than sixty (60) days
after the filing of an application as required by section 14-83 the
historic district commission shall pass upon such application and
shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant. Evidence
of approval, as required by section 14-83 shall be by certificate of
appropriateness issued by the historic district commission.
b) Failure of the historic district commission to act within
such sixty (60) days shall constitute approval and no other evidence
of approval shall be needed. The historic district commission
shall keep a record of all applications for certificates of
appropriateness and its actions with respect to each. The historic
district commission' s records and its written decision rendered on
each such application shall specify the grounds for approval or
denial.
c) In its deliberations the historic district commission shall
not consider interior arrangement or use and shall take no action
except for the purpose of preventing the erection, reconstruction,
restoration, alteration or razing of buildings in the historic district
obviously incongruous with the historic aspects of the district.
Ord. of 5- 27-63, § 9)
Sec. 14-85. Considerations in determining appropriateness.
If the historic district commission determines that the proposed
erection, construction, restoration, alteration or razing will be
appropriate, it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness. In
833
14-85 SUFFIELD CODE
passing upon appropriateness the historic district commission
shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the
historical and architectural value and significance, architectural
style, general design, arrangement, texture and material of the
architectural features involved and the relationship thereof to
the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other
structures in the immediate neighborhood. A certificate of appropriateness
may be refused for any building or structure, the
erection, reconstruction, restoration, alteration or razing of which,
in the opinion of the historic district commission, would be detrimental
to the interest of the historic district.
Ord. of 5- 27-63, § 10)
Sec. 14-86. When variations permissible.
Where, by reason of topographical conditions, district borderline
situations, immediately adjoining existing developments or
because of other unusual circumstances, the strict application of
the provisions of this article would result in exceptional practical
difficulty or undue hardship upon the owner of any specific property,
the historic district commission in passing upon applications
shall have power to vary or modify strict adherence to the provisions
of this article or to interpret the meaning of this article so as to relieve
such difficulty or hardship; provided such variance, modification,
or interpretation shall remain in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of the article so that the general character of the
district shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting
variations, the historic district commission may impose such
reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in
its judgment, better fulfill the purposes of this article.
Ord. of 5-27-63, § 11)
Sec. 14-87. Action by commission to prevent illegal acts;
penalties.
If any action or ruling taken by the historic district commission
pursuant to the provisions of sections 7- 147a to 7- 147k,
inclusive, of the general statutes or of this article has been violated,
the commission may, in addition to other remedies, institute
an action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, razing, maintenance or
use or to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to prevent
834
L
PLANNING § 14-88
the occupancy of such building, structure or land, or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
Regulations and orders of the historic district commission
issued pursuant to such sections of the general statutes or of this
article, shall be enforced by the building inspector of the town,
who is hereby authorized to inspect and examine any building,
structure, place or premises and to require in writing the remedying
of any condition found to exist therein or thereon in violation
of any provision of the regulations or orders made under the
authority of such sections of the general statutes or of this article.
The owner or agent of any building or premises where such a
violation has been committed or exists, or where the lessee or
tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation
has been committed or exists, or the owner, agent, lessee or
tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such
violation has been committed or exists, or the agent, architect,
builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part
in or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building
or premises in which any such violation exists, shall be fined not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
100.00) for each day that such violation continues; but, if the
offense is willful, the person convicted thereof shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($ 100.00) nor more than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250. 00) for each day that such violation continues,
and the circuit court wherein such violation continues or
exists shall have jurisdiction of all such offenses, subject to appeal
as in other cases. Each day that a violation continues to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Ord. of 5-27-63, § 12)
Sec. 14-88. Appeals.
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any
decision of the historic district commission or of any officer thereof
may, within fifteen ( 15) days from the date when such decision
was rendered, take an appeal to the Court of Common Pleas for
Hartford County, which appeal shall be made returnable to such
court in the same manner as that prescribed for civil actions
brought to such court. Notice of such appeal shall be given by
leaving a true and attested copy thereof in the hands of or at the
835
14-88 SUFFIELD CODE
usual place of abode of the chairman or clerk of the historic
district commission within twelve (12) days before the return day
to which such appeal has been taken. Procedure upon such appeal
shall be the same as that defined in section 8- 8 of the
general statutes.
Ord. of 5- 27-63, § 13)
Sec. 14-89. Exempted acts.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior feature in the historic
district which does not involve a change of design thereof; nor to
prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition
of any such feature which the building inspector certifies is required
by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous
condition; nor to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration
or demolition of any such feature under a permit issued by
the building inspector prior to the effective date of establishment
of the district.
Ord. of 5- 27- 63, § 14; Ord. of 1- 7- 64, § 2)
Secs. 14-90- 14-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
COMMISSION*
Sec. 14-101. Purpose.
In order to encourage the establishment and development of
economic enterprises in the town to service, foster and promote
the interests of present economic enterprises in the town and to
encourage the economic development of the community through
the maintenance of a proper balance among such growth elements
as residential, agricultural, commercial, industrial and
municipal in the town, the provisions of Public Act No. 211
passed by the 1955 general assembly are hereby accepted.
Ord. of 3- 2- 83, § 1)
Charter reference—Economic development commission, § 706(J).
Cross reference—Boards and commissions, § 2- 16 et seq.
State law reference—Municipal authority to establish, G. S. § 7- 136.
836
111101
PLANNING § 14- 106
Sec. 14-102. Established.
There is hereby established for the town an economic development
commission for the promotion and evolvement of the business
and industrial resources of the town.
Ord. of 3-2-83, § 2)
L
Sec. 14-103. Composition; terms.
The economic development commission shall consist of five (5)
members, not more than three ( 3) of whom shall belong to the
same political party who shall be appointed by the board of
selectmen. Two ( 2) members shall be appointed to serve for a
period of two (2) years, and three (3) members shall be appointed
to serve for a period of four (4) years. Thereafter, members shall
be appointed to serve for a period of four (4) years.
Ord. of 3- 2- 83, § 3)
Sec. 14-104. Organization; meetings.
The economic development commission shall elect annually a
chairperson and a secretary from among its members. All meetings
of the economic development commission shall be held upon
the call of the chairperson or in his absence the secretary thereof
and at such times and places as the chairperson shall determine
in accordance with applicable state law.
Ord. of 3- 2- 83, § 4)
Sec. 14-105. Vacancies.
Any vacancy in the membership of the economic development
commission shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term
by the board of selectmen.
Ord. of 3- 2-83, § 5)
Charter reference—Vacancies in appointed boards and commissions, § 703.
Sec. 14-106. Removal of members.
Any member of the economic development commission may be
removed by the board of selectmen for cause, but upon request of
such a member, such removal shall become effective only after a
public hearing.
Ord. of 3- 2- 83, § 6)
837
14-107 SUFFIELD CODE
Sec. 14-107. Compensation.
The members of the economic development commission shall
receive no compensation for their services as such, but shall be
reimbursed for their necessary expenses incurred in the performance
of their official duties.
Ord. of 3- 2- 83, § 7)
Sec. 14-108. Duties.
The economic development commission shall conduct researches
into economic opportunities in the town, shall seek to coordinate
activities of official bodies organized for such purposes, may advertise
and may prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts
and pamphlets which in its judgment will further its official
purposes.
Ord. of 3- 2- 83, § 8)
Sec. 14-109. Annual budget.
The economic development commission shall prepare an annual
budget and may request an annual appropriation which
shall be submitted to the board of finance for approval as provided
by law.
Ord. of 3- 2- 83, § 9)
Sec. 14-110. Annual report.
The economic development commission shall make an annual
report to the board of selectmen prior to August thirty-one of
each year and said report shall be published in the annual report
of the town.
Ord. of 3- 2- 83, § 10)
Secs. 14-111- 14-125. Reserved.
838
1
PLANNING § 14- 127
ARTICLE VII. ADVISORY COMMISSION ON CAPITAL
EXPENDITURES*
Sec. 14- 126. Established; composition; compensation.
There is hereby established for the town an advisory commission
on capital expenditures. The purpose of this commission is to
ascertain the long-range capital improvements the town is expected
to require and to prepare and present annually to the
board of finance its projections and recommendations thereon.
The advisory commission on capital expenditures shall consist of
five (5) members and two (2) alternate members, all of whom shall
be appointed as hereinafter provided. Each regular and alternate
member of the advisory commission on capital expenditures shall
be a resident elector of the town holding no salaried municipal
office. No regular or alternate member of the advisory commission
on capital expenditures shall receive any compensation for
his services; but necessary expenses, incurred in the performance
of his official duties, shall be reimbursed. No more than three (3)
regular members shall belong to the same political party, and an
alternate shall not belong to the same political party as the other
alternate.
Ord. of 5- 22- 74, § I)
Sec. 14. 127. Powers; duties.
The advisory commission on capital expenditures shall conduct
such studies as it may deem advisable for the purpose of ascertaining
the capital improvement needs and priorities of the town
for the ensuing five (5) fiscal years, and for such further period in
the future as the advisory commission on capital expenditures
may deem appropriate, and the manner in which such improvements
shall be financed. On or before October one of each year,
the advisory commission on capital expenditures shall request of
each officer or agency of the town supported in whole or in part by
funds appropriated in the town budget its projection of the capital
improvements it will require for the ensuing fiscal year and at
least for the four (4) fiscal years thereafter, in such form as may
Charter reference—Advisory commission for capital expenditures, § 706(C).
Cross reference—Boards and commissions, § 2-16 et seq.
Supp. No. 5 839
14- 127 SLTFFIELD CODE
be prescribed by the advisory commission on capital expenditures.
On or before December one of each year, each such officer
or agency shall supply such projection to the advisory commission
on capital expenditures as aforesaid. On or before February one of
each year, the advisory commission on capital expenditures shall
hold a public hearing, notice of the date, time and place of which
shall be published in a newspaper having circulation in the town
not later than seven (7) nor more than fourteen (14) days prior to
such hearing, to ascertain the views of the residents and taxi
payers of the town on capital improvements for the ensuing fiscal
years. On or before March one of each year, the advisory commission
on capital expenditures shall present to the board of finance
its recommendations regarding capital improvements to be undertaken
by the town in the ensuing fiscal year and at least the
four ( 4) fiscal year thereafter. Such recommendations shall include,
but not be limited to, a designation of the location and
description, estimated costs, suggested methods of financing, approximate
time of starting, and approximate time of completion
of each such capital improvement, and an indication of priorities
among the several capital improvements. The board of finance
shall take such recommendations into consideration in preparing
its proposed annual town budget.
Ord. of 5- 22- 74, § II; Ord. of 8-28-75( 1))
Secs. 14- 128, 14-129. Reserved.
Editor' s note—The provisions of §§ 14- 128 and 14-129 were deleted as being
superseded by the provisions of charter sections 705 and 706C. Former §§ 14-128
and 14- 129 pertained to appointment of regular and alternate members of the
advisory commission on capital expenditures and derived from Ord. of May 22,
1974, §§ III, IV.
Sec. 14- 130. Removal of regular or alternate members.
Any member or alternate of the advisory commission on capital
expenditures may be removed by the board of selectmen for cause,
but upon request of such member, such removal shall become
effective only after a public hearing.
Ord. of 5- 22- 74, § V)
Sec. 14- 131. Organization.
a) Within thirty (30) days after the appointment of the members
of the advisory commission on capital expenditures they shall
Supp. No. 5 840 J
PLANNING § 14. 132
meet, organize, and from among the regular members of the advisory
commission on capital expenditures elect a chairman, a
vice-chairman and a clerk. Thereafter annually during the month
in which the original chairman, vice-chairman and clerk were
elected as provided herein, the advisory commission on capital
expenditures shall elect from among its regular members a
chairman, a vice-chairman and a clerk.
b) Alternate members of the advisory commission on capital
expenditures shall not participate in any election of officers of the
advisory commission on capital expenditures. In all other matters,
when a regular member of the advisory commission on capital
expenditures is unable to act because of absence, illness, or
disqualification, he shall notify the chairman, who shall forthwith
designate one ( 1) of the alternate members to serve in the
place of such regular member, and such alternate member shall
thereupon exercise all the powers and duties of such regular
member until the absence, illness or disqualification of the regular
member shall have been terminated.
Ord. of 5- 22-74, § VI)
Sec. 14. 132. Meetings; consultants; quorum.
The advisory commission on capital expenditures shall fix the
time and place of its regular meetings, and may hold such special
meetings as may from time to time be required. The advisory
commission on capital expenditures shall prepare an annual
budget and may request an annual appropriation as provided by
law. The commission may, within the limits of appropriations
made for the purpose by the town, employ clerical and technical
assistance or consultants. The presence of three (3) regular members,
or in the absence of proper designation of an alternate or
alternates as provided by the terms of this article, the presence of
a total of four (4) regular and alternate members, shall constitute
a quorum. No resolution or vote except a vote to adjourn or to fix
the time and place of its next meeting shall be adopted by less
than three (3) affirmative votes.
Ord. of 5-22- 74, § VII)
Supp. No. 5 841
1.
L
PLANNING § 14- 152
Sec. 14-133. Supersession.
The advisory commission on capital expenditures shall supersede
any other board, commission or agency heretofore created by
ordinance or resolution for the purposes set forth as the purposes
of the advisory commission on capital expenditures. Specifically,
but without in any way limiting the foregoing advisory commission
on capital expenditures shall supersede the capital improvement
advisory committee created in 1958, which committee is
hereby abolished.
Ord. of 5- 22-74, § VIII)
Secs. 14-134- 14-150. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. CAPITAL REGION
PLANNING AGENCY
Sec. 14-151. Adoption of state law.
The town hereby adopts sections 8- 31a to 8-37a inclusive of the
general statutes, concerning the creation of a regional planning
agency as defined in section 32-7 of the general statutes and
hereby joins the capitol region planning agency.
Ord. of 10-6-69, § I)
Sec. 14-152. Appointments; membership; terms; vacancy;
removal.
The board of selectmen shall appoint one ( 1) resident elector to
serve as a representative from the town to the capitol region
planning agency and the zoning and planning commission shall
appoint one ( 1) resident elector to serve as a representative from
the town to the capitol region planning agency. Each such representative
shall serve for a term of two (2) years commencing on
January 1 of the year in which he is appointed and shall have
qualified. The board of selectmen or the zoning and planning
commission, as the case may be, may fill, for the unexpired term,
any vacancy which may occur with respect to an appointment
made by it. Any representative of the town to the capitol region
planning agency who shall be absent, without cause, from three
Supp. No. 1 843
14- 152 SUFFIELD CODE
3) consecutive legal meetings of the agency may be removed by
the authority which appointed him to so serve.
Ord. of 10-6-69, § II)
Secs. 14-153- 14-165. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. LANDFILL MANAGEMENT COMMISSION*
Sec. 14-166. Creation of commission.
There is hereby created the Suffield Landfill Management Commission
consisting of five (5) members and two (2) alternates.
Ord. No. 88-03, § 1, 3- 15-88)
Sec. 14-167. Term of office.
Three (3) members shall be appointed for four (4) years and two
2) members shall be appointed for two-year terms commencing
on the effective date of this article. Thereafter, all members shall
be appointed for four-year terms. Alternates shall be appointed
for four-year terms. Appointments shall be made by the board of
selectmen and terms shall be extended until a successor is appointed.
Ord. No. 88-03, § 2, 3- 15-88)
Sec. 14-168. Officers.
The commission members shall adopt bylaws establishing the
officers required and the manner and method of holding meetings
in conformity with the Connecticut Freedom of Information Act.
Ord. No. 88-03, § 3, 3- 15- 88)
Sec. 14-169. Duties.
The commission shall have the following responsibilities and
duties:
1) Oversee the collection, transportation, and disposal of all
solid waste and hazardous waste as mandated by Connecticut
Statutes generated within the Town of Suffield.
Editor's note—Ordinance No. 88-03, adopted March 15, 1988, was not specifically
amendatory of the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1- 6 as Art. IX, §§ 14- 166
14- 171, was at the discretion of the editor.
Supp. No. 1
844
J
L
PLANNING § 14- 171
2) Development of plans that consider optimum recycling and
the ultimate disposals of solid waste in future years.
3) Develop an aggressive communications and educational
program to familiarize every townsperson including adult
residents, school children, business people, and government
officials of the need for recycling and proper solid and
hazardous waste storage, handling, transportation, and disposal
procedures.
4) Work with the landfill staff to develop operating and capital
expenditures.
5) Assist the selectmen and landfill staff to establish and/ or
maintain on-going liaison with the Department of Environmental
Protection, Connecticut Resource Recovery Authority,
Connecticut Conference of Municipalities, Capitol
Region Council of Governments, and to obtain financial
assistance for our programs.
6) Assist the selectmen and landfill staff to explore the pros
and cons of participating in the Mid -Connecticut Energy
Recovery Project (trash to energy).
7) Assist the landfill staff to find markets for recyclable
materials.
8) Recommend licensing and usage fee schedules to the selectmen
annually.
Ord. No. 88-03, § 4, 3- 15-88)
Sec. 14-170. Regulations.
In order to carry out the foregoing duties the commission shall
have the power to adopt regulations which shall be consistent
with all federal and state laws and town code and charter provisions.
Ord. No. 88-03, § 5, 3- 15-88)
Sec. 14-171. Budget.
To assist it in carrying out its responsibilities, the commission
may create and submit to the board of selectmen a budget for
inclusion in the annual town budget.
Ord. No. 88-03, § 6, 3- 15-88)
Supp. No. 1 845
14- 172 SUFFIELD CODE
Secs. 14- 172- 14-180. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. FLOOD AND EROSION
CONTROL BOARD*
Sec. 14-181. Establishment of board.
There is hereby established the flood and erosion control board
of the Town of Suffield pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut
General Statutes, section 25-84.
Ord. No. 88-06, § 1, 12- 29-88)
Sec. 14-182. Membership.
The board shall consist of seven ( 7) regular members and two
2) alternate members who shall be the members of the conservation
commission.
Ord. No. 88-06, § 2, 12-29-88)
Cross reference—Conservation commission, § 14-51 et seq.
Sec. 14-183. Appointment of regular members; terms; vacancies.
Regular members shall be appointed by the board of selectmen
to serve four-year staggered terms. Initial appointment shall be
made of the conservation commission members for the balance of
their existing terms in accordance with Suffield Code section
14-54. Thereafter, all subsequent appointments shall be made for
four-year terms.
Ord. No. 88-06, § 3, 12-29-88)
Sec. 14-184. Appointment of alternate members.
The board of selectmen shall appoint two ( 2) alternate members
for a term of four (4) years. Initial appointments shall be
Editor' s note—Ordinance No. 88-06, adopted Dec. 29, 1988, was not specifically
amendatory of the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1- 10 as Art. X, §§ 14-181- 14-190,
was at the discretion of the editor.
Cross references—Flood damage prevention regulation, App. A, § 5.40; floodplain
use, Connecticut River flood plain, App. A, § 5. 72. 1; soil erosion and sediment
control plan, App. A, §§ 5. 80- 5. 88; land subject to flooding not to be
subdivided for residential purposes, App. B, § 304a.
Supp. No. 1
846 J
PLANNING § 14- 187
made of the conservation commission alternate members for the
balance of their existing terms in accordance with Suffield Code
section 14-54. Thereafter, all subsequent appointments shall be
made for four-year terms.
Ord. No. 88-06, § 4, 12-29-88)
Sec. 14-185. Declination to serve.
Should any regular or alternate member of the conservation
commission decline to serve on the flood and erosion control
board, the board of selectmen may appoint another elector of the
town.
Ord. No. 88-06, § 5, 12-29-88)
Sec. 14-186. Organization.
Within thirty (30) days after the appointment of the members
of the flood and erosion control board, they shall meet, organize,
and from among the regular members of the board elect a chairman,
a vice-chairman and a clerk. Thereafter, annually during
the month in which the original chairman, vice-chairman, and
clerk were elected as provided herein, the board shall elect from
among its regular members a chairman, a vice-chairman, and a
clerk. Alternate members of the board shall not participate in
any election of officers of the flood and erosion control board. In
all other matters, when a regular member of the board is unable
to act because of absence, illness, or disqualification, he shall
notify the chairman who shall forthwith designate one ( 1) of the
alternate members to serve in the place of such regular member,
and such alternate member shall thereupon exercise all the powers
and duties of such regular member until the absence, illness,
or disqualification of the regular member shall have been terminated.
Alternate members shall serve in rotation as near as
possible.
Ord. No. 88-06, § 6, 12-29-88)
Sec. 14-187. Meetings; assistants; consultants; quorum.
The flood and erosion control board shall fix the time and the
place of its regular meetings, and may hold such special meetings
as may from time to time be required. The board shall prepare
an annual budget and may request an annual appropriation as
Supp. No. 1 847
14- 187 SUFFIELD CODE
provided by law. The board may, within the limits of appropriations
made for the purpose by the town, employ clerical and
technical assistants or consultants. The presence of four (4) regular
members or, in the absence of proper designation of an alternate
or alternates as provided by the terms of this article, the
presence of five (5) regular and alternate members shall constitute
a quorum. No resolution or vote except a vote to adjourn or
to fix the time and place of its next meeting shall be adopted by
less than four (4) affirmative votes.
Ord. No. 88-06, § 7, 12- 29-88)
Sec. 14-188. Removal of regular or alternate members.
Any member of the board may be removed by the board of
selectmen for cause, but upon request of such member, such
removal shall become effective only after a public hearing.
Ord. No. 88-06, § 8, 12-29-88)
Sec. 14-189. Powers.
The flood and erosion control board shall have all the powers
and duties provided by section 25-84 through section 25-94 of the
Connecticut General Statutes as they may be amended together
with such other powers as may now or hereinafter be conferred
on municipal flood and erosion control boards by local, state, or
federal law.
Ord. No. 88-06, § 9, 12- 29-88)
Sec. 14-190. Regulations.
In order to carry out its duties, the flood and erosion control
board is empowered to adopt regulations which shall be consistent
with all federal and state law, town code, and charter provisions.
Ord. No. 88-06, § 10, 12-29-88)
Supp. No. 1
848 The next page is 893]
Chapter 15
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER
PUBLIC PLACES*
Art. I. In General, §§ 15-1- 15- 15
Art. II. Excavations, §§ 15- 16- 15-30
Art. III. Naming of Private Roads, §§ 15-31- 15-42
ARTICLE L IN GENERAL
Sec. 15- 1. Owners to keep sidewalks in good repair.
The owner of any premises in the town in front of whose premises
any sidewalk is in need of repair shall forthwith repair all
defects therein in any way endangering or incommoding public
travel upon the same and shall maintain such sidewalk in a safe
condition and convenient for the use of the public and shall
remove therefrom without delay any and all obstructions that
may be placed or found thereon.
Ord. of 2- 18-58, § 1)
Sec. 15-2. Removal of snow or ice from sidewalks.
a) Generally. The owner, tenant or occupant of any premises,
in the town adjoining and fronting on any such sidewalk shall,
within six (6) hours of daylight immediately following the cessa-
Cross references—Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; cemeteries, Ch.
6; obstruction of streets and sidewalks, § 12- 2; parks and recreation, Ch. 13;
planning, Ch. 14; utilities, Ch. 18; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B.
State law references—Power of town to control the excavation of the highways
and streets, G. S. § 7- 148( 0(6)(CXiii); to lay out, construct, etc., streets,
sidewalks, etc., G. S. § 7. 148(cX6XC)(i); to provide for lighting the streets, etc., G. S.
7- 148(cX4XF); to provide for the planting, etc., of shade and ornamental trees on
the streets and public grounds, G. S. § 7- 148(cX6)( AXv); to keep open, etc., the
streets, sidewalks, etc., G. S. § 7- 148(cX6)(CXii); to require owners or occupants of
land adjacent to any sidewalk to remove snow, etc., G. S. § 7- 148(cX6NCNv); to
regulate and prohibit the excavation, etc., of sidewalks, etc., G. S. § 7- 148(cX0CNiv);
to prohibit and regulate the discharge of drains from roofs of buildings over or
upon the sidewalks, streets, etc., G. S. § 7- 148(cX6)(Blliv); to keep the streets,
sidewalks and public places free from undue noises and nuisances, etc., G. S. §
7- 148(cX7XFXi); highways and bridges, G. S. § 13a- 1 et seq.
Supp. No. 1 893
15- 2 SUFFIELD CODE
tion of any storm of snow, ice or sleet or the accumulation of ice
or snow thereon, cause the same to be removed from such sidewalk
and if the same cannot be wholly removed, shall sprinkle
thereon sufficient sand or other proper substance so that such
sidewalk shall be made safe for travel.
b) Repair by town; lien authorized. Upon the default or neglect
of the owner, tenant or occupant of such adjoining premises to
comply with the provisions of this section the selectmen may
repair such walk or remove any snow or ice therefrom and the
expense of such repair or removal shall be a lien upon the premises
adjoining such walk, provided the selectmen shall cause a
certificate of lien to be recorded in the town clerk' s office within
sixty (60) days of the completion of such construction, repair or
removal.
c) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section shall be fined in accordance with section 1- 11.
Ord. of 2- 18- 58, §§ 2- 4)
Cross reference—Snowstorms, § 17- 51 et seq.
Secs. 15-3- 15-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. EXCAVATIONS*
Sec. 15- 16. Permit required; bond; penalty.
a) No person shall excavate within or under, or place any
obstruction or substruction within, under, upon or over, or interfere
with construction, reconstruction or maintenance of or drainage
from, any street or highway previously accepted by the town
without the written permission of the board of selectmen, and the
board may fill in or close any such excavation or remove or alter
any such obstruction or substruction, and the expense incurred
by the board in such filling or removing or altering shall be paid
by the person making such excavation or placing such obstruction
or substruction, provided any excavation, obstruction or substruction
existing within, under or over any such accepted street
Cross references—Planning, Ch. 14; utilities, Ch. 18; zoning, App. A; subdivisions,
App. B.
Supp. No. 1 894
STREETS, SIDEWALKS, PUBLIC PLACES § 15- 31
or highway on May 1, 1973, or, at the discretion of the board of
selectmen any excavation, obstruction or substruction made after
such date without a permit or in violation of the provisions of a
permit, shall be removed or altered by the person making or
maintaining the same within thirty (30) days from the date when
the board of selectmen sends by registered or certified mail,
postage prepaid, a notice to such person ordering such removal or
alteration.
b) Every person making application for such permission shall
file with the board of selectmen a satisfactory bond of a surety
company authorized to transact such business in the state and
having an agent within the limits of the county, in a form and in
an amount satisfactory to the board of selectmen. The bond shall
be conditioned upon the applicant substantially and properly
performing all work to be done under the permits issued to him
or it in a workmanlike manner and upon his using proper materials;
and upon the applicant' s restoring that portion of any street
or public place which he has excavated and maintaining the
same for a period of one ( 1) year; and upon the applicant' s reimbursing
the town for any expense for repairs to such street or
public place made necessary by reason of the excavation.
c) Any person violating any provision of this article shall be
fined in accordance with section 1- 11.
Ord. of 4- 10-73)
Secs. 15-17- 15-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. NAMING OF PRIVATE ROADS*
Sec. 15-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.]
Private road ( street): Any road, street, drive, right-of-way for
motor vehicles which is not accepted as a town street by the town
Editor's note—Ordinance No. 88-05, adopted Sept. 20, 1988, was not specifically
amendatory of the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1- 12 as Art. III, §§ 15-31- 15-42,
was at the editor' s discretion.
Cross reference—Proposed street names in subdivisions, App. B, § 910.
Supp. No. 1 895
15-31 SUFFIELD CODE
but which serves more than one property owner and which is the
access by which police, fire and other public services are delivered
to said property owners.
Property owner: The legal title holder of any lot, parcel of land,
building, condominium unit, or other structure to which the delivery
of public services may be required.
Street sign: The sign approved by the board of selectmen for
installation on private roads or streets.
Ord. No. 88-05, § 1, 9- 20-88)
Sec. 15-32. Authority.
The board of selectmen is hereby authorized to name all private
roads in the Town of Suffield except such roads as are being
designed as future public streets under the jurisdiction of the
Suffield Zoning and Planning Commission.
Ord. No. 88-05, § 2, 9- 20-8)
Sec. 15-33. Inventory.
The board of selectmen shall conduct a study and inventory of
the names of all private and public roads in the town and maintain
a list of all names so as to avoid duplication and confusion
with other private or public roads.
Ord. No. 88-05, § 3, 9- 20-88)
Sec. 15-34. Petition by property owner.
The owner(s) of any private road or any person owning property
along any private road may petition the board of selectmen
to name said private road. Such petition shall contain the names
and addresses of all property owners served by said road and may
contain a proposed name.
Ord. No. 88-05, § 4, 9-20-88)
Sec. 15-35. Notice by publication.
Upon receipt of any such petition, the board of selectmen shall
conduct a public hearing on said petition giving notice by publication
in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the
town and may also provide additional notice to the property
Supp. No. 1
896
L
L
STREETS, SIDEWALKS, PUBLIC PLACES § 15-39
owners identified on the petition or otherwise known to the selectmen
as owning property along said road. No public hearing
may be conducted sooner than ten ( 10) days after publication of
notice.
Ord. No. 88-05, § 5, 9-20-88)
Sec. 15-36. Decision by board of selectmen.
Within a reasonable time after said public hearing, the board
of selectmen shall name said private road and designate the
location for the installation of one ( 1) or more street signs.
Ord. No. 8- 05, § 6, 9- 20-88)
Sec. 15-37. Location of street sign.
Street signs shall be located by the board of selectmen within
the public right-of-way where the private road intersects the
public road. Where a private road intersects another private
road, the new sign shall be located as near as possible to the
location of any previously existing sign consistent with public
health and safety.
Ord. No. 88-05, § 7, 9- 20-88)
Sec. 15-38. Design, installation of street signs.
In order to ensure uniformity and clarity in the delivery of
public services, the board of selectmen shall supply all private
street signs designed in the same manner as public street signs,
except that the word " private" in lower case letters in parentheses
shall appear after the name as follows, "( private)."
Said signs shall be supplied and installed by the town as a cost
of government.
Ord. No. 88-05, § 8, 9- 20-88)
Sec. 15-39. Direct action by selectmen.
Absent a petition under section 15-35 herein, where the board
of selectmen determines that the name of an existing private
road or the lack of name or the signage is or is likely to impair the
delivery of public services, the board of selectmen may initiate a
naming or renaming of the road by calling a public hearing on
the naming of said road and providing notice by publication
Supp. No. 1 897
15-39 SUFFIELD CODE
aforesaid at least ten ( 10) days before the date of the public
hearing. As additional notice, not as a legal requirement but as a
courtesy, the selectmen may send written notice to property owners
along said road and who are served by said road.
Ord. No. 88-05, § 9, 9-20-88)
Sec. 15-40. House numbers.
After a street has been so named or renamed, the board of
selectmen or its designee may assign house numbers to the properties,
residential or commercial, along said private road and so
notify the property owners affected.
Ord. No. 88-05, § 10, 9-20-88)
Sec. 15-41. Regulations.
In order to carry out the foregoing duties the board of selectmen
shall have the power to adopt regulations which shall be
consistent with all federal and state laws and town code and
charter provisions.
Ord. No. 88-05, § 11, 9- 20-88)
Sec. 15-42. Budget.
To assist it in carrying out its responsibilities under this article,
the board of selectmen may create and submit a budget
request for inclusion in the annual town budget.
Ord. No. 88-05, § 12, 9-20-88)
Supp. No. 1
898
The next page is 9451 J
Chapter 16
TAXATION*
Art. I. In General, §§ 16-1- 16-20
Art. II. Assessor, §§ 16-21- 16-24
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 16-1. Abatement and deferment of taxes on certain
property.
The town hereby adopts in its entirety the provisions of Special
Act No. 79- 1, adopted by the October, 1979 session of the general
assembly, as it applies to the town, allowing for the abatement
and deferment of taxes on real or personal property damaged as a
direct result of the tornado occurring in the vicinity of the town
on October 3, 1979.
Sec. 16-2. Listing of certain real estate and personal property.
The town hereby adopts section 12-41 of the general statutes
providing for the elimination of the listing of real estate and
certain personal property with the assessors and the assessors
shall be authorized and empowered to take such action as may be
necessary to secure the approval of the state tax commissioner of
the elimination of listing of real estate and certain personal
property as provided in such section.
Ord. of 6- 10-53)
Charter reference—Finance and taxation, Ch. VIII.
Cross references—Administration generally, Ch. 2; licenses, permits and miscellaneous
business regulations, Ch. 11.
State law references—Boards of finance. G. S. § 7- 340 et seq.; finance and
taxation, G.S. § 12-40 et seq.; general provisions, G. S. 1 7- 398 et seq.; municipal
auditing act, G.S. § 7- 391 et seq.; municipal bond issues, G. S. § 7- 369 et seq.;
municipal reserve fund, G. S. § 7- 359 et seq.; town deposit fund, G. S. 1 7- 350;
treasurer, G. S. § 7- 79 et seq.; uniform fiscal years, G. S. § 7- 381 et seq.
Supp. No. 1 945
16-3 SUFFIELD CODE
Sec. 16-3. Exemption for solar energy heating and cooling
systems.
a) In accordance with the provisions of Public Act No. 76-409,
the following described property shall be exempt from taxation
subject to the provisions of this section: any building or addition
to a building, the construction of which is commenced on or after
October 1, 1976, and before October 1, 1991, which is equipped
with a solar energy heating or cooling system, to the extent of the
amount by which the assessed valuation of such real property
equipped with such solar heating or cooling system exceeds the
assessed valuation of such real property equipped with the conventional
portion of the heating or cooling system, exclusive of
any portion of such system related to solar energy, provided this
exemption shall only apply to the first fifteen ( 15) assessment
years following construction of such building or addition.
b) As used in this section, " solar energy heating or cooling
system" means equipment, including windmills and waterwheels,
which provides for the collection, transfer, storage and use of
incident solar energy for water heating, space heating or cooling
which absent such solar energy system would require a conventional
energy resource, such as petroleum products, natural gas
or electricity, and which meets standards established by regulation
by the commissioner of planning and energy policy.
c) Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in
this section shall file with the board of assessors, within thirty
30) days following the annual assessment date, written application
claiming such exemption on a form as prescribed by the state
tax commissioner. Failure to file such application in the manner
and form within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a
waiver of the right of such exemption for the assessment year.
Ord. of 5- 19-77, §§ I—III)
State law reference—Authority, G. S. § 12-81( 56) a.
Sec. 16-4. Exemption for certain vehicles.
a) Exemption. There is hereby created pursuant to Connecticut
General Statutes section 12-81c, an exemption from personal
property taxation, after inspection and approval by the assessor' s
office, of any privately owned vehicle equipped with special hand
Supp. No. 1 946
J
J
TAXATION § 16-6
Li, controls or other adaptions for physically disabled drivers or passengers,
and vans equipped with wheelchair lifts or hoists, used
exclusively for the purpose of transporting physically disabled
persons or passengers.
b) Limitations. This exemption shall not apply to any vehicle
used to transport such persons for payment.
c) Application. Any person who wishes to claim said exemptions
may file a written application with the assessor' s office.
d) Authorization. The assessor is given the authority to promulgate
such regulations and forms as necessary to implement
this exemption.
Ord. No. 88- 01, §§ 1- 4, 3- 15-88)
Editor's note—Ordinance No. 88- 01, adopted March 15, 1988, did not expressly
amend the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1- 4 as § 16-4 was at the editor' s
discretion.
Sec. 16- 5. Property tax waived if less than a certain amount.
The Town of Suffield, commencing with the property tax list of
October 1, 1991, waives any property tax due the town in an
amount less than five dollars ($5. 00).
Ord. of 4- 21-82; Ord. of 4- 23-92)
Editor' s note—An ordinance of April 21, 1982, did not specifically amend the
Code; therefore, inclusion as § 16-5 was at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 16- 6. Tax relief for the elderly and disabled.
a) Authority. The Town of Suffield adopts the provisions of
Connecticut General Statutes section 12- 129n to provide tax relief
to the elderly and disabled.
b) Eligibility and application for property tax credit relief for
the elderly and disabled.
1) Eligibility. To the eligible, the elderly or disabled taxpayer
shall complete an application and must have qualified for
the State of Connecticut tax credit relief for elderly and
disabled homeowners and meet the financial requirements
under the provisions of sections 12-129b to 12-129d, inclu-
Supp. No. 5 947
16- 6 SUFFIELD CODE
sive, sections 112- 129h, 12- 129i, and sections 12- 170a to
12- 170c, inclusive, of the general statutes, as the same may
be amended from time to time.
The basic requirements that must be met in order for tax
relief under the homeowner program to be granted by the
State of Connecticut are:
2) Filingperiod for application. Any property owner, believing
him/herself entitled to a tax reduction under the program,
must make application to the assessor of Suffield between
February 1 and May 15, of the calendar year following the
October 1 Grand List date for which tax relief is sought.
Claimant must reapply for subsequent qualification on a
biennial basis.
3) Age and disability requirement. Claimant (or spouse, if domiciled
together) must have been sixty-five ( 65) years of
age by the end of the calendar year preceding the filing
requirement. Totally disabled persons regardless of age are
eligible.
4) Residence/tenancy requirement. Claimant must own and reside
at the property for which tax relief is sought; or he/she
must hold a tenancy for life use or for a term of years in
such property, which tenancy makes him liable for the payment
of property taxes under Connecticut General Statutes
section 12-48. Such ownership which must constitute
the claimant' s principal or legal residence, must have been
effective on or before October 1 of the current assessment
year.
c) Assessor. The assessor for the Town of Suffield is delegated
the authority to administer this program and promulgate such
forms, rules, and regulations necessary, consistent with this section
and state law. The assessor shall further adopt a form to
implement the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes section
12- 129n(f).
d) Relief to be granted. The town tax relief benefit will be
calculated as follows:
1) Tax minus state benefit minus twenty-five (25) percent of
original tax bill equals town credit which in no event may
exceed the state benefit.
Supp. No. 5 948
TAXATION § 16- 23
2) The town credit so calculated will be deducted from the
taxpayer' s July tax bill.
e) Application. Any person who wishes to claim said exemptions
may file a written application with the assessor' s office.
Ord. No. 90-01, §§ 1- 5, 1- 17-90)
Editor's note—Ord. No. 90- 01, §§ 1- 5, adopted January 17, 1990, did not
specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 16-6 was at the discretion of
the editor. The effective date of the aforesaid ordinance shall be February 24,
1990.
Secs. 16-7- 16-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ASSESSOR*
Sec. 16.21. Establishment of office.
There is hereby established for the town, .pursuant to general
statutes Title 9, Chapter 146, an assessor' s office. Such office
shall consist of one ( 1) full-time qualified assessor, appointed by
the first selectman with the approval of the board of selectmen, as
hereinafter more particularly set forth.
Ord. of 12-28-82(2), § I)
Sec. 16-22. Term of office.
The assessor shall be appointed by the first selectman with the
approval of the board of selectmen, and shall serve for a term of
four (4) years after being sworn and until his sucessor has been
duly appointed and qualified. The four-year term shall commence
February 1, 1983. Any vacancy in the office of assessor shall be
filled for the unexpired portion of the term by appointment of the
first selectman, with the approval of the board of selectmen.
Ord. of 12-28- 82(2), § II)
Sec. 16.23. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the assessor shall be those set forth by
any and all general statutes concerning the assessment of real
and personal property particularly Title 12, and Title 9 of the
general statutes.
Ord. of 12-28-82(2), § III)
Charter reference—Assessor, § 609.
Cross reference—Officers, § 2- 131 et seq.
Supp. No. 5 949
16-23 SUFFIELD CODE
andpersonal property particularly Title 12, and Title 9 of the
general statutes.
Ord. of 12- 28-82(2), § III)
Sec. 16-24. Compensation; clerical assistance.
The assessor shall receive such compensation for the performance
of his duties as may be determined by the town pursuant
to section 12- 121 of the general statutes. The creation of any
positions of clerical assistants to the assessor and the compensation
to be allocated for the clerical positions may be determined
by the town pursuant to section 9- 198 of the general statutes.
Ord. of 12- 28-82(2), § IV)
Supp. No. 5 950
The next page is 997]
Chapter 17
TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES*
Art. I. In General, §§ 17- 1- 17-15
Art. II. Stopping, Standing And Parking, §§ 17- 16- 17-56
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 17- 16- 17-30
Div. 2. Fire Lanes, §§ 17- 31- 17-50
Div. 3. Snowstorms, §§ 17-51- 17- 56
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 17-1- 17-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. STOPPING, STANDING AND
PARKINGt
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 17-16- 17-30. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. FIRE LANES$
Sec. 17-31. Definitions.
As used herein the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
Building shall mean any building existing on the effective date
of the ordinance from which this article derives or thereafter
included within the meaning of a " place of assembly" pursuant
to P.29-41-4.02 of the state fire safety code as the same may be
amended from time to time.
Cross references—Trailers and camp vehicles restricted in parks, § 13-11;
operation and parking of motor vehicles restricted, § 13- 16; streets, sidewalks and
other public places, Ch. 15.
State law references—Authority to regulate traffic generally, G.S. § 7- 148(cX7)( BXi);
authority to regulate speed of vehicles, G.S. § 7- 148(c)( 7XBXii); authority restricted,
G.S. § 14- 162.
1 -Cross references—Parking on the premises of another, § 12-3; parking of
motor vehicles restricted in parks, § 13- 16.
Cross reference—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15.
997
17-31 SUFFIELD CODE
Educational pursuant to P29-41- 4. 03 of the state fire safety
code as the same may be amended from time to time.
Fire lane shall mean a designated unobstructed passageway at
least twenty (20) feet in width with an outside turning radius of
fifty (50) feet and constructed in a manner to permit free passage
of fire apparatus and other emergency equipment from a public
highway to all necessary areas around or upon any of the premises
described in the definition of " Building" herein, in all seasons
and in all kinds of weather.
Industrial pursuant to P29-41-4.08 of the state fire safety code
as the same may be amended from time to time.
Institutional pursuant to P29-41-4. 04 of the state fire safety
code as the same may be amended from time to time.
Mercantile pursuant to P29-41-4.06 of the state fire safety code
as the same may be amended from time to time.
Office pursuant to P29-41-4.07 of the state fire safety code as
the same may be amended from time to time.
Parking area shall mean lots, areas or other accommodations of
motor vehicles off the street or highway and open to the public
use with or without charge, which parking areas are on the same
premises as or adjacent to a building as herein defined.
Residential (except lodging and rooming houses and one and
two-family dwellings) pursuant to P29-41-4. 05 of the state fire
safety code as the same may be amended from time to time.
Storage pursuant to P29-41-4. 09 of the state fire safety code as
the same may be amended from time to time.
Ord. of 4-29-76, § I)
Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1- 2.
Sec. 17-32. Designation.
The board of selectmen and the fire marshal, acting together,
shall determine and designate the location of such fire lanes in
parking areas as they deem necessary to ensure access of fire
apparatus and other emergency equipment to buildings on the
same premises as or adjacent to the parking areas. Upon such a
determination and designation, the fire marshal shall by certi-
998 J
TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES § 17-35
fied mail inform the owner or owners of the parking area of such
determination and designation. Such notice shall include a description
of the fire lane sufficient to apprise the owner of its
nature, location and extent, and shall give notice that such fire
lane shall be maintained as such by the owner beginning on the
twenty-first day after the mailing of the notice.
Ord. of 4-29-76, § II)
Sec. 17-33. Duties of owners; fine.
The owner of any parking area on which has been designated a
fire lane shall cause to be erected, installed and maintained at
his own expense permanent and adequate signs bearing the words
Fire Lane—No Parking—Cars will be Towed at Owner' s Expense"
in such fire lane. Such owners shall cause to be erected,
installed and maintained such other and further designations as
may reasonably be required by the fire marshal to warn persons
to keep said fire lanes free. The fire marshal may notify in
writing the owner of such parking area of specific requirements
he deems necessary to effect compliance with this ordinance.
Such notice shall be sent to the owner by certified mail and shall
prescribe a reasonable time for compliance by the owner. If the
owner shall fail to comply within such time, then the owner shall
be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25. 00)
nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such violation, and
each day following such specified time for compliance shall constitute
a separate violation. The owner shall keep fire lanes free
of ice, snow, rubbish containers, or other obstructions at all times.
Ord. of 4-29-76, § III)
Sec. 17-34. Parking in fire lanes.
No person shall park or permit to stand a motor vehicle in any
fire lane except when actually picking up or discharging passengers
or actively engaged in loading or unloading a motor vehicle.
Ord. of 4-29-76, § IV)
Cross reference—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15.
Sec. 17-35. Towing.
1109 Any motor vehicle found parked or standing in a fire lane may
be towed upon the direction of a police officer to any public or
999
17- 35 SUFFIELD CODE
private parking facility, and all expense of such towing, and any
subsequent storage, shall be borne by the registered owner of the
vehicle.
Ord. of 4-29-76, § VI)
Sec. 17-36. Penalties.
The owner of any motor vehicle failing to comply with the
provisions of this division shall be fined not more than five dollars
($5. 00), if the fine is paid within forty-eight (48) hours of the
issuance of the notice hereinafter set forth, and not more than
ten dollars ($10.00) if the fine is paid beyond the period of fortyeight
(48) hours or is ordered by court. Payment as stated above
to the designated authority as stated on the notice hereinafter
provided shall be in lieu of a court appearance. Whenever a
motor vehicle shall be found parked or standing in violation of
this division, any police officer may attach to such vehicle a
notice to the owner thereof that the vehicle has been parked or is
standing in violation of this division, and shall set forth the
schedule of fines hereinafter set forth, the notice to be on the
form used by the police officer in the case of parking violations in
violation of regulations established by the traffic authority of the
state or town. The registered owner of the motor vehicle shall be
presumed to be the operator of the vehicle.
Ord. of 4-29-76, § V)
Secs. 17-37- 17-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. SNOWSTORMS*
Sec. 17-51. Definitions.
As used in this division the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them in this section:
Business days shall include Monday through Friday and exclude
any holidays falling within that period.
Street or road shall include all public highways within the
town and all private roads within the town upon which the town
performs snow removal operations.
Cross reference—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15.
1000
1.
TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES § 17-55
Vehicle shall include, but not be limited to registered and
unregistered automobiles, trucks, semi -trailers units, motorcycles
and motorized bicycles or snowmobiles.
Ord. of 3- 13-85, § VI)
Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1- 2.
Sec. 17-52. Impeding roads prohibited.
No person shall stop or park a vehicle on the travelled portion
or shoulder of any street or road in such a manner as will impede
the free flow of traffic while a snowstorm is in progress or snow -
removal operations are being conducted.
Ord. of 3- 13-85, § I)
Sec. 17-53. Notice of violation.
Whenever any vehicle is found in violation of this division a
police officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or
operator thereof stating that such vehicle has been parked
unlawfully.
Ord. of 3- 13-85, § II)
Sec. 17-54. Owner presumed responsible.
In any prosecution or proceeding under the provisions of this
division, the registered owner of any such vehicle shall be presumed
to have parked or to have authorized the parking of the
vehicle in violation of this division, if no operator is with the
parked vehicle at the time.
Ord. of 3- 13-85, § III)
Sec. 17-55. Removal and storage of vehicles.
a) Any police officer upon discovering any such vehicle so
parked in violation of this division may cause the vehicle to be
removed by towing from the location at the owner' s expense.
Towing fees payable to the town shall include the cost of towing
and storage fees legally allowed until such vehicle is claimed at
the location to which it has been towed.
b) Whenever a police officer causes the removal of a vehicle,
as authorized by this division, he shall report such fact to police
headquarters. A reasonable effort shall be made by headquarters
1001
17-55 SUFFIELD CODE
to notify the owner of the removal and the reason therefor, and
the name and location to which the vehicle has been towed, and
this information will be provided upon the owner' s inquiry.
Ord. of 3- 13- 85, § IV)
Sec. 17-56. Penalty.
The fine for violation of the provisions of this division shall be
five dollars ($5. 00) paid within five (5) business days of issuance
and ten dollars ($10. 00) if paid on the sixth day or later. Payment
of fines shall be to the town and payment may be made by mail or
in person to the town clerk' s office. Failure to pay fines may
subject the violator to arrest.
Ord. of 3- 13- 85, § V)
The next page is 1053]
1002
1f
Chapter 18
UTILITIES*
Art. I. In General, §§ 18- 1- 18- 15
Art. II. Sewers, §§ 18-16- 18-150
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 18- 16- 18-40
Div. 2. Building Sewers and Connections, §§ 18-41- 18- 70
Div. 3. Use of Public Sewers and Natural Outlets, §§ 18- 71- 18- 100
Div. 4. Permits, §§ 18- 101- 18- 150
Art. III. Water, §§ 18- 151- 18-177
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 18- 151- 18- 170
Div. 2. Water Mains, §§ 18- 171- 18- 177
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 18-1- 18-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. SEWERSt
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 18-16. Purpose.
In order to ensure proper removal and disposal of sewage wastes
and sewage waters within the town, to ensure the proper opera -
Charter reference—Water pollution control authority, § 301(K).
Cross references—Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; garbage and
refuse, Ch. 8. 5; housing, Ch. 9; planning, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other
public places, Ch. 15; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B.
State law references—Power of town to lay out, construct, etc., sewer and
drainage systems and sewage disposal plants, G. S. § 7- 148(cX6XB)(i); power of
town to contract for the furnishing of water, G.S. § 7- 148(cX4)(G); power of town to
create, etc., all things in the nature of public works and improvements, G.S. §
7- 148(cX6XAXii); power of town to regulate the laying, etc., of water pipes, drains,
sewers, etc., in the streets and public places, G.S. § 7- 148(cX6)(BXiii); power of town
to regulate and prohibit the construction, etc., of sinks, c sspools, G.S. § 7- 148(cX7XC);
municipal waterworks systems, G. S. § 7- 324 et seq.; municipal sewerage systems,
G.S. § 7- 245 et seq.; sewer districts, G.S. § 7- 324 et seq.; water resources, G.S. §
25- 1 et seq.; sewer revenue bonds, G.S. §§ 7- 259- 7- 266.
tCharter reference—Superintendent of public works, § 605.
Cross reference—Excavations, § 15- 16 et seq.
Supp. No. 3 1053
18- 16 SUFFIELD CODE
tion and maintenance of public sewers, sewage treatment plants
and other sewage works within the town; and to provide for the
keeping of adequate records of sewers and appurtenances and
connections thereto, the following article regulating the construction,
use, repair, alteration, and discontinuance or abandonment
of sewers and appurtenances and connection thereto, including
pipes discharging directly or indirectly into such sewers, and the
substances to be discharged directly or indirectly into and through
the sewers and appurtenances of the public sewer system of the
town as provided in the February 4, 1959 ordinance of the town
and section 7- 346 et seq. of the general statutes, is hereby enacted.
Ord. of 1- 21- 81, § 1)
Sec. 18-17. Definitions.
As used in this article the following words and phrases have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
B. O.D. (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days
at twenty (20) degrees Centigrade, expressed in parts per million
by weight.
Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system that receives only sanitary waste
discharged from pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys
it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the
inner face of the building wall.
Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building
drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
Chlorine demand shall mean the amount of chlorine which
must be added to waters or wastes to produce a residual chlorine
content in such waters or wastes.
Cooling water shall include clean waste water from air conditioning,
industrial cooling, condensing and similar apparatus and
from hydraulically powered equipment. In general, cooling water
will include only water which is sufficiently clean and unpolluted
to admit of being discharged, without treatment or purification,
into any natural open stream or watercourse without offence.
Supp. No. 3
1054
UTILITIES § 18- 17
Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale
of produce.
Supp. No. 3
1054. 1
UTILITIES § 18- 17
Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial
processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Natural outlet shall mean any outlet in a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, which have been
shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely
under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers,
with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by
public authority.
Reasonable length of time shall mean ninety (90) days, weather
permitting.
Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to
which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally
admitted.
Sewage shall mean a combination of the water -carried wastes
from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.
Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices
and structures used for treating sewage.
Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating, and disposing of sewage.
Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial
waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity
of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen
15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty -fourhour
concentration or flow.
Storm sewer or storm drain shall mean a sewer which carries
storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
polluted industrial wastes.
1055
18- 17 SUFFIELD CODE
Sub -soil drainage shall include water from the soil percolating
into sub -soil drains and through foundation walls, basement floors
or from underground pipes or from similar sources.
Suitable facilities shall mean public sewer, or septic tank.
Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the
surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids;
and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
Water pollution control authority is defined in chapter 103 section
7-246 of the general statutes.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, §§ 2. 13- 2. 25)
Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1- 2.
Sec. 18-18. Use of public sewers required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit
to be deposited upon public or private property within the town
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
Ord. of 1- 21- 81, § 3. 1)
Sec. 18-19. Prohibited discharges to natural outlets.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
with subsequent provisions of this article.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 3. 2)
Sec. 18-20. Owners must connect to public sewer before
occupancy.
The owner of all newly constructed houses, buildings or properties
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other
purpose, situated within the town and abutting on any street,
alley or right-of-way in which there is now located a public sanitary
sewer of the town is hereby required at his expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
1056 J
18-25
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
601
provisions of this article before occupancy.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 3. 3)
Sec. 18-21. Septic tanks permitted in certain cases.
Those existing homes abutting a sanitary sewer where basement
facilities cannot be served may be served by an existing
septic tank system for that basement area only subject to approval
of the water pollution control authority.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 3. 4)
1
c.„
Sec. 18-22. Private disposal systems.
All homes, businesses, buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments not abutting on a street in which there is a sanitary
sewer shall have a suitable private sewer disposal system,
the installation and operation of which shall be subject to the
inspection and approval of the building inspector in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the ordinances and building
code of the town and the state.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 3. 5)
Sec. 18-23. Use of septic tanks restricted.
Except as herein provided it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any septic tank and or other facilities intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 3. 6)
Sec. 18-24. Subdivisions to have suitable facilities.
Whenever a developer subdivides a tract of land into building
lots or industrial or commercial sites he shall provide and install
suitable facilities or a sewage disposal system in accordance with
the regulations of the zoning and planning commission and the
standards and specifications of the water pollution control authority.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 4. 1)
Cross reference—Subdivisions, App. B.
Sec. 18-25. Liability for damage.
Any person who willfully breaks, damages, destroys, or injures
any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the
1057
18-25 SUFFIELD CODE
municipal sewage works shall be subject to the penalties imposed
under section 53-46 of the general statutes.
Ord. of 1- 21- 81, § 14. 1)
Sec. 18-26. Powers and authority of inspectors.
The water pollution control authority and the superintendent
of sewers, and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 15. 1)
Sec. 18-27. Owners must connect to public sewer after
notification.
Within sixty (60) days after a sewer in a public street becomes
operational, the water pollution control authority shall notify
abutting property owners that they must connect with the sewer
within twelve ( 12) months after such notification. Failure to obtain
a permit to make such connection shall be prima facie evidence
that no connection has been made.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 13. 1)
Sec. 18-28. Penalties.
a) Any person who shall violate any provision of this article
except section .18-25 shall be served by the town with written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations.
b) Any person who shall violate any provision of this article
may be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each
day that any violation of this article continues and each day that
person continues to discharge prohibited wastes or substances
into any public sewer shall be deemed a separate offense for the
purpose of applying the above penalty.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, §§ 16. 1, 16. 2)
1058
j
UTILITIES § 18-30
Sec. 18-29. User charges.
a) Charges covering operation and maintenance costs of the
total sewer facilities shall be appropriately made to each user or
person owning or controlling each property having use of sewers
user charge system") and shall generate sufficient revenue to
offset the costs of all treatment works operation and maintenance
provided for by the town. In the event that collections do not
cover all the costs of the sewerage treatment system, the water
pollution authority may borrow appropriate amounts from the
town sufficient to meet the financial requirements, for a period
not to exceed twenty-four (24) months and subject to interest at
the prevailing prime rate.
b) The water pollution control authority is authorized to obtain
from the Connecticut Water Company, all the necessary
records to determine the consumption of water by users of the
sewer system. Further, the water pollution control authority may
enter into whatever contracts and agreements it deems necessary
and appropriate with the Connecticut Water Company for the
purpose of obtaining access to the above mentioned records.
Ord. of 5- 1- 85)
Sec. 18-30. Deferred payment for elderly.
a) Any owner of real property who is eligible for tax relief for
elderly taxpayers under the provisions of sections 12- 129b and
12-170a of the general statutes may apply to the water pollution
control authority for approval of a plan of payment of such property
owner' s sewer assessment other than as provided under
section 7- 253 of the general statutes. The plan may include an
option to pay only the annual interest charge, as provided in said
section 7-253, on any deferred payments or outstanding balance
of principal of said assessment. Any such plan shall provide that
the outstanding balance of principal deferred under such optional
method of payment of said assessment shall become due upon
any transfer of title to the property subject to such assessment or
upon the death of such property owner. The plan shall become
effective upon approval of the water pollution control authority,
and shall be subject to annual review and reapproval by the
water pollution control authority.
1059
18-30 SUFFIELD CODE
b) This section is enacted under authority of general statutes
section 7-253a.
Ord. of 12-29-80)
Cross reference—Taxation, Ch. 16.
Secs. 18-31- 18-40. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. BUILDING SEWERS AND
CONNECTIONS
Sec. 18-41. Building sewer permit—Required.
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent
of sewers.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 5. 1)
Cross references—Building permits, § 5- 16 et seq.; licenses, permits and
miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11.
Sec. 1842. Same—State permit required.
No person shall discharge into the public sewer any industrial
or commercial waters or wastes without obtaining an appropriate
permit from the state department of environmental protection
pursuant to section 22a-430 of the general statutes prior to discharge
of such waters or wastes to the town' s sewerage system.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 5. 1. 1)
Cross references—Building permits, § 5- 16 et seq.; licenses, permits and
miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11.
Sec. 18-43. New discharges; substantial changes.
Any person proposing a new discharge into a public sewer or a
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that
are being discharged into a public sewer, shall notify the superintendent
at least forty-five (45) days prior to the proposed change
or connection.
Ord. of 1- 21- 81, § 5. 1. 2)
1060
l
UTILITIES § 18-47
Sec. 18-44. Classes of building sewer permits; application;
fees.
a) There shall be two (2) classes of building permits for sewers:
1) For residential and commercial service; and
2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
b) In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application
on a special form furnished by the town. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of water pollution
control authority and superintendent of sewers. A permit
and inspection fee of fifteen dollars ($15. 00) for a sewer permit for
a residential or commercial building and twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for a sewer permit for buildings where industrial wastes are
produced shall be paid to the superintendent of sewers at the
time the application is filed.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 5. 2. 2)
Sec. 1845. Owner to bear costs of installation and connection;
to indemnify city for loss, damage.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 5. 3)
Sec. 18-46. Use limited for old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test by the
superintendent of sewers to meet all requirements of this article.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 5. 4)
Sec. 18-47. Standards and specifications.
The water pollution control authority or the superintendent of
sewers shall from time to time establish minimum standards and
specifications to regulate the sizes, materials, methods and workmanship
to be used in the construction of sewers, building drains,
1061
18-47 SUFFIELD CODE
building sewers, and other similar work and appurtenances, thereto
connected or intended to be connected or to discharge, directly or
indirectly, into any public sewer or drain. Such standards shall
provide minimum requirements as to size, depth, slope or rate of
grade for such pipes, shall regulate the kinds of pipe, fittings,
methods of laying, jointing, materials used, manner of connecting
to pre-existing sewers and drains, and general considerations
as to location and other pertinent features.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 5. 5)
Sec. 18-48. Building and plumbing regulations to be observed.
The requirements of town building and plumbing codes shall
be observed with respect to piping and fixtures inside or immediately
adjacent to buildings and within the areas of jurisdiction of
said several codes, subject only to the general requirements of
this article. Pipe more than five (5) feet outside the inner walls of
any building or similar structure shall conform to the requirements
of this article as to permits, materials and workmanship.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 5. 6)
Cross reference—Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5.
Sec. 18-49. Notification of inspection.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
superintendent of sewers, reasonably in advance, when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
superintendent of sewers or his agent.
Ord. of 1- 21- 81, § 5. 7)
Sec. 18-50. Excavations for building sewers.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the
public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored
in a manner satisfactory to the water pollution control authority.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 5. 8)
Cross reference—Excavations, § 15- 16 et seq.
1062
L
L
UTILITIES § 18-53
Sec. 18-51. Abandonment; discontinuance of building sewer.
When any building, or other structure previously served by a
connection to any public sewer is demolished, destroyed, abandoned,
or altered so that any sewer portion of an abandoned
plumbing system which is directly or indirectly connected to any
public sewer is no longer used and is no longer connected to the
sewer system which discharged, directly or indirectly, into public
sewer shall be promptly closed and sealed off so that no water or
wastes not otherwise permitted to enter the public sewer shall so
discharged thereinto. The superintendent of sewers shall be notified
of such abandonment or discontinuance and of the closing
and sealing of such sewer and shall be afforded an opportunity to
see such work performed. All of the work shall be done by the
person or party who demolishes the building or structure or who
alters the sewage of the premises so as to make such closing and
sealing necessary, and, in the event of the failure of such person
or party to do so, shall be done by the owner, lessee or tenant of
the premises in a satisfactory manner all without expense to the
town.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 5. 9)
Sec. 18-52. Drain layers; bond, insurance required.
a) The town may license as a drain layer any person found to
be suitable and competent, who shall have applied to it on forms
to be provided for that purpose and who shall have furnished the
surety bond, and insurance required by sections 18-106 and 18- 107.
b) No person other than those described in subsection (a) shall
construct, repair, alter or remove any sewer, building drain, building
sewer, or sewer line connected to or with or discharging
directly or indirectly to or into, any public sewer of the town or
intended to discharge thus at some future time, regardless of
whether the work is located in a public street or in public or
private land.
Ord. of 1- 21- 81, §§ 7. 1, 7. 2)
Sec. 18-53. Persons authorized to construct, alter, repair,
etc.
a) The following may, as indicated, construct, repair, alter or
1063
18-53 SUFFIELD CODE
remove sewers, subject to supervision and approval by the water
pollution control authority:
1) Regular forces of a contractor employed by the town, operating
under orders of the water pollution control authority
and in the performance of work for the town;
2) Regular forces of the town or the state highway department
operating under the subject to permit for the particular
job to be issued by the water pollution control authority
or the superintendent of sewers and while engaged in the
regular work and operations of the town or state highway
department.
3) Regular forces of any public utility corporation authorized
by state law to construct, maintain and operate pipes or
ducts within public highways within the town, while engaged
in work incidental to the regular structures of the
utility company and operating under the subject to the
conditions of a permit for the particular ob issued by the
water pollution control authority or the superintendent of
sewers.
b) The limitations as to person who may construct, alter or
repair building drains and building sewers as provided in section
18-52 shall not restrict the usual work of plumbers or others
when operating in accordance with local plumbing and building
codes of the town and when they are working on pipes within or
not more than five ( 5) feet outside the walls of a building or
similar structure; provided, no plumber or other person shall
make any connection to a public sewer of the town without a
permit therefore, even if the sewer is located under or immediately
adjacent to any building or similar structure; and provided,
all fixtures within the building or structure and all use made of
them shall conform to the requirements of this article as to what
may and may not be permitted to be discharged into public sewers.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, §§ 7. 3, 7. 4)
Sec. 18-54. Owner performance.
Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the owner of a
building or structure from personally installing the building sewer
on his own property under the conditions herein specified:
1064
L
UTILITIES § 18-73
1) Approval of plans and final approval by the superintendent
of sewers shall be obtained;
2) A permit shall be secured as provided in this division
before the work is performed;
3) Permit fees shall be paid, and application made for inspections;
4) All work shall be performed by the owner himself in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 7. 5. 4)
Secs. 18-55- 18-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
AND NATURAL OUTLETS
Sec. 18-71. Prohibited discharges to sanitary sewer.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm -
water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process
waters to any sanitary sewer.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 6. 1)
Sec. 18-72. Designation of sewers for stormwater, other unpolluted
drainage.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged
to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined
sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the
superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to
a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 6. 2)
Sec. 18-73. Prohibited discharges to public sewers and natural
outlets.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable
or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
1065
18-73 SUFFIELD CODE
2) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with
any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans
or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant;
3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5. 0, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel
of the sewage works;
4) Solid viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works
such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
Ord. of 1- 21- 81, §§ 6. 3- 6. 3. 4)
Sec. 18-74. Discharge of certain wastes restricted.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears
likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes
can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment,
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors
as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewage treatment
plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited
are:
1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one
hundred fifty ( 150) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty-five ( 65)
degrees Centigrade.
1066
LUTILITIES § 18-74
2) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred ( 100)
mg/1 or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and
one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit.
3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped
with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0. 76 hp metric)
or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of
the superintendent.
4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized
or not.
5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree
that any such material received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the superintendent for such material.
6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or
odor producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the superintendent as
necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet
the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies
or jurisdiction for such discharges to the receiving
waters.
7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the superintendent
in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9. 5.
9) Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids ( such
as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and
lime residues) or of dissolved solids ( such as, but not
limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
b. Excessive discoloration ( such as, but not limited to,
dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);
1067
18-74 SUFFIELD CODE
c. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the sewage treatment works, which
may cause the effluent limitations of the discharge
permit to be exceeded;
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting " slugs".
10) Waters and wastes containing substances that are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment
processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to
such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot
meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, §§ 6. 4- 6. 4. 10)
Sec. 18-75. Action of superintendent upon discharge of wastes
having deleterious effect upon sewage works,
etc.
a) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to
be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section
18-74, and which in the judgment of the superintendent, may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment,
or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may:
1) Reject the wastes;
2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers;
3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes.
b) If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization
of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants
and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
superintendent, and subject to the requirements of all applicable
codes, ordinances, laws and the municipal discharge permit. Further,
such pretreatment installations must be consistent with the
1068 J
UTILITIES § I8_79
requirements of any state pretreatment permit issued to the
41, industry.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, §§ 6. 5- 6. 5. 4)
L
Sec. 18-76. Interceptors.
Grease, oil, and sand traps shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts,
or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients;
except that such traps shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All traps shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 6. 6)
Sec. 18-77. Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow -equalizing facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner
at his expense.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 6. 7)
Sec. 18-78. Control manhole.
a) When required by the superintendent, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes
shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary
meters, and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes.
Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved
by the superintendent.
b) The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense,
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at
all times.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 6.8)
Sec. 18-79. Monitoring of discharges required.
All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform
such monitoring of their discharge as the superintendent or other
1069
18-79 SUFFIELD CODE
duly authorized employees of the town may reasonably require,
including installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment,
keeping records and reporting the results of such monitoring
to the superintendent. Such records shall be made available,
upon request by the superintendent, to other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters.
Ord. of 1- 21- 81, § 6. 8)
Sec. 18-80. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this ordinance
shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of " Standard
Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater," published
by the American Public Health Association, and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable
samples taken at said control manhole. If no special manhole has
been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at
which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried
out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents
upon the sewage works and to determine the existence
of hazards to life, limb and property.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 6. 9)
Sec. 18-81. Special agreements with industrial concerns.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the
town and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the town for
treatment, subject to payment, therefor, by the industrial concern;
provided that such agreements do not contravene any requirements
of existing federal laws and are compatible with any
user charge and industrial cost recovery system in effect.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 6. 10)
Sec. 18-82. Use of treatment plant.
The waste from any privy, septic tank or cesspool may be
deposited and processed at the town' s sewage treatment plant,
provided such waste is from property in the town, and is not
1070
UTILITIES § 18- 102
considered harmful. The plant operator' s permission must be
given before such waste can be discharged into the treatment
plant. A test of such waste, and any treatment to make such
waste compatible shall be made at the contractor' s expense if the
plant operator considers the waste harmful to the plant facilities
or operation. The contractor shall assume all liability to property
and persons.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 6. 11)
L
Secs. 18-83- 18-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. PERMITS*
Sec. 18-101. Required.
No person, other than those working for and under the direction
of the town, shall make any excavation for or construct,
install, lay, repair, alter or remove any sewer, building drain,
building sewer, sewer connection, or appurtenance thereof or
connect to such sewer within the town, which is in any way
connected to or discharges directly or indirectly to or into any
public sewer of the town, or is intended at some future time to be
so connected or so discharged, until said person or party shall
have applied for and secured from the superintendent of sewers a
permit for doing such work. Such permits may be issued only to
those qualified to perform such work as provided in section 18-52.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 8. 1)
Sec. 18-102. Application.
Every application for a permit required by this division shall
be made in writing on forms to be provided by the town for that
purpose and shall be signed by the drain layer or other qualified
person or party, or an authorized agent thereof. The application
shall state the location and ownership of the property to be served
by the sewer in question, the post office address of the property
owner, a brief description of the work to be done, and shall
contain an agreement that the permittee will do the work in
Cross references—Building permits, § 5- 16 et seq.; licenses, permits and
miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11; building sewer permit required, §
18-41; state permits for building sewers required, § 18-42.
1071
18-102 SUFFIELD CODE
accordance with the requirements of town and local laws, ordinances,
regulations and permits as those laws, etc., may apply to
the particular locations or work and will save the town and
others harmless from damages, loss, damage claims, etc., in accordance
with the terms of the drain layer' s surety bond provided
for in section 18-107. The superintendent of sewers shall require
as a prerequisite to the issuance of any permit that he be furnished
evidence that any and all necessary permits, etc., to open public
streets, public or private grounds or property have been or will
be issued; that the agent of the application is properly authorized
to sign the application in question; that the devices used or
provisions made to prevent the entry into public sewers of any
substances forbidden entry by this ordinance will be provided,
maintained and operated as required by division 2 and division 3
of this article; and any other information or proof pertinent to the
particular job in question.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 8. 2)
Sec. 18-103. Fee; assignability.
Any person who applies for a permit to connect into a sewer or
sewer line shall pay the prescribed fee for each such permit.
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable by the permittee.
Permits shall be kept on the premises where and at all times
when work is in progress and shall be shown to any proper person
asking to see the same. All persons operating under such permits
shall be held responsible for conformity to the requirements thereof
and of this article.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 8. 3)
Sec. 18-104. Suspension, cancellation, termination.
Any permit required by this division, in whole or in part, may
be suspended, cancelled or terminated by the water pollution
control authority or the superintendent of sewers on written
notice to the permittee for violation of the conditions thereto or
for the violation of the requirements of this article.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 8. 4)
Sec. 18-105. Conduct of permittee.
Each drain layer licensed in accordance with section 18-52
shall be responsible for the proper performance of all work per -
1072
UTILITIES § 18- 107
formed under the permits issued to him and for the conduct of all
work and all materials furnished on work by his employees or
agents. No work shall be sublet by a drain layer under any
permit issued in any manner to divest the drain layer of full
control and responsibility for all parts of the work.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 9. 1)
Sec. 18-106. Drain layer responsibility.
Each drain layer shall save the town, its agents and servants
harmless from all loss or claims of loss, damage or injury arising
from the operations of the drain layer under any permits issued
him by reason of his negligence in performing the work in which
he has been issued a permit. He shall furnish the town a public
liability policy in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
in which the town is a named insured, protecting it against such
loss or claims of loss.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 10. 1)
Sec. 18-107. Surety bond.
Every person making application for permit required by this
division shall file with the town a satisfactory bond of a surety
company authorized to transact such business in the state, and
having an agent within the limits of the county, in a form satisfactory
to the water pollution control authority or the superintendent
of sewers. The bond shall be in an amount not less than
one thousand five hundred dollars ($ 1, 500. 00) to be determined
by the sewer superintendent, conditioned upon the applicant substantially
and properly performing all work to be done under the
permits issued to him in a workmanlike manner and upon his
using proper materials; upon the applicants restoring that portion
of any street or public place, which he has excavated in
accordance with the rules contained in the permit issued him and
maintaining the same for a period of one ( 1) year; upon the
applicants reimbursing the town for any expense for repairs to
such street or public place made necessary by reason of the
excavation.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, § 11. 1)
Supp. No. 3 1073
18- 108 SUFFIELD CODE
Sec. 18-108. Enforcement.
a) If any person shall construct, install, alter or repair any
sewer, building drain, building sewer or connection to any public
sewer of the town in violation of the requirements of this article
or, having obtained a permit as provided in this division, shall
construct, install, alter or repair any sewer, building drain, building
sewer or connection thereto without having given the superintendent
of sewers or his authorized representative adequate
notice, time, opportunity and assistance, during regular working
hours, to inspect such sewer, connection and the work and materials
used thereon, the superintendent of sewers shall order or
direct the person who constructed, installed, altered or repaired
such sewer, etc., or the owner of any property in which such
sewer, etc., may be located or which may be served thereby, or in
whose interest and employ the work was done, to uncover and
fully expose any or all portions of such sewer, etc., and afford the
superintendent of sewers and his authorized representatives adequate
opportunity to examine and inspect such sewer, etc., and
to secure such records thereof as may be proper. If such sewer,
etc., and the appurtenances thereof shall be found not to be in full
accord with the requirements of this article and the standards
established under its provisions, then the superintendent of sewers
shall order and direct such person, owner or lessee to make
such changes in or additions to or remove portions of appurtenances
of such sewer, etc., as may be necessary to insure that
such sewer, etc., will conform to the requirements of this article
and of the standards established under its provisions. All of such
work shall be performed by the person, owner or lessee without
delay and without expense to the town.
b) If any person after proper order or direction from the superintendent
of sewers fails to take the remedial steps or perform
the acts required by this article, or fails thereafter to use, operate
and maintain any connection with the public sewers of the town,
or appurtenances thereof, as required by this article, the water
pollution control authority or the superintendent of sewers, by
such agents or facilities as it or he may choose, may disconnect
the sewer, etc., which was wrongfully connected, altered, repaired
or used, or through which improper wastes were discharged into
the public sewer system of the town.
Ord. of 1- 21-81, §§ 12. 1, 12. 2)
Supp. No. 3 1074
i4w
UTILITIES § 18- 172
Secs. 18-109- 18- 150. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. WATER
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 18-151- 18-170. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. WATER MAINS*
Sec. 18-171. Owner to reimburse town for proportionate
share of cost for extension.
In accordance with Section 7- 137c of the General Statutes of
Connecticut; Revision of 1958, as amended ( the General Statutes),
each owner of property shall, pursuant to the provisions of
this division, reimburse the town for the proportionate share of
the cost to the town of the extension of any water main which
abuts such property.
Ord. No. 90-03, § 1, 9- 12-90)
Sec. 18-172. Computation of reimbursement.
a) The amount of such reimbursement shall be computed in
such manner as to leave the town ultimately free of any of the
cost of the extension of the water main and expenses incidental
thereto, except that, where any portion of such water service is to
be used for a municipal purpose the town shall contribute a fair
proportion of the expense representing such proportionate municipal
share. Such expenses shall include, but are not limited to,
any costs of materials, installation, pumping stations, service connections,
curb, sidewalk and highway repairs, installation of gate -
valves and shutoffs, interest and professional fees.
b) If (i) any of the property to be assessed hereunder is residential
or agricultural property or is property zoned for residential
or agricultural use, and (ii) such property abuts extensions of
Editor's note—Ord. No. 90- 03, §§ 1- 7, adopted September 12, 1990, did not
specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as Div. 2, §§ 18- 171- 18- 177, was
at the discretion of the editor. These provisions shall become effective as of October
6, 1990.
Supp. No. 3 1075
18- 172 SUFFIELD CODE
water mains to be used for industrial or commercial purposes or
partly for industrial or commercial purposes, and ( iii) said property
is not being used for such industrial or commercial purposes,
the proportionate share of the owners of such property shall be
computed on a front -foot or other equitable basis for a standard or
minimum size main.
c) In the case of land zoned for other than commercial or industrial
purposes or classified, pursuant to the provisions of the
General Statutes, as farm land, forest land or open space land on
the last completed grand list of the town, which land exceeds by
more than one hundred (100) percent the size of the smallest lot
permitted in the lowest density residential zone allowed under
the zoning regulations of the town, the assessment of such excess
land shall be deferred until such time as such excess land shall be
built upon or a building permit issued therefor or until approval
of a subdivision plan of such excess property, whichever event
occurs first. The town clerk shall place a caveat on the land records
in each instance where an assessment is deferred.
Ord. No. 90-3, § 2, 9- 12- 90)
Sec. 18- 173. Notice of hearing.
In the case of any assessment under this section, notice of the
time and place for a hearing upon such assessment shall be published
at least ten (10) days before the date thereof in a newspaper
having a circulation in the town and a copy of such notice, signed
by the town clerk, shall be mailed to the owner of any property to
be affected thereby.
Ord. No. 90-3, § 3, 9- 12-90)
Sec. 18- 174. Appeal.
The owner of any property so assessed may appeal to the courts
from the valuation of his assessment in accordance with and subject
to the limitations of Section 7- 137c of the General Statutes.
Ord. No. 90-3, § 4, 9- 12- 90)
Sec. 18- 175. Water pollution control authority to determine
amount of each assessment.
The water pollution control authority shall determine the
amount of each assessment levied pursuant to this division and
Supp. No. 3
1076
UTILITIES § 18- 177
may adopt policies concerning deferment of payment of assessments.
In apportioning costs, the water pollution control authority
may give consideration to the area, frontage, grand list
valuation and to present or permitted use or classification of abutting
properties and to any other relevant factors. Assessments
may be paid in installments over a period not exceeding fifteen
15) years as the authority shall determine. The authority shall
fix the rate of interest to be paid on the outstanding balance of
said installments. Any such assessment shall be a lien against
such property and the water pollution control authority shall cause
a certificate of lien for each such assessment to be lodged with the
town clerk as provided in Section 7- 137d of the General Statutes.
Ord. No. 90-3, § 5, 9- 12-90)
Sec. 18-176. Notification of assessment.
When the water pollution control authority has determined the
amount of the assessment to be levied, it shall file a copy thereof
in the office of the town clerk. Not later than five (5) days after
such filing, it shall cause a copy of such assessment to be published
in a newspaper having a circulation in the municipality,
and it shall mail a copy of such assessment to the owner of any
property affected thereby.
Ord. No. 90-3, § 6, 9- 12-90)
Sec. 18-177. Payment; interest.
Any installment payment due upon any such assessment and
any interest on the outstanding balance of such assessment which
is not paid when due shall bear interest, until paid, at the maximum
rate, from time to time, permitted by law for unpaid property
taxes.
Ord. No. 90-3, § 7, 9- 12-90)
Supp. No. 3 1077
The next page is 17751
PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION
ZONING REGULATIONS
JULY 12, 2004
Amended through July 5, 2019
TOWN OF SUFFIELD
Page 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section I: PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Authority ……………………………….……………. I-1
B. Purpose ..……………………………………………. I-1
C. Jurisdiction and Application …..………………….. I-2
D. Interpretation …………….……..………………….. I-2
Section II: DEFINITIONS ………………………………… II-1
Section III: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. General Conditions ………………………………... III-1
B. Lots of Record ……………………………………… III-2
C. Lots in Two Zones …………………………………. III-2
D. Obstructions in Yards, Fences …………………… III-2
E. Exceptions to Height Requirements …………….. III-3
F. Accessory Buildings ………………………………. III-3
G. Lot Frontage and Configuration…….…………….. III-4
H. Driveways and Visibility …………………………… III-5
I. Utility Services ……………………………………… III-7
J. Health Considerations …………………………….. III-7
K. Horses and Ponies for Pleasure …………………. III-8
L. Connecticut River Conservation Zone …………… III-8
M. Outdoor Lighting …………………………………… III-11
N. Sidewalks …………………………………………… III-12
O. Mobile Homes, Trailers, and Recreation Vehicles III-13
P. Outdoor Display, Storage of Goods or Materials III-14
Q. Storage Containers and Dumpsters …………….. III-15
R. Commercial Vehicles ……………………………... III-15
S. Drainage …………………………………………… III-15
T. Topsoil ……………………………………………… III-15
Section IV: ZONING DISTRICTS AND USE REGULATIONS
A. Zoning Districts ……………………………………. IV-1
B. Use Table ………………………………………….. IV-2
C. Farmland Preservation (FP) Zone ………………. IV-4
D. Residential (R) Zones …………………………….. IV-5
E. Planned Development Apartment (PDA) Zone ... IV-7
F. Town Center Village (TCV) District Zone ……….. IV-10
G. West Suffield Center Village (WSCV) District Zone IV-16
H. Neighborhood Commercial (NC) Zone ………….. IV-20
I. Industrial District (I) Zone …………………………. IV-21
J. Planned Development Industrial Park (PDIP) …. IV-23
K. Temporary Use Permits …………………………... IV-26
L. Prohibited Uses ……………………………………. IV-26
M. Height and Area Schedule ……………………….. IV-28
N. Housing Opportunity District (HOD) Zone……….. IV-29
Section V: SPECIAL REGULATIONS
A. Active-Adult Housing Developments ……………. V-1
B. Adult-Oriented Establishments ………………….. V-5
C. Affordable Housing ……………………………….. V-6
D. Alcoholic Beverages ……………………………… V-7
E. Antique Shops …………………………………….. V-9
F. Assisted-Living and Personal-Care Facilities,
Convalescent and Nursing Homes ………………. V-10
G. Back (or Rear) Lots …..…………………………… V-12
H. Bed and Breakfast Facility ……………………….. V-13
I. Conversion of One-to-Two-Family Dwelling ……. V-14
J. Earth Removal …………………………………….. V-14
K. Flood Damage Prevention ……………………….. V-16
L. Greenhouse Operations (Commercial) ..……….. V-31
M. Horses for Commercial Purposes ….…………… V-32
N. Landfill Regulations ………………………………. V-33
O. Motor-Vehicle Sales, Service, and Washing …. V-35
P. Outdoor Café Service Requirements ………….. V-36
Q. Two-Family Dwelling …………………………….. V-37
R. Wireless Telecommunication Regulations …….. V-38
S. Farm Stand Permanent …………………………... V-45
T. Wineries…………………………………………….. V-46
U. Adaptive Reuse……………………………………. V-47
V. Small Wind Energy Producing Facilities………... V-49
W. Keeping of Chickens………………………………. V-52
Section VI: FLEXIBLE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
A. Statement of Purpose ………………………………... VI-1
B. Applicability …………………………………………… VI-1
C. Pre-Application Conference ………………………… VI-2
D. Application ……………………………………………. VI-2
E. Conservation Commission Review ………………… VI-2
F. Development Standards and Requirements ……… VI-3
G. Design Guidelines …………………………………… VI-4
H. Conveyance of Open Space ……………………….. VI-5
I. Conditions ……………………………………………. VI-5
Section VII: PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
A. Statement of Purpose ……………………….………. VII-1
B. General Parking and Loading Provisions ….……… VII-1
C. Dimensions of Parking Space and Aisles ….……… VII-2
D. Parking Space Requirements in any Zone ……….. VII-2
E. Loading Space Requirements ……………………… VII-4
F. Submission and Approval of Plans ………………... VII-4
G. Restrictions on Unregistered Motor Vehicles …….. VII-4
Section VIII: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERS
A. Statement of Purpose ………………………….…… VIII-1
B. Definitions …………………………………………… VIII-1
C. General Requirements …………………………….. VIII-2
D. Screening and Buffers ……………………………… VIII-3
E. Other Requirements ………………………………… VIII-4
Section IX: SIGNAGE
A. Statement of Purpose ………………………….…… IX-1
B. Measurement of Sign Area ………………………… IX-1
C. General Requirements …………………………….. IX-1
D. Height and Shape of Signs ……………………….. IX-2
E. Prohibited Signs ……………………………………. IX-3
F. Dimensional Requirements ……………………….. IX-3
Section X: RIDGELINE PROTECTION ZONE
A. Statement of Purpose ………………………….….. X-1
B. Definitions …………………………………………… X-1
C. Permitted Uses ……………………………………… X-2
D. Ridgeline Protection Standards …………………… X-2
E. Application …………………………………………… X-4
Section XI: NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
A. Statement of Purpose ……………………………… XI-1
B. Nonconforming Lots ……………………………….. XI-1
C. Nonconforming Uses ………………………………. XI-2
D. Nonconforming Structures ………………………… XI-2
E. Other ………………………………………………… XI-2
Section XII: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
A. Statement of Purpose ……………………………… XII-1
B. Definitions …………………………………………… XII-1
C. Activities Requiring Certified E&S Control Plan … XII-2
D. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan ……………… XII-2
E. Minimum Acceptable Standards ………………….. XII-3
F. Issuance of Certification …………………………… XII-4
G. Conditions Relating to Soil E&S Control …………. XII-4
H. Inspection and Other Requirements …………….. XII-5
Page 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section XIII: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
A. General …………………………………………… XIII-1
B. Powers and Duties ……………………………… XIII-1
C. Procedures ………………………………………. XIII-2
D. Application Form and Content …………………. XIII-3
E. Time Limit on Variance ………………………… XIII-3
Section XIV: ADMINISTRATION
A. Required Permits and Information ……………… XIV-1
B. Approvals ………………………………………….. XIV-5
C. Bonding ……………………………………………. XIV-7
D. Enforcement ………………………………………. XIV-8
E. Zoning Amendment ..…………………………….. XIV-9
F. Fees ………………………………………………… XIV-9
Section I: PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Authority ………………………………………….. I-1
B. Purpose .…..………………………………………. I-1
C. Jurisdiction and Application .…..…………………. I-2
D. Interpretation ……………….……..………………. I-2
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section 1: Purpose and Intent
Page 1
SECTION I: PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. AUTHORITY
The Zoning and Planning Commission of the Town of Suffield, Connecticut, at a meeting held
on June 21, 2004, in said Town of Suffield, adopted the following Zoning Regulations and
Zoning Map, thereby amending Section 1 through 7 inclusive of the Town of Suffield Zoning
Regulations and Zoning Map adopted on October 25, 1978. The following revised Zoning
Regulations and Zoning Map shall replace said presently existing Zoning Regulations and
Zoning Map of the Town of Suffield and shall become effective on July 12, 2004.
The provision of the zoning regulations of the Town of Suffield as originally adopted on June
15, 1954 and subsequently revised and amended are repealed as of the effective date of these
Zoning Regulations, except that all terms and conditions attached to special permits approved by
the Zoning and Planning Commission and variances approved by the Board of Appeals shall
remain in effect.
B. PURPOSE
The Zoning Regulations are adopted under the authority of Chapter 124 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended, for the following purposes:
1. To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
Suffield, Connecticut, and of the public generally;
2. To divide the municipality into zones of such number, shape, and area as may be best
suited to carry out the purposes of these Regulations;
3. To lessen congestion in the streets and facilitate adequate provision for transportation,
water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public benefits;
4. To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout Town, thereby conserving the
value of properties;
5. To regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or use of buildings or
structures and the use of land in such zones;
6. To permit certain classes or kinds of buildings, structures or uses of land within the Town
only after obtaining a special permit;
7. To regulate the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures; the
percentage of the area of the lot that may be occupied; the size and configuration of
yards, courts and open spaces; and the height, size and location of advertising signs and
billboards;
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section 1: Purpose and Intent
Page 2
8. To regulate the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures,
and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes;
9. To regulate the type, use, and aesthetics of lots and buildings within the Village Districts;
10. To secure safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers;
11. To promote and protect existing agricultural uses;
12. To prevent sprawl and the overcrowding of land;
13. To promote cluster development;
14. To provide for various housing opportunities;
15. To guide development in a manner which recognizes the importance of the natural
environment; and,
16. To guide growth in accordance with Suffield’s Plan of Conservation and Development.
C. JURISDICTION AND APPLICATION
Within the Town of Suffield, no land, building, structure or portion thereof shall hereafter be
used, and no building, structure or portion thereof shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged
located, extended, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the Zoning
Regulations. The Zoning Regulations are intended to state the uses of land and/or buildings and
structures that are permitted within the Town of Suffield. USES NOT STATED ARE
PROHIBITED.
D. INTERPRETATION
1. Use of land, buildings or structures, and activities not clearly permitted in the various
zoning districts are prohibited.
2. In interpreting and applying these regulations, they shall be considered as the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
3. When these regulations impose a greater restriction on the use of buildings or require larger
yards or other open spaces, or require a greater percentage of lots to remain un-built, or
impose other standards higher than those imposed by law, ordinance, regulation or private
agreement, these regulations shall control.
4. When restrictions are imposed by any law, ordinance, regulation or private agreement
which are greater than those required by these regulations, such greater restriction shall not
be affected by these regulations.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section 1: Purpose and Intent
Page 3
5. When one section of these regulations imposes standards greater than those of another
section, the standards of the more restrictive section shall control.
6. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; and words
used in the present tense shall include the future.
7. The words “shall” and “must” are mandatory and not discretionary.
8. The words “zone(s)”, “zoning district(s)”, and “district(s)” have the same meaning.
9. The word “lot” shall include the word “parcel”.
10. The phrase “these regulations” shall refer to the entire “Zoning Regulations”.
11. The phrase “Commission” shall refer to the “Zoning and Planning Commission”.
12. The phrase “Board” shall refer to the “Zoning Board of Appeals”.
13. The phrase “Health Department” shall refer to the North Central District Health
Department.
14. The phrase “Town Plan” shall refer to the “Plan of Conservation and Development.”
15. The phrase “Zoning Officer” shall refer to the “Zoning Enforcement Officer”.
16. The acronym “CGS” shall refer to “Connecticut General Statutes” as amended.
17. The acronym “SF” shall refer to “square feet”.
18. The acronym “WPCA” shall refer to Suffield’s “Water Pollution Control Authority”.
19. The acronym “DRB” shall refer to the Village District “Design Review Board”.
20. If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this act shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional for any reason, such adjudication shall apply only to the section,
paragraph, subdivision, clause, or provision upon which such adjudication is based, and the
remainder of this act shall be deemed to be and shall continue to be valid and in full force
and effect.
21. Questions regarding these regulations should be directed to the Office of the Town Planner.
Section II: DEFINITIONS
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page1
SECTION II: DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of these regulations, the following words shall have the meaning given therein.
(Diagrams are provided for illustrative purposes only.)
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A
building or structure, in addition to the principal
building, which is clearly subordinate to, and
customarily incidental to, and located upon the
same lot as the principal building or on a
contiguous lot under the same ownership, except
in the case of barns or sheds used for the indoor
storage of agricultural products or equipment,
which may require a special permit.
ACCESSORY USE: A use, in addition to the principal use, which is clearly subordinate to, and
customarily incidental to, and located upon the same lot as, the principal use or on a contiguous
lot under the same ownership. This use may require a special permit.
ACTIVE RECREATION FACILITY: Recreation that is typically characterized by the participation
in organized sports programs, often requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places,
sites, or fields. The term “active recreation” includes swimming, bicycling, skateboarding, and
playground activities. Court games such as tennis, basketball, and volleyball. Fields sports such
as baseball, softball, lacrosse, field hockey, football, and soccer or any combination thereof or
similar or related uses. This use requires a special permit from the Commission. (2/7/2012)
AQUACULTURE: The hatching, raising, and breeding of fish or other aquatic plants or animals
for sale or personal use on a parcel of land containing a minimum of five (5) acres. This use
requires a special permit.
ACTIVE-ADULT HOUSING: A housing development where one-hundred percent (100%) of all
dwelling units fully comply with provisions of the United States Fair Housing Act as amended,
as it pertains to “housing for older persons” (age 55 and older). This includes compliance with
any and all rules promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) which govern the implementation of such act. This use requires a special permit.
ADULT MATERIAL: Shall include but is not limited to accessories, books, films, videocassettes,
or live entertainment for observation by patrons therein, or magazines and other periodicals or
any combination thereof which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT: Shall include, without limitation, an “adult live dancing
establishment,” “adult bookstores,” “adult Motion pictures theaters,” “adult mini-motion picture
theaters,” and further means any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or
admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms studios,
Accessory Building
Principal Building
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page2
compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purposes of
viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to
a member of the public, a patron or a member. An “adult-oriented establishment” includes,
without limitation, any “adult entertainment studio” or any premises that are physically arranged
and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio,
without limitation, any “adult entertainment studio” or any premises that re physically arranged
and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio,
exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio, or any other term of
like import. An “adult-oriented establishment” includes an establishment that has ten percent
(10%) or more of its stock or trade devoted to adult material. This use requires a special permit.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Housing for which persons and families pay thirty (30) percent or less
of their annual income, where such income is less than or equal to eighty (80) percent of the area
median income or for the State of Connecticut, whichever is less.
AGRICULTURE: The cultivation of soil for the production of crops and the raising of livestock.
AGRICULTURAL BUFFER: A fifty (50) to one-hundred (100) foot buffer required by the
Commission when a residential development is proposed adjacent to actively farmed land and a
fifty (50) foot minimum buffer for a farm used for the keeping of pigs, fur-bearing animals,
poultry, or wildlife for commercial purposes. The planting of trees and shrubbery may be
required as part of an agricultural buffer. When a residential development is proposed adjacent
to actively farmed land, the following statement shall be noted on the plans and on each property
deed contained in the development: “This property abuts or is in proximity to an active
agricultural or farming operation which is a permitted zoning use. Agricultural operations
sometimes emit noise, run-off, odor, dust or chemical spray drift during either the day or night
that are annoying or irritants to some people.”
EXISTING FARM PROPOSED HOMES COMMERCIAL PIG, FUR-BEARING EXISTING HOMES
POULTRY, WILDLIFE FARM
Lot Line Lot Line
50’ to 100’ 50’ to 100’
Agricultural Agricultural
Buffer Buffer
Agricultural Buffer required with a Agricultural Buffer required with a proposed
proposed Residential Subdivision Commercial Pig, Fur-Bearing, Poultry, Wildlife Farm
AMUSEMENT ARCADE OR DEVICE: A building or room the principal use of which is storage and
operation of up to three (3) amusement devices, defined as any mechanical, electric or electronic
device used or designed to be operated for entertainment or as a game by the insertion of a coin,
token or other article or by paying money to have it activated. For purposes of this definition,
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page3
each station of a device that provides multiple stations, each of which allows separate games to
be played, shall be considered one amusement device.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: An establishment where animals are given medical or surgical treatment
and are cared for during the time of such treatment. This use requires a special permit.
ANTIQUE SHOP: A place offering the sale of antiques, defined as a work of art, piece of
furniture, or decorative object (not including appliances), at least fifty (50) years old. This use
requires a special permit.
APARTMENT: A segregated portion of a dwelling with bathroom and kitchen facilities. An
apartment requires a special permit.
APARTMENT HOUSE: Apartment house is a building arranged, intended or designed to contain
three (3) or more dwelling units where the occupants are not transient in nature. This use
requires a special permit.
ASSISTED-LIVING FACILITY: Independent living residences with options for assistance with
activities of daily living including but not limited to meal service, housekeeping, maintenance,
laundry, medical assistance, personal assistance, and transportation as desired or needed. This
use requires a special permit.
BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY: An owner occupied single-family dwelling in which breakfast
and lodging may be provided to overnight paying guests where the provision of such services is
subordinate to the principal use of the building as a residence. This use requires a special permit.
BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE: An owner-occupied building or structure where lodging and
meals for no more than two (2) boarders are provided to long-term non-transient residents only,
for compensation, utilizing one central kitchen facility. All elements of boarding house use shall
be confined to the principal building on the lot. No sign is permitted in connection with this use.
BOARDING HOUSE, FARM: A dormitory building with group sleeping accommodations, used as
an accessory building and use to a farm, for the seasonal use of farm labor.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of
persons, animals or materials. Any other structure more than eight feet high shall be considered
as a building including a fence or wall excluding a public utility pole or a flagpole.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: See “ACCESSORY BUILDING”.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average finished grade measured six (6) feet
out from the foundation to the highest point of a flat or mansard roof, or to the mean level
between the eave and ridge for the highest roof surface for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page4
6’
Hip or Gable Gambrel Mansard Flat
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to a
street at a distance equal to the
required front yard or at a greater
distance when otherwise established
by the Town of Suffield or when
established by the owner and
recorded in the land records of the
Town of Suffield. In the case of a
back or rear lot, the “building line”
shall be established parallel to the
“rear lot line” of the front lot or as
determined by the Commission.
BUILDING PERMIT: An official certificate or document issued by the Building Official that
authorizes performance of a specified activity which the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies
conforms to these regulations.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: See “Principal Building”
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A certificate issued by the Building Official for a use or
occupancy of a structure in whole or in part which requires the Zoning Enforcement Officer’s
approval.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE: A letter issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
certifying that a building or land use conforms to the requirements of these regulations.
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER: Includes “Group Child Care Home” and “Family Child Care
Home” as defined in CGS Sec. 19a-77, as amended, i.e., a facility providing daytime care or
instruction for seven (7) or more children, as long as no play equipment is located in any
required setback area. This use requires a special permit.
CLUB: An organization catering exclusively to members and their guests, provided that the
purpose of the club is not conducted primarily for gain and that there is not conducted any
commercial activities except as required generally for the membership and purposes of this club.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A development design technique that is encouraged under Sec. VI.
Flexible Residential Development regulations, that permits a reduction in lot area, frontage, and
½ ½
½ ½
Height
6’ 6’
Height
6’
Height
Height
Back Lot
Building Line
Building Line
Corner Lot
Building Line Interior Lot
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page5
setback, and a reduction in associated infrastructure needs, provided there is no increase in the
overall density permitted for a conventional development, in return for the preservation of open
space to be used for passive and/or active recreation or agricultural purposes, and the
preservation of historically or environmentally sensitive features.
Cluster Development Conventional Development
- 30 lots - - 30 lots –
COMMISSION: The Zoning and Planning Commission of the Town of Suffield, Connecticut.
CONDOMINIUM, RESIDENTIAL OR OFFICE: A residential or commercial development containing
individually owned dwelling units and commonly owned and shared areas and facilities on a lot
or lots owned in common.
CONSERVATION COMMISSION: Synonymous with the Town of Suffield’s Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Agency and/or the Town of Suffield’s Conservation Commission.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT: A nonpossessory interest in real property imposing limitation or
affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or
open space values of real property assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or
open space use.
CONTRACTORS’ YARD: A use involving the keeping of construction, excavation, landscaping
and/or yard maintenance equipment. This use requires a special permit.
CONVALESCENT, NURSING, OR REST HOME: A medical institution providing shelter, clothing
and food to resident patients as defined in CGS Sec. 19a-490(o). For the purposes of these
regulations, a convalescent, nursing or rest home use is a permissible use under Sec. V.F.
(Assisted-Living and Personal-Care Facilities) in all zones. This use requires a special permit.
Open
Space
Open Space
Open Space
Open Space
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page6
CUSTOMARY HOME OFFICE OR OCCUPATION: Customary home office or occupation for gain
carried on entirely within the dwelling by residents thereof provided the use:
1. Is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes;
2. Does not change the residential character of the dwelling in any visible manner;
3. Does not create objectionable noise, odor, vibrations, or unsightly conditions noticeable
off the premises;
4. Does not create interference with radio and television reception in the vicinity;
5. Does not create a health or safety hazard;
6. That no nonresident help is employed for that purpose;
7. No trading in merchandise is carried on;
8. No personal physical service of any kind is performed;
9. No external or internal alterations or construction features not customarily found in a
home are required (i.e. no outside storage of materials); and,
10. No commercial type vehicle shall be used in connection with the home occupation.
Commercial operations such as massage therapists, tearooms, antique shops, barbershops, beauty
shops, etc., are not to be considered customary home occupations. (10-09-09)
DEAD-END STREET OR SYSTEM: A public or private street or connected series of streets with its
only means of entrance or exit through one common point. A dead-end street or dead-end-street
system shall be limited to twelve-hundred (1,200) feet as measured from the edge of the
connecting street to the center of the proposed cul-de-sac unless waived by the Commission for
severe topographic reasons or for the purpose of fulfilling Subdivision Regulation Sec. 801 when
said street:
1. Has public water; and,
2. Has no more than a total of thirteen (13) lots in the R-90 zone, fifteen (15) lots in a R-45
zone, or twenty (20) lots in the R-25 zone.
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD (DRB): An advisory Board to the Commission authorized by CGS
Chap. 124, Sec. 8-2j as amended, charged with reviewing applications in accordance with the
regulations set forth for the Town Center Village District and the West Suffield Center Village
District.
DEVELOPABLE AREA: An uninterrupted contiguous area, which does not contain wetlands,
watercourses, water bodies, or areas with slopes in excess of twenty percent (20%).
DRIVE-THRU: A vehicular lane with storage in a line of approach to a bank facility or retail
pharmacy only, which permits bank customers to conduct banking business or pharmacy
customers to purchase prescription drugs. This use requires a special permit. (10-09-09)
Driveway: Any access from a street used, designed, or intended to be used for vehicular ingress
and egress to any building, structure, use, or lot. Each lot shall have access through its required
lot frontage except when the Commission approves a common driveway. The Commission may
approve a common driveway for up to 2 houses when it finds that each lot is capable of
supporting its own driveway with access through the required lot frontage and that in the opinion
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page7
of the Commission a common driveway is (1) desirable for traffic and safety concerns; (2) only
one common driveway is permitted on a lot; (3) the common driveway must serve one of the lots
on which it is located; and, (4) a common driveway maintenance agreement is filed in the Land
Records the contents of which are acceptable to Commission Counsel. (9/28/05)
DWELLING: A building designed and used exclusively as living quarters for one or more
families. The terms "dwelling," "attached dwelling," "detached dwelling" and "dwelling unit"
shall not be deemed to include hotel, motel, boarding or rooming house, convalescent or nursing
home, mobile home trailer, tourist home or tent. In the case of buildings having two (2) or more
portions divided by party walls forming a complete separation above the basement, each such
portion shall be considered to be a separate dwelling.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A building having any portion of a wall in common with another
dwelling.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A building with open spaces on all sides.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building containing more than one dwelling unit. This use
requires a special permit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building containing one dwelling unit only.
DWELLING, UNIT: A building or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping facilities for
one (1) family.
EARTH MATERIALS REMOVAL: The removal, excavation or mining of minerals, sand, gravel,
clay, bedrock, peat, loam or topsoil for commercial purposes. This use requires a special permit.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN: A plan required by these regulations to
minimize soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development, and administered by the
Town of Suffield Conservation Commission.
Family: FAMILY – One person or two or more persons, related by blood, foster relationship,
marriage or adoption, and , in addition, any domestic servants or gratuitous guests thereof; or one
or more persons who need not be so related, and, in addition, domestic servants or gratuitous
guests thereof, who are living together in a single, nonprofit dwelling unit and maintaining a
common household with single cooking facilities. A roomer, boarder or lodger shall not be
considered a member of the family.
FARM: A tract of land containing five (5) or more acres used in part or wholly for agricultural
purposes. In the case of a portion of a farm used for the keeping of pigs, fur-bearing animals,
poultry, or wildlife for commercial purposes, an agricultural buffer with a minimum width of
fifty (50) feet from all property lines is required.
FARMERS’ MARKET: A seasonal weekly event sponsored by the Town of Suffield. This use
requires a special permit.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page8
FARM STAND: A structure used for the sale of agricultural and homemade products which are
produced on the premises, setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the front lot line and fifty
(50) feet from any street intersection, and not to exceed ten (10) feet in height unless part of an
existing structure.
Farm Stand Permanent (11/17/08): An accessory building and use to an active farm for the
sale of agricultural and home made products. This use requires a Special Permit (See section
V.S.). (11/17/08)
Flexible Residential Development: A residential development consisting of at least ten (10)
acres with five (5) or more lots that allows smaller lots than those normally required by the
underlying zoning district regulations in order to permanently conserve natural, scenic, or
historic resources; provide open spaces for active or passive use; and, reduce infrastructure costs
and impervious surfaces. (See also “CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT”.)
Greenhouse: A building made mainly of glass or other transparent or translucent material in
which the temperature or humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of plants. (10-09-09)
Golf Course: A tract of land laid out for playing a game of golf, including miniature golf,
driving ranges, and associated buildings. This use requires a special permit.
Grade, Finished: The final elevations of lawns, driveways, walks and roads constructed as
shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
Gross Floor Area: The sum of the horizontal area of all floors of a building, measured by
exterior dimensions.
HOMEOWNERS’ ASSOCIATION: An incorporated organization operating under recorded land
agreements through which each lot or unit owner is automatically a member and each lot or unit
is automatically subject to a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization’s activities.
Hotel/Motel: A building or group of buildings providing lodging for persons, with or without
meals, and intended, designed, and used primarily for the accommodation of transients. This use
requires a special permit.
Industrial: The manufacture, fabrication, processing, or reduction of an article, substance or
commodity in such a manner as to change the form, character, or appearance thereof.
Industrial, Light: Research and development activities, and the manufacturing or processing
and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously manufactured materials,
which activities are conducted wholly within an enclosed building.
Junk: Any worn-out, cast-off or discarded article or material that is ready for destruction or has
been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page9
Kennel: The keeping of five (5) or more dogs over the ages of six (6) months. This use requires
a special permit. Commercial kennels as defined in CGS Sec. 22-344 are prohibited.
LANDSCAPING PLAN: A plan that is prepared by and contains the seal of a Landscape Architect
registered by the State of Connecticut that includes a list and count of all trees and shrubs to be
planted, by common and botanical names, size (caliper, height, time until maturity) at planting,
and height and spread maturity.
LIGHTING PLAN: A plan required for non-residential uses and residential uses that require a
special permit, which provides specific outdoor illumination measures and specifications.
LIVESTOCK: Shall mean domestic animals including alpaca, cows, goats, horses, lamas and
sheep.
Lot: A plot or parcel of land occupied or approved to be occupied by a building(s) which meets
the minimum requirements for lot frontage, lot depth, and lot area of the zone in which it is
located or which meets the definition of nonconforming lot as defined in these regulations.
Lot Area: The actual area, in square feet, enclosed by the boundaries of the lot.
Lot Corner: A lot having two (2) adjacent sides facing a street or streets so that the interior
angle of the intersection is not more than one-hundred twenty (120) degrees; also a lot having
two (2) adjacent sides forming tangents of a curve with an inside radius greater than fifty (50)
feet, all ofwhich face a street or streets.
Lot Coverage: That percentage of the total lot area covered by buildings and all other
impervious surfaces including most parking areas.
Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the
general direction of the side lot lines.
Impervious Surface
Pervious Surface
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page10
LOT FRONTAGE: Is the distance between lot sidelines measured along the street line. In the case
of lots having frontage on or adjacent to a street curve, required lot frontage shall be measured at
the building line. The required minimum lot frontage shall be measured as a continuousunbroken
line. (9/28/05)
LOT LINE: The property lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
S T R E E T R. O. W.
LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the property line separating
the lot from the street.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line which is generally opposite the front lot line; if the rear lot line is
less than ten (10) feet in length, or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be
deemed to be a line parallel to the front line not less than ten (10) feet long, lying wholly within
the lot and farthest from the front line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line, as defined herein.
Membrane Structure: A structure with a frame consisting of tubular metal, plastic, wood or
any other framing material and covered with plastic or other membrane fabric material. Also
known as a “hoop house”. Not to be construed as a greenhouse (see Section II Definitions). (10-
09-09)
MOBILE OFFICE OR TRAILER: A structure capable of being transported on wheels or on a
flatbed trailer designed to permit temporary office occupancy in connection with a permitted
construction project. A mobile office or trailer cannot be used for dwelling purposes.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure legally in existence at
the time of the adoption of these regulations, or legally existing prior to an amendment to these
regulations, which does not conform to all the applicable requirements of these regulations.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot legally existing at the adoption of these regulations, or legally
existing prior to an amendment to these regulations, which does not conform to the minimum lot
area or frontage requirements for the zone in which it is located.
Rear Lot Line
Side Lot Line Side Lot Line
Front Lot Line
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page11
NONCONFORMING USE: A use legally existing at the adoption of these regulations, or legally
existing prior to an amendment to these regulations, which does not conform to the use
regulations for the zone in which it is located.
OPEN SPACE: Land permanently preserved through deed or conservation restriction in its natural
state and/or developed for recreational or farming use as approved by the Commission.
OWNER OF RECORD: Wherever the term “owner of record” is used in this ordinance in
conjunction with a public hearing or public notice, it shall mean the owner whose name appears
in the land records found in the Assessor’s Office at the time when the mailing list for said
hearing or notice is prepared.
PLAN OF CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT: The Town of Suffield Master Plan adopted by
the Commission that details current and future community-development plans.
POULTRY: Chickens, turkeys, pheasants, ducks, and other birds customarily raised for their meat
and/or eggs for commercial purposes.
PREMISES: A lot or parcel and all buildings, uses, and structures located therein.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: That single building or inter-related group of buildings, in which is
conducted the principal use of the lot on which the building is situated.
PRINCIPAL USE: The primary purpose or function for which a premise is used, designed, or
intended to be used.
PROFESSIONAL HOME OFFICE OR OCCUPATION: An office accessory to and located within an
owner-occupied single-family dwelling for use by the homeowner professional, their staff, and
clients, provided that:
1. A site plan is submitted to the Commission for approval.
2. Professionals may have one (1) non-resident employee except that medical doctors or
dentists may have two (2) non-resident employees.
3. Adequate off-street screened parking and lighting shall be provided on the premises.
This use requires a special permit.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle which can be registered for highway use or boat, which
is capable of being occupied with sleeping and/or cooking accommodations, on a temporary
basis and may or may not contain sanitary facilities.
RESTAURANT: A space in a suitable and permanent building kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public to be a place where meals are regularly served. A restaurant may
include a cocktail lounge or bar as long as no more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area
is devoted to such use and is clearly adjunct to the primary function of serving food and operate
under a Liquor Permit as provided in the C.G.S. as amended and comply with all Liquor Control
Commission regulations appertaining thereto. Other establishments serving food and
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page12
Freestanding
Sign
Window
Sign
Project in a
Sign
Common Sign
10’ Max.
nonalcoholic drink in an enclosed structure, providing seats for its customers either at a counter
or at separate tables. Outdoor window counter service is prohibited. Any type of service of food
and drink intended for consumption on the premises outside of the enclosed structure is
prohibited, unless the Commission grants a special permit as an accessory use. This use requires
a special permit.
RESUBDIVISION: A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or resubdivision if
such change (1) affects any street layout shown on such map; (2) affects any area reserved
thereon for public use; or (3) diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an
additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or
recording of such map.
RETAIL: The sale of goods or services directly to the consumer, with the exception of those uses
listed in Sec. IV.L. Prohibited Uses or similar uses. This use requires a special permit.
SIGN: Any structure or part thereof, or any
device (including but not limited to letters,
words, emblems, numerals, pictures,
sculptures, figures, or any combination
thereof) used for visual communication for
the purpose of bringing the subject thereof
to the attention of the public. Merchandise
or facsimile merchandise shall not be
considered a sign.
SIGN, FREESTANDING OR GROUND: A sign affixed to the ground by its own support and/or
foundation.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign attached to a building extending in whole or in part more than
twelve (12) inches beyond said building.
SIGN,WALL: A sign attached to or painted on the exterior wall of a building and not projecting
away from said wall more than twelve (12) inches.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign affixed to the interior or exterior of a window and visible from outside
the building.
SIGN PERMIT: Same as “BUILDING PERMIT”.
SITE PLAN: A detailed plan required when seeking a permit by the Commission in accordance
with Sec. XIV.A.2.
SPECIAL PERMIT: A use of a structure or lot or any action upon a premises that may be
permitted by these regulations only upon application to, and the approval of, the Zoning and
Planning Commission in accordance with these regulations. These uses have been deemed by
the Commission to require restrictions or conditions placed upon them, which if controlled as to
Wall Sign
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page13
number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would promote public health, safety,
appearance, or general welfare. The procedure for obtaining a special permit includes that
abutters be notified and a public hearing held. Completion of a site plan is required for obtaining
a special permit. Special permits may be issued by the Commission for a specified time period.
STORAGE TRAILER: A vehicle without means of propulsion that can be used for hauling or
storing of materials or goods and is capable of being readily moved by a tractor or other vehicle.
This use may require a special permit.
STORY: That portion of a building or structure between the surface of a floor and the surface of
the next floor above, or in its absence, the next ceiling above.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street with an average traffic volume in excess of five-thousand (5,000)
vehicles per day and which accommodates traffic movement between arterial, collector, and
local streets.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street with an average traffic volume between one-thousand (1,000)
and five-thousand (5,000) vehicles per day.
STREET LINE: The property line separating the street right of way from adjoining property, not
the paved or traveled roadway.
STREET, PUBLIC: Any street, which is a State highway. Any Street or Road accepted by Town
Meeting and deeded to the Town of Suffield. This includes land dedicated as a public right of
way and accepted by the Town or the State. (2/7/2012)
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, including a building, the use of which requires
location on or under the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground
excluding flagpoles, public utility poles, and underground services.
SUBDIVISION: A division of land into three (3) or more parts or lots made subsequent to the
adoption of subdivision regulations by the Commission, for the purposes, whether immediate or
future, of sale or building development expressly excluding development for municipal,
conservation, or agricultural purposes.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: The Town of Suffield “Subdivision Regulations” adopted by the
Zoning and Planning Commission and which must be adhered to in order to subdivide or
resubdivide property in the Town of Suffield.
TOWN HOUSE: A dwelling unit attached to another dwelling unit at one or both sides by party
walls, extending from the lowest floor level to the roof with no openings between units.
TRAILER: A large transport vehicle designed to be hauled by a truck or tractor.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page14
UNIT OF OCCUPANCY: Any structure or part thereof that is intended to be, or is, used to house
one family, business, industry or corporate entity for the purpose of carrying out the business
appurtenant thereto.
USE, ACCESSORY: See “Accessory Use”
Use, Principal: See “Principal Use”
Variance: A relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Regulations where such a variance will be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of the regulations and with due consideration for
conserving the public health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values solely with
respect to a parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such a parcel but not
affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of such regulations
would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship so that substantial justice will be done
and the public safety and welfare secured. A variance may only be issued by a vote of the
Zoning Board of Appeals after proper application and notice.
Warehousing, Wholesaling, and Distribution: A use engaged in selling and/or distributing of
merchandise, where goods are received and/or stored for delivery to others. This use requires a
special permit.
Wetlands: Those areas designated and defined as inland wetlands by the Conservation
Commission, pursuant to its regulations.
Wineries: (11/17/08) An accessory building and use to an active farm that is used for growing,
bottling, and the production of wine and wine products. Wineries may include activities such as:
(1) retail sale of wine and related items; (2) a tasting room; (3) wine sales by glass or bottle; (4)
wine tasting; (5) tours; (6) wine/food events and (7) wine festivals. This use requires a Special
Permit. (See section V.S.). (11/17/08)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section II: Definitions
Page15
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a structure that lies between said structure and the
nearest lot line and which is unoccupied except as may be specifically authorized in this
ordinance. In measuring a yard, as hereafter provided, the line of structure shall be deemed to
mean a line parallel to the nearest lot line, drawn from a point of a structure nearest to such lot
line. Such measurement shall be taken at right angle from the line of the structure, as defined
herein, to the nearest lot line:
Rear Lot Line
Side Lot Line Side Lot Line
Front Lot Line
STREET R.O.W.
Yard, Front: A yard extending across the full width and/or length of the lot and lying between
the front lot line and the nearest line of a structure.
Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line
and the nearest line of the building.
Yard, Side: A yard between the sideline of a lot and the nearest line of the building and
extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or, in the absence of either such yards, to the front
or rear lot line as the case may be.
Zoning Board of Appeals: The Town body whose responsibility is to hear appeals from
decisions of the Zoning Officer and to consider requests for variances to these regulations.
Zoning District: A specific area of land designated on the Town of Suffield Zoning Map having
separate requirements as establish by these regulations.
Zoning Enforcement Officer: The individual(s) designated by the Commission as the Town
Official responsible for administering and enforcing the requirements of these regulations.
Rear Yard
Front Yard
Side
Yard
Side
Yard
Section III: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. General Conditions ………………………………………… III-1
B. Lots of Record ……………………………………………... III-2
C. Lots in Two Zones …………………………………………. III-2
D. Obstructions in Yards, Fences ……………………………... III-2
E. Exceptions to Height Requirements ……………………….. III-3
F. Accessory Buildings ……………………………………….. III-3
G. Lot Frontage and Configuration…………………………….. III-4
H. Driveways and Visibility …………………………………... III-5
I. Utility Services …………………………………………….. III-7
J. Health Considerations ……………………………………… III-7
K. Horses/Ponies for Pleasure ………………………………… III-8
L. Connecticut River Conservation Zone …………………….. III-8
M. Outdoor Lighting …………………………………………. III-11
N. Sidewalks ………………………………………………….. III-12
O. Mobile Homes, Trailers, and Recreation Vehicles ………… III-13
P. Outdoor Display, Sales or Storage of Goods or Materials … III-14
Q. Storage Containers and Dumpsters ……………………….. III-15
R. Commercial Vehicles ……………………………………… III-15
S. Drainage …………………………………………………… III-15
T. Topsoil …………………………………………………….. III-15
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 1
SECTION III. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
When any provision of these regulations imposes more stringent requirements, regulations,
restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other ordinance,
statute or law, the provision of these regulations shall apply and govern. In the case of any
conflict or inconsistency between sections of these regulations themselves, the more stringent
section shall apply and govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, or sentence shall not affect
the validity of any other word, clause or sentence.
A. GENERAL CONDITIONS
Except as specifically provided herein:
1. No land, building or premises, or part thereof shall hereafter be used and no building or
part thereof or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged,
moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein prescribed for the zone
in which it is located.
2. No part of any yard or other open space required about any building by the provisions of
these regulations may be included as part of a yard or other open space required for any
other building.
3. No building containing a residential use shall be erected, altered, enlarged, or maintained
in the rear of any building on the same lot, and no building shall be erected, enlarged, or
maintained in front of a building containing a residential use, except as expressly
permitted in Subsection D.
4. No lot shall be so reduced in area or changed in dimensions that any required yard or
other open space will be smaller than prescribed by the Zoning Regulations.
5. No structure shall be erected or altered except in accordance with these regulations, on
any lot nearer to the street than the building line.
6. No building or zoning permit shall be issued for any structures or land use unless the lot
for which the permit is sought has the required frontage on a public street, with the
exception of the conditions described in Subsection B. below.
7. Prior to filing any map in the Town Clerk’s office depicting a lot line revision or free
split, the map shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Department to verify that the
proposed lot(s) will conform to all applicable requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 2
B. LOTS OF RECORD
The lot frontage and lot area requirements of these regulations or amendments thereto shall not
prevent construction of a permitted building or establishment of a permitted use on a lot that:
1. Was owned separately from any adjoining land prior to June 15, 1954, as evidenced by
deed recorded in the Suffield land records, and has not merged with a contiguous lot; or,
2. Was shown on a valid, filed plan of subdivision, approved by the Commission prior to the
effective date of these regulations.
3. Has its frontage on a public street, and sanitary sewage disposal and a potable water
supply can be assured without hazard to public health, and that the side and rear yards
conform to the regulations that were in existence on the date immediately prior to the
effective date of these regulations.
C. LOTS IN TWO ZONES
In the case of a lot of record lying in more than one district, the provision of the less restrictive
district may be applied for a distance of not more than thirty (30) feet into a more restrictive
district, provided that such lot has frontage on a street in the less restrictive district.
D. OBSTRUCTIONS IN YARDS, FENCES
No structures or projections from structures shall be permitted in any required yard except as
follows:
1. No structure shall be erected between the building line and the street line, except for signs
according to Sec. IX of these regulations, a farm stand, and a wall or fence not over four
(4) feet in height and not more than one-half (1/2) solid with the exception of a stone wall
which may be a maximum of three (3) feet in height.
2. Walls or fences, not exceeding eight (8) feet in height measured above the adjoining
finished grade, are allowed only in any required side or rear yard. Minor variations of
less than one (1) foot in elevation of the adjoining finished grade shall not affect the
measurements of the height of such fence or wall.
3. All fences, except those used for agricultural purposes, shall be erected so that the
finished side of the fence faces the abutting property.
4. Minor projections of structures, such as window or door frames and sills, belt courses,
cornices or other architectural features may project no more than one (1) foot into any
required yard.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 3
5. Major projections of structures such as chimneys, bay windows not longer than twentyfive
(25) percent of the wall from which they project, eaves, roofs over doorways,
hatchways, areaways and fire escapes may project not more than four (4) feet into any
required yard, provided that they shall not be closer than four (4) feet to any lot line.
6. In any rear yard accessory buildings shall be permitted, provided that they shall not
occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required rear yard.
7. An attached solar greenhouse on the southerly side of the main structure may project up
to ten (10) feet into a required setback yard.
8. Handicapped ramps.
E. EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
1. The height limitations of these regulations shall not apply to chimneys, antennas, church
spires, air conditioning equipment and enclosures, or other usual accessory features
carried above the roof. Freestanding structures such as towers or tanks not intended for
human habitation, which exceed the height limits of these regulations, may be permitted
by the Commission under a special permit when such structures are erected only to such
height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are intended to serve. These
requirements shall not pertain to amateur radio antennas.
2. Satellite dishes of up to thirty-nine (39) inches in diameter may be permitted on roofs of
buildings containing up to three (3) residential units. Commercial and other residential
buildings may carry larger units provided that such units are completely screened from
ground level up to horizontal observation level.
F. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
1. An accessory building or structure is attached to a principal building, including
attachment by means of a breezeway or a roofed passageway, then it shall comply with
the requirements of these regulations applicable to a principal building.
2. Any accessory building observing the same yards as required for the principal building
may be erected to the same height limits as the principal building.
3. No accessory building on the same lot with a main residence building other than a farm
boarding house or school dormitory shall be used for residence purposes, except for
immediate family of the owner, or for domestic employees or caregivers of the owners or
family members, and who are employed on the premises. Such dwelling of not more than
three (3) rooms, including kitchen facilities, shall be permitted in an accessory building
provided the lot contains at least 10,000 square feet of area above the required lot size for
the district in which it is located. Additional lot area is not required in an R-90 District.
Rental of the unit to anyone other than the owner’s family members, employees or
caregivers of the owner is prohibited. Other requirements are as follows;
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 4
a. The property shall be and shall remain owner occupied.
b. The accessory building should not exceed 35% of the total floor area of the
primary dwelling unit or 900 square feet, whichever is less. Only the floor
area used for the dwelling unit shall apply within existing accessory buildings.
c. A limit of one (1) accessory building may be used for residence purposes per
lot.
d. Existing accessory structures may be used for residence purposes on lots of
any size provided all health and safety standards can be met.
e. No additional road (driveway) cuts are allowed. (4-03-2014)
4. Accessory buildings may include private garages with space for not more than three noncommercial
motor vehicles on one lot up to one acre in size and for one additional such
vehicle for a lot in excess of one acre. Not more than one such space may be occupied by
a commercial motor vehicle provided such vehicle be not more than 18,000 [pounds]
gross vehicle weight for a residential lot.
5. Accessory buildings to farming use, buildings housing farm animals and poultry, and
farm boarding houses are permitted not less than one-hundred (100) feet from a street or
lot line, and not less than one-hundred-fifty (150) feet from the nearest existing residential
building on land under separate ownership.
6. Greenhouses as accessory buildings are limited to one structure on a residential lot. More
than one greenhouse as an accessory use may be allowed on a farm, but such buildings
shall be accessory and incidental to the main agricultural use of the property.
7. Accessory buildings which are not more than ten (10) feet in height may be located:
a. In the rear half of any lot, but not nearer than seventy-five (75) feet to any street.
b. Within five (5) feet of the side or rear lines of said lot when such lot lines abut the
rear lines or rear half of side lines of adjoining lots.
c. No accessory building shall be nearer than the required minimum side yard line to
a rear lot line which adjoins the front half of the side line of an adjacent lot.
8. No accessory building or private garage shall be built on a lot without principal use,
except for farm buildings associated with a farm use actively operating on the premises.
G. LOT FRONTAGE AND CONFIGURATION (10/07/06) (2/7/2012)
1. No lot shall be created, divided, or subdivided without having the frontage required in the
applicable zone upon a public street. (See definition of Street, Public.) (2/7/2012)
2. The minimum street frontage on each street of any corner lot shall be not less than the
minimum frontage for the zone in which such lot is located.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 5
3. The width of a lot shall not be less than 80% of its required minimum frontage for the first
100 feet back from the front lot line and side lines must be substantially perpendicular to
the street. (10/07/06)
H. DRIVEWAYS AND VISIBILITY
1. Locations and Design Standards of Driveways. (6/28/07)
a. Driveways shall meet the intersection sight distance requirement of AASHTO.
Applicants shall determine the 85th percentile of operating speed on existing
streets by conducting a speed study or by determining the AASHTO sight distance
requirements for the posted speed limit plus ten (10) miles per hour. (2/10/06)
b. Driveways and parking areas shall be setback from property lines at least ten (10)
feet in the R-90 Zone, five (5) feet in the R-45 and R-25 Zones, and two (2) feet in
all other residential zones. (11/19/04)
c. Driveways shall intersect roadways at an angle of not less than seventy five
degrees (75%). This angle should be maintained for a distance of not less than
twenty (20) feet. (6/28/07)
d. The maximum grade for a driveway shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) if
paved and ten percent (10%) if unpaved. (6/28/07)
e. Driveway side slopes shall not exceed a slope of three to one (3:1) unless retaining
walls or other suitable stabilizing provisions are utilized. (6/28/07)
f. All driveways shall be constructed at a grade of plus three percent (+3%) for a
fifteen (15) foot distance from the edge of the pavement. (6/28/07)
g. All driveways shall be paved for the first twenty (20) feet, as measured from the
edge of the gutter line. This paving shall consist of a minimum of two inch
bituminous concrete on a six inch processed aggregate base. All Driveways must
be constructed with a minimum radius of five (5) feet on each side at the street.
No driveway radius shall extend beyond the side property line in front of an
adjacent property. (6/28/07)
h. Driveway openings shall be located no closer than seventy five (75) feet from any
roadway intersection. This requirement may be waived for existing corner lots or
new subdivision corner lots after safety considerations by the Commission or
Staff. (6/28/07)
i. Proposed lots which cannot be served by a driveway conforming to required
standards shall not be approved. (6/28/07)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 6
j. No curb cuts or driveways are allowed without the issuance of a driveway permit
form the office of the Town Zoning Enforcement Officer. (6/28/07)
2. Residential driveways, including related bridges and cross culverts, longer than 250 feet
shall:
a. Be constructed to accommodate a two-axle 42,000 lb. fire truck;
b. Be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width and have an additional passable area of
three (3) feet on each side (for a total of 18 feet in width) capable of supporting
fire apparatus;
c. Be clear of obstructions for a height of thirteen (13) feet; and,
d. Contain a turnaround area of sufficient size to allow a forty (40) foot three (3) axle
fire truck with two-hundred (200) inch wheel base to turn around in the vicinity of
the residence. The turnaround location shall not interfere with the parking area for
the residential vehicles. (6/28/07)
e. A limit of one driveway of more than 250 feet in length is permitted to serve no
more than one lot from the one hundred and ten (110) foot Cul-De-Sac radius
R.O.W. of a street of no more than twelve hundred (1,200) feet in length. The
driveway must be located totally on the property being served and meet the
applicable set-back requirements. (6/28/07)
f. There shall be no more than one driveway in excess of two hundred fifty (250)
feet in length on a dead-end street or dead-end street system. (6/28/07)
g. Paragraphs e. and f. above are not applicable if a driveway in excess of two
hundred fifty (250) feet in length results in more lots being created than could be
provided on twelve hundred (1,200) feet of street length for the zone in which it is
located. In such case no driveways in excess of two hundred fifty (250) feet in
length will be permitted. (6/28/07)
h. The separation distance between driveways in all zones must be a minimum of
twenty (20) feet not including radius. (6/28/07)
i. Driveways in excess of two hundred fifty (250) in length are only permitted to
serve lots with a minimum area of five (5) contiguous developable acres.
(6/28/07)
3. Visibility at Intersections, Corners and Curves.
a. No obstruction, hedge, bush, tree or other growth, wall, fence, or sign shall be
erected, maintained or planted which obstructs or interferes with a clear view of
drivers of vehicles on a curve or at any street intersection.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 7
b. Commercial site access entrances shall not be located within two-hundred and
fifty (250) feet of a street intersection or within one-hundred and thirty (130) feet
of a curb cut on the same side of the road, as measured centerline to centerline of
pavement. This provision may be waived or modified by the Commission
depending on specific site conditions.
c. The minimum site line clearance shall require a height not exceeding three (3) feet
above the street grade within twelve (12) feet of the intersection street lines
bordering corner lots.
I. UTILITY SERVICES
1. Gas Transmission Lines.
No structure or accessory building capable of being occupied by persons, nor any use of
land that involves occupancy by persons will be permitted within the building lines
hereby established on the high pressure gas transmission pipe line. Such building lines
shall run parallel to the lines of said pipe, and at the distance given below measured from
each side of right of way line:
a. For Division I classification: One-hundred (100) feet
b. For Division II classification: Five-hundred (500) feet
2. Utility Transmission Lines and Substations.
Utility transmission lines and substations are permitted uses in all zoning districts,
provided that:
a. The location, construction, and right-of-way of any transmission line shall be such
as to prevent hazard to the public and surrounding property.
b. Gas booster stations shall be located on a site at least one (1) acre in area and
having no dimension less than 100 feet.
c. A utility substation shall be located on a lot at least 10,000 square feet in area.
There shall be suitable fencing to protect the public and landscaping to effectively
screen the substation from surrounding property. Yard setbacks of the district in
which the substation is located, shall be met. In addition, there shall be adequate
off-street parking areas, providing at least two parking spaces.
d. Minor structures, such as hydrants, telephone or light poles, or similar equipment,
shall not be subject to these regulations.
J. HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS
All lots shall provide for an adequate healthful water supply and for proper sewage disposal for
the use intended. Where a private water system and/or sewage disposal are planned on a lot, the
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 8
system or systems to be installed shall have the written approval of North Central District Health
Department before a Certificate of Occupancy may be issued.
K. HORSES/PONIES FOR PLEASURE
These regulations permit the keeping of horses/ponies for pleasure, but not for any commercial
purpose, under the following conditions:
1. The lot shall contain not less than two (2) acres for up to two (2) horses or ponies and one
(1) additional acre for each two (2) additional horses or ponies. The provisions of Sec.
V.M. shall apply for more than ten (10) horses.
2. Buildings housing animals shall be not less than 150 feet from an existing dwelling under
separate ownership or from a stream. Concentrations of waste shall be stored on any
premises at a point farthest from houses under separate ownership, or from a stream, but
not less than 150 feet and such concentration on any premises shall not exceed two (2)
cubic yards in bulk.
3. Animal corrals shall not be within twenty (20) feet of side property lines within 150 feet
of a street line. Beyond such point corrals may be placed along the property line, but
shall not be within one-hundred (100) feet of an existing dwelling located on adjacent
land. (See also Subsection F.5.)
L. CONNECTICUT RIVER CONSERVATION ZONE
In accordance with Connecticut Public Act No. 82-296, as amended, regulations are hereby
established in the Town of Suffield for an area generally described as lying between CT Rte. 159
and the Connecticut River and extending from the Massachusetts State Line southerly to the
Windsor Locks Town Line. Said area is delineated on the Zoning Map as an overlay zone.
Requirements in the overlay zone are in addition to underlying district requirements, and include
application by the Applicant with authorization of Town staff to the Connecticut River Assembly.
1. Purpose. The minimum standards for the preservation and usage of land within the
conservation zone are designed to promote development practices which will support the
following program goals:
a. Protecting and improving the water quality of the Connecticut River;
b. Preserving the flood storage capacity of flood plains;
c. Preserving unique natural, historic and scenic areas and natural topography of
riverfront land;
d. Encouraging the development of agricultural land uses which contribute to
conservation of the area's soil and water resources and which increase long-term food
producing capacity;
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 9
e. Promoting the recreational potential of the river area and public access to the riverfront
which is consistent with the ability of the land and the river to support such use;
f. Influencing the visual impact of riverfront development; and
g. Encouraging the preservation and rehabilitation of the Connecticut River greenbelt.
2. Minimum standards for the preservation and usage of land within the Conservation Zone.
The standards apply to land use within the conservation zone. They focus on measures to
control non-point sources of pollution, such as erosion and sedimentation and limit
destruction of the natural environment. All standards are not listed in this section since
standards having universal application may be found under appropriate categories in other
sections of these regulations (such as flood hazards, erosion control, etc.).
a. Flood plain use.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this minimum standard for flood plain use is to preserve
the necessary flood storage capacity of the Connecticut River flood plain and its
tributary flood plains; to promote public health, safety and general welfare through
minimizing flood losses in flood plain areas; and to promote flood plain use which
is compatible with beneficial flood plain values and goals of the Connecticut River
Assembly Program.
(2) Activities Permitted As of Right. The flood plain use guidelines contained in Sec.
4. below, shall not be deemed to restrict agricultural or farming uses, including the
building of fences, provided that this section shall not apply to farm buildings and
farm structures.
(3) Permitting of Regulated Activities. No obstruction or encroachment shall be
placed in the flood plain by any person, firm or corporation, public or private,
unless authorized by the Zoning Enforcement Officer who shall consider the use
guidelines contained in Subsection (4) below, when making a decision to deny or
issue a permit. Nothing in Subsection (4) shall be construed as constituting
approval or disapproval of any activity prior to the decision on a permit.
(4) Use Guidelines For Regulated Activities.
(a) The following activities may be generally compatible with flood-plain values
under certain conditions.
1. Conservation activities which do not require significant physical alteration of
watercourses and flood plains, i.e., wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, etc.
2. Parks and recreation areas provided that:
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 10
a. The placement of small piers, catwalks, floats, docks, piles and other similar
structures including trails and pedestrian access routes:
(1) Do not involve dredging or filling of the watercourses and do not require
significant physical alteration of flood plains;
(2) Are elevated on low-impact pile foundations;
(3) Do not interfere with or obstruct navigation; and,
(4) Do not restrict circulation.
b. The repair, relocation and/or rearrangement of floating docks, open pile
docks, and similar structures within an established marina or boat basin
involve no disturbance of the watercourse or flood plain other than removing
or relocating anchors or pilings.
c. Accessory structures and amenities (such as picnic tables) are anchored and
built to withstand flooding.
(b) The following activities are generally incompatible with flood plain values.
1. Activities which require incremental filling of the flood plain, where
incremental fill shall mean fill, including any material or structure, which would
have the effect of displacing water or the flood storage capacity of the property.
Changing existing land elevations without the addition of new fill from off-site
and which does not reduce the existing flood storage capacity of the subject
property is not considered incremental fill.
2. Construction of any structure whose lowest floor, including basement, is lower
than the base flood elevation of a one-hundred (100) year storm event unless flood
proofed.
3. Construction of any structure which is not anchored to prevent floatation,
collapse or lateral movement.
4. Construction of waste disposal systems which are not flood proofed to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
5. Construction of industrial facilities using, producing or storing hazardous or
toxic substances (nuclear power plants, chemical factories, oil storage tanks, etc.)
which are not protected against a flood of rare occurrence.
(5) Cutting of timber. No trees, shrubs or ground cover shall be destroyed, cut or removed
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 11
within the 100-year flood hazard area unless dead or diseased. Within the Conservation Zone
no trees over ten (10) inches in caliper, unless dead or diseased, shall be removed until a
cutting plan has been provided and approved.
(6) Removal of soil and earth materials. The removal of soil and earth materials shall require
a Special permit from the Commission except for:
(a) Foundation, trench and related site excavation performed after the issuance of a
Building Permit;
(b) Removal in connection with the landscaping and grading of land for the purpose for
which a Building Permit is not required, provided that such removal shall not exceed
300 cubic yards of material; and,
(c) Earth moving or excavation related to farm management techniques or farm building
construction.
(7) Dumping and storage of refuse. No dumping or storage of refuse shall be permitted
within the Conservation Zone nor shall any new public solid waste disposal facility be
established in the area. Transfer station operations used to store small amounts of refuse for
brief periods pending final lawful disposition shall be prohibited in the flood plain and
discouraged in the remainder of the Conservation Zone.
M. OUTDOOR LIGHTING
The purpose of these regulations is to provide specific outdoor lighting standards in order to
maximize the effectiveness of site lighting, to enhance public safety and welfare, to raise public
awareness of energy conservation, to avoid upward illumination, to reduce glare; and to avoid
light trespass onto adjacent properties and public streets. These regulations shall apply to the
installation or replacement of outdoor lighting fixtures. Subsections 1 and 2 shall apply to all
non-residential land uses located in the commercial and industrial zoning districts, and for special
permits issued in a residential zoning district. Subsection 3 shall apply to all uses in residential
zones. Subsection 4 applies to all zoning districts.
1. Submission of Lighting Plan. Applicants proposing the installation of outdoor lighting
shall file with the Commission a Lighting Plan subject to Site Plan review, unless waived by the
Commission. Said plan shall be designed in accordance with the lighting standards and
requirements, and shall contain the following:
a. The location, height, and type of outdoor-lighting luminaries, including building
mounted.
b. The luminaire manufacturer’s specification data, including lumen output and
photometric data showing cutoff angles.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 12
c. The type of lamp, i.e., metal halide, compact fluorescent, high-pressure sodium, etc.
d. An isodiagram or photometric plan showing the intensity of illumination expressed in
foot-candles at ground level, including at adjacent property lines, if required by the
Commission.
e. Hours of business operation and when lighting will be turned off.
2. Lighting Standards and Requirements
a. Outdoor lights and illuminated signs shall be designed, located, installed, shielded and
directed to prevent direct light at (and glare across) the abutting property lines and the
public right-of-way or street. The “maintained horizontal illuminance
recommendations” as set by the Illumination Engineering Society of North America
shall not be exceeded.
b. Outdoor lighting shall be full cut-off type fixtures, defined as a luminaire or light
fixture that by design of the housing does not allow any light dispersion or direct glare
to shine above a 90-degree horizontal plane from the base.
c. Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be limited to a maximum of fourteen (14) feet in
height, unless otherwise designated by special permit.
d. All lighting in connection with signs shall be constructed according to Sec. IX of
these regulations.
3. Properties located in Residential Zoning Districts.
a. Illumination of signs, spotlighting or floodlighting shall be so shielded that the light
source cannot be seen from adjacent properties or the street.
b. Lighting of outdoor recreation facilities is subject to the approval of the Commission.
4. Exemptions to this section include lighting for public buildings, public monuments, flagpoles,
stairs, ramps, or as determined by the Zoning Officer.
N. SIDEWALKS
In conjunction with an application for site plan approval or a special permit the Commission may
require the installation of sidewalks up to eight (8) feet in width with materials to be approved by
the Commission along a public road or within a site where it makes a determination that such
walk would:
1. Facilitate the movement of customers or patrons from or to nearby residential or nonresidential
uses.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 13
2. Separate pedestrian movement from vehicular movement for public safety and welfare.
O. MOBILE HOMES, TRAILERS, AND RECREATION VEHICLES
1. In any district a permit for a trailer used for storage or as an office in connection with an
approved construction project on any lot may be issued by the Zoning Officer when found
to be in compliance with the following:
a. Trailer(s) must be located on the project site except for public-works projects.
b. Application must be accompanied by a drawing to scale of not more than 1” = 40’
showing all existing and proposed structures, proposed location of trailer(s) and the
location of buildings on neighboring lots.
c. The location of all trailers shall conform to all the setback requirements for buildings
and other structures for the zoning district in which they are located.
d. No construction trailer shall be placed at an approved location prior to two (2) weeks
before the start of construction or site development nor shall it remain in place for
more than six (6) months. Upon request, the Zoning Officer may grant one (1)
extension of time for up to six (6) months.
e. All construction trailers shall be removed no later than thirty (30) days after
completion of construction activity.
f. The Zoning Officer may require the relocation or removal of a trailer(s).
g. In no case shall a construction storage/construction office trailer be used for human
habitation.
2. In Residential Zoning Districts or on all lots previously used for one-family purposes, a
permit for a temporary mobile home may be issued by the Zoning Officer while the
residence is being repaired or rebuilt after a fire or other casualty when found to be in
compliance with the following:
a. The mobile home must be located on the rebuilding site.
b. Application must be accompanied by a drawing to a scale of not more than 1” = 40’
showing all existing and proposed structures, proposed location of trailer(s) and the
location of buildings on neighboring lots.
c. All mobile homes shall conform to all the setback requirements for buildings or other
structures in the district in which it is located.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 14
d. Permits shall be issued for six (6) months. Upon request, the Zoning Officer may
grant one (1) extension of time for up to six (6) months if no certificate of occupancy
has been granted.
e. The Zoning Officer may require the relocation or removal of a mobile home.
3. Temporary uses of trailers other than for residential purposes may be allowed by the
Commission as a special permit, subject to Sec. XIV.A. and the following:
a. Trailer(s) must be located on the project site.
b. The location of all trailers shall conform to all the setback requirements for buildings
and other structures for the zoning district in which they are located.
c. In no case shall a trailer be used for human habitation.
d. The Commission shall establish reasonable requirements in respect to screening, time
limits, hours of use, and other factors which control such special use.
4. Trailers or mobile homes shall not be placed in a special flood hazard area under any
circumstances. The Commission shall establish reasonable requirements in respect to
screening, time limits, hours of use and other factors which control such special use.
5. No more than a total of two (2) mobile homes or recreational vehicles, including boat
and/or boat trailers may be stored by its owner in the rear yard of a lot occupied by his
permanent residence; however, no unit may be occupied for sleeping, living, cooking or
for carrying on a business in any zone except as provided elsewhere in these regulations.
Such unit while stored shall be adequately screened from view from the street and from
neighboring properties as determined by the Zoning Officer. Storage of mobile homes,
trailers, and recreational vehicles are prohibited in the side or rear yard setbacks.
P. OUTDOOR DISPLAY, SALES OR STORAGE OF GOODS OR MATERIALS
1. Outdoor display, sales or storage of goods or materials may only be established with the
approval of the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
a. In approving outdoor display or sales areas the Commission or Zoning Officer may
regulate its:
(1) Location on the site.
(2) Number and type of items displayed.
(3) Hours of the day for the establishment or operation of any outdoor display or sales
area.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section III: General Requirements
Page 15
b. The outdoor display or sales area shall not be located where the Zoning Officer or
Commission finds that a traffic or pedestrian hazard on or off site will result.
2. Outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be enclosed by Type “C” screening and
located to the rear of any existing or proposed building(s).
3. Outdoor display, sales or storage of goods or materials shall comply with applicable yard
requirements to a building as specified by these regulations for the particular zone in
which it is located.
Q. STORAGE CONTAINERS AND DUMPSTERS
1. Temporary storage containers and dumpsters.
a. Storage containers or dumpsters used in connection with an approved construction
activity shall be approved by the Zoning Officer.
2. Permanent storage containers or dumpsters according to an approved Site Plan as follows.
a. Shall be Type “C” screened.
b. Shall be placed on a concrete pad.
c. Shall not be located within the required front, rear, or side yards adjacent to any
residential zoning district, or the required front yard setback of any non-residential
zoning district.
R. COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
In Residential Zoning Districts, commercial vehicles requiring a CDL (commercial drivers
license) shall not be parked or stored overnight, except for farm equipment associated with a farm
on which said equipment is stored.
S. DRAINAGE
No structure shall be used, erected or expanded and no land shall be graded or hard-surfaced
unless provisions have been made and expressly approved by the Town Engineer for the proper
disposal of drainage water.
T. TOPSOIL
The removal or destruction of topsoil of more than twenty (20) cubic yards on any lot shall not be
permitted except in connection with a bona-fide permitted construction project. After completion
of such work, topsoil shall be replaced and seeded according to accepted landscaping practices
and the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
Section IV: ZONING DISTRICTS AND USE REGULATIONS
A. Zoning Districts ……………………………………………………. IV-1
B. Use Table ………………………………………………………….. IV-2
C. Farmland Preservation (FP) Zone ………………………………… IV-4
D. Residential (R) Zones ……………………………………………… IV-5
E. Planned Development Apartment (PDA) Zone …………………… IV-7
F. Town Center Village (TCV) District Zone …………………………IV-10
G. West Suffield Center Village (WSCV) District Zone …………… IV-16
H. Neighborhood Commercial (NC) Zone …………………………… IV-20
I. Industrial (I) Zone ………………………………………………… IV-21
J. Planned Development Industrial Park (PDIP) Zone ……………… IV-23
K. Temporary Use Permits …………………………………………… IV-26
L. Prohibited Uses ……………………………………………………. IV-26
M. Height and Area Schedule ………………………………………… IV-28
N. Housing Opportunity District (HOD) Zone………………………... IV-29
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 1
SECTION IV: ZONING DISTRICTS AND USE REGULATIONS
A. ZONING DISTRICTS
The predominant character of Suffield as it exists and as planned is for agriculture and singlefamily
residential use. However, it is also the intent that there be a variety of types of rural and
urban residential environments and commercial centers to meet the needs and desires of town
residents.
The Town of Suffield is divided into the following single-family, multi-family, commercial,
industrial, and agricultural zoning districts, the boundaries of which are shown on the "Official
Zoning Map, Town of Suffield", which is declared to be part of these regulations and shall bear
the date of the most recent zone map amendment.
Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines or centerlines of streets, rights-ofway
and watercourses, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless such district boundary lines
are fixed by dimensions as shown on the Zoning Map. Where district boundaries are so
indicated that they approximately follow the edge of lakes or other bodies of water, the mean
high water lines thereof shall be construed to be the district boundaries. All dimensions to or
from roads shown on the Zoning Map shall be taken from the edge of the right-of-way of such
roads. When uncertainty exists the Commission shall determine the location of the district
boundary line.
1. Single-Family Residential (R) Zoning Districts
a. R-90 (90,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit)
b. R-45 (45,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit)
c. R-25 (25,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit)
d. R-20 (20,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit)
e. R-15 (15,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit)
f. R-11 (11,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 2
2. Multi-Family Residential Zoning District.
a. Planned Development Apartment (PDA).
b. Housing Opportunity District (HOD).
3. Commercial Zoning Districts.
a. Town Center Village District (TCV).
b. West Suffield Center Village District (WSCV).
c. Neighborhood Commercial District (NC).
4. Industrial Zoning Districts.
a. Industrial District (I).
b. Planned Development Industrial Park District (PDIP).
5. Farmland Preservation Zoning District.
a. Farmland Preservation District (FP).
B. USE TABLE
The Use Table on the following page lists permitted uses of land and buildings as follows. Any
use not specifically listed or otherwise permitted in a zoning district herein established shall be
deemed prohibited unless the Commission determines that a proposed use is substantially similar
to a listed use. No structure shall be used, erected or expanded and no land use shall be
established or expanded except in accordance with these regulations.
1. Any use marked “P” in the Use Table is a permitted use subject to the issuance of a
building and/or zoning permit.
2. Any use marked “SP” in the Use Table may be a permitted use subject to these
regulations and requires a “special permit” and site plan approval to be issued by the
Commission.
3. Any use marked “SPA” in the Use Table may be a permitted accessory use subject to
these regulations and requires a special permit and site plan approval to be issued by the
Commission.
4. Any use marked “SITE” in the Use Table is permitted subject to “site plan approval”
issued by the Commission.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004 (2/7/2012, 6/5/2015, 1/4/2019) USE TABLE
P = Permitted Use
SP = Special Permit Use
SPA = Special Permit Accessory Use
SITE = Site Plan Only
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 3
Town Center W.Suffield Neighborhood
LAND USES FP R-90 R-45 R-25 R-20 R-15R-11PDA HOD Village Village Commercial Industrial Planned
Agricultural
Farm P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Nursery (outdoor plant stock growing) P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Public & Institutional
Active Recreation Facility SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Adult Day Care Center SPA SP SP SP
Cemetery SP SP SP
Child Day Care Center SP SP SP SP SP SP SPA SP SP SP SP SP
Hospital SP
Municipal Land Use SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Museums SP SP SP SP SP SP
Places of Worship SP SP SP SP SP SP
Private Membership Club SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
School/Education Center SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
- w/Restaurant SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA
Residential
Active-Adult Housing SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Antique Shop SPA SPA SPA SP SP SP
Apartments or Condominiums SP SPA SPA SPA SP
Assisted-Living/Convalescent Home SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Bed & Breakfast SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA
Conversion of Single-to-Two Family SP SP SP
Customary Home Office or Occupation P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Dwelling, Single-Family P P P P P P P P
Dwelling, Two-Family SP SP SP
Dwelling, Multi-Family SP SITE
Farm Stand Permanent SP SP SP SP
Horses for Pleasure P P P P P P P P P P P P
Kennel SPA SPA SPA
Professional Home Office/Occupation SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA
Winery SP SP SP SP
Commercial & Industrial
Adult-Oriented Establishment SP
Animal Hospital SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Aquaculture SP SP SP
Banks & Financial Institution SP SP SP SP SP
Contractor's Yard SP SP
Crematorium SP
Farmers' Market SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Funeral Home SITE SITE SITE SITE SP
Golf Course SP SP SP SP SP SP
Greenhouse Operation (Commercial) SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Horses for Commercial Purposes SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Hotel/Motel SP
Indoor Recreation SP SP
Industrial SP
Industrial, Light SP SP
Motor Vehicle Sales, Service, Washing SP SP
Offices, including Medical SP SP SP SP SP
Restaurant SPA SP SP SP SP SPA
- w/Outdoor Café Service SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA
Retail, Personal Services SPA SP SP SP SP SPA
Self-Storage Facility SP
Theaters (indoor movies and theatre) SP SP SP SP SP
Warehousing,Wholesaling,Distribution SP SP
S U F F I E L D Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
Farmland
Preservatio Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 4
C. FARMLAND PRESERVATION ZONE (FP)
1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Farmland Preservation (FP) Zoning District is to perpetually protect
and preserve land in Suffield for agricultural use. Only land containing a permanent
conservation restrictive covenant or easement shall be made part of the Farmland
Preservation (FP) Zone.
2. Permitted Uses.
The following uses may be permitted as of right in the FP zone subject to any applicable
provisions of these regulations and subject to the property-specific conservation
restrictive covenant or easement.
a. Farm or Nursery.
b. Customary Home Office or Occupation.
c. Single-family Dwelling, one per lot.
3. Special Permit Uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the FP zone subject to special permit and site
plan approvals in accordance with Sec. XIV of these regulations and in accordance with
the property-specific conservation restrictive covenant or easement.
a. Aquaculture.
b. Bed and Breakfast as an accessory use.
c. Commercial Horse Farm.
d. Farmers’ Market.
e. Farm Stand Permanent
f. Greenhouse Operation (Commercial).
g. Kennel.
h. Professional Home Office or Occupation as an accessory use to a Single-Family
Dwelling.
i. Small Wind Energy Producing Facility
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 5
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
4. Lot, Yard, and Other Requirements.
a. Minimum lot size: Five (5) acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: Fifty (50) feet
c. Minimum front yard setback: Fifty (50) feet
d. Minimum side or rear yard setback
when a Specialized Farm is proposed:
Fifty (50) feet
e. Maximum height: Forty (40) feet
D. RESIDENTIAL (R) ZONES
1. Purpose.
The purpose of the single-family residential zoning districts is to provide areas for residential
development surrounded by open space while at the same time preserving those areas which
are capable of supporting agricultural pursuits. It is intended that nonresidential and
nonagricultural uses in these districts be limited to those which are primarily necessary or
desirable to serve the residents of these districts and are compatible with residential uses
when located in their midst.
2. Permitted Uses.
The following uses are permitted as of right in all Residential (R) zones subject to any
applicable provisions of these regulations.
a. Customary Home Office or Occupation.
b. Farm or Nursery.
c. Horses for Pleasure.
d. Single-Family Dwelling, one per lot.
3. Special Permit Uses.
The following uses may be permitted in all Residential (R) zones unless indicated below,
subject to special permit and site plan approvals in accordance with Sec. XIV of these
regulations as follows:
a. Active-Adult Housing.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 6
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
b. Animal Hospital in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones.
c. Antique Shops as an accessory use to an owner-occupied single-family dwelling in
the R-90 and R-45 zones, or R-25 zone within a historic structure or accessory building
identified within the Town’s Survey of Historical and Architectural Resources
prepared by the Capital Regional Council of Governments, 1979 on file with the
Town Clerk’s Office.
d. Aquaculture in the R-90 and R-45 zones.
e. Assisted-Living Facility.
f. Bed and Breakfast as an accessory use to an owner-occupied Single-Family Dwelling
in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones.
g. Cemetery in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones.
h. Child Day Care Center.
i. Conversion of Single-to-Two Family Dwelling in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones.
j. Horses for Commercial Purposes in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones.
k. Farmers’ Market.
l. Farm Stand Permanent in the R-90, R45, and R-25 zones.
m. Golf Course in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones.
n. Greenhouse Operations (Commercial) in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones.
o. Kennel as an accessory use to an owner-occupied Single-Family Dwelling in the R-90
and R-45 zones.
p. Municipal Land Use.
q. Museums in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones.
r. Places of Worship in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones.
s. Private Membership Club.
t. Professional Home Office or Occupation as an accessory use to a Single-Family
Dwelling.
u. Two-Family Dwelling in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones.
v. School/Education Center in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones including indoor or
outdoor restaurant facilities as an accessory use.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 7
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
w. Small Wind Energy Producing Facility in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones.
x. Winery
4. General Dimensional Requirements.
Zone
Height
Frontage
Lot Size
Developable Area
Lot Coverage
Front
Side
Rear
R-90 30 200' 90,000 SF 60,000 SF 10% 50' 30' 50'
R-45 30 175' 45,000 SF 45,000 SF 20% 50' 20' 50'
R-25 30 125' 25,000 SF 25,000 SF 25% 50' 20' 40'
R-20 30 100' 20,000 SF 20,000 SF 30% 40' 10' 40'
R-15 30 90' 15,000 SF 15,000 SF 35% 40' 10' 35'
R-11 30 75' 11,000 SF 11,000 SF 40% 40' 9' 25'
See also Subsection M. for additional requirements.
E. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT APARTMENT (PDA) ZONE
1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Planned Development Apartment (PDA) Zoning District is to provide, as
a special permit after public hearing, the establishment of carefully designed residential areas
which can be integrated into the neighborhood, conserve property values, and does not
negatively impact existing and proposed traffic or the general character of the immediate
neighborhood, for those residents who cannot or do not wish to have personal responsibility
for the maintenance of residential property or who prefer a more urbanized environment.
2. Permitted Uses.
The following uses are permitted as of right in the PDA zone subject to any applicable
provisions of these regulations.
a. Customary Home Office or Occupation.
b. Farm or Nursery.
c. Single-family Dwelling, one per lot.
3. Special Permit Uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the PDA zone subject to special permit and site plan
approvals in accordance with Sec. XIV of these regulations and any applicable provisions of
these regulations.
a. Active-Adult Housing.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 8
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
b. Adult Day Care Center as an accessory use
c. Apartment or Residential Condominium, including town houses.
d. Assisted-Living or Personal-Care Facility.
e. Child Day Care Center as an accessory use.
f. Farmers’ Market.
g. Golf Course.
h. Multi-Family Dwelling, including apartments and townhouses.
i. Municipal Land Use.
j. Convalescent Home.
k. Restaurant as an accessory use, including Outdoor Café Service.
l. Retail, personal services as an accessory use when confined to the use by residents of
the planned development.
4. Area, Yard, and Density Requirements.
a.
b.
Minimum lot size:
Maximum density:
Ten (10) acres.
Five (5) dwelling units per developable acre;
seven (7) dwelling per developable acre if
age-restricted to those 55 or over.
c. Minimum lot frontage: Five-Hundred (500) feet.
d. Minimum building setback
from existing public streets
One-Hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum building setback
from proposed private roads
Thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum building setback
from property boundary
Fifty (50) feet unless adjacent to an existing
PDA Zone in which case twenty (20) feet
side and forty (40) feet rear yards.
g. Minimum parking area setback
from property boundaries.
Twenty-five (25) feet for side and rear; Fifty
(50) feet for front.
h. Maximum lot coverage: Thirty-Five (35) percent.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 9
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
i. Maximum building height: Fifty (50) feet.
j. Minimum open space: Sufficient to meet active and passive
recreational needs of residents including
tennis and swimming facilities, and club
houses limited to use by tenants and guests.
5. Other Requirements
a. Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the submission of an application for a Planned
Development Apartment (PDA) zone change, all applicants are required to initiate a
pre-application conference with the Commission and its staff to discuss the
conceptual aspects of the proposed development and to prepare and present a
conceptual plan for informal consideration. The conceptual plan should contain all
necessary information to allow the Commission to make an informed informal
consideration, including the locations of wetlands, slopes in excess of twenty percent
(20%), and all proposed roads, parking areas, buildings, development amenities, and
open spaces.
b. Homeowners’ Association. A homeowners’ association shall be developed in a
common interest community form of ownership per CGS Chapter 828, i.e., Common
Interest Ownership Act. A homeowners’ association must be legally established
prior to filing the approved plans; membership must be mandatory for each home
buyer and any successive buyer and recorded in all deeds; open space restrictions
must be permanent and not just for a given period of years; the association must be
responsible for liability insurance, taxes, and the maintenance of recreational and
other facilities; homeowners must pay pro rata share of the cost or the assessment
levied by the Town or same may become a lien upon the delinquent member’s
property and share of the common space in the development; the instrument
establishing the association must be submitted for approval as part of the application;
and, each unit owner shall own a proportionate share of the common land shown on
the plan and a statement to that effect shall be indicated on said plan.
c. Bonding. Estimates of construction costs for roads, storm drains, sidewalks,
hydrants, streetlights and other common facilities, and site erosion and sedimentation
control shall be prepared and submitted to the Commission for approval after the
appeal period for approval has expired. Sureties must be received and approved by
the Commission’s Counsel and the Treasurer’s Office prior to start of construction.
d. Improvements. Any required public improvements shall conform to the applicable
sections of the subdivision regulations. The owner(s) shall maintain all private roads,
parking areas, landscaping, streetlights, and sidewalks. All utilities shall be
underground. Public sewer and water are required.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 10
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
e. Parking. There shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2.5) parking spaces
provided for each dwelling unit to provide adequate unit and visitor parking.
f. Landscaping Plan. The landscaping provisions of Sec. VIII.C of these regulations
shall be applicable to Planned Development Apartments except as modified by this
section. A forty (40) foot wide landscaped buffer area shall be provided within the
building setback wherever a Planned Development Apartment unit abuts a singlefamily
residential development. The buffer shall be installed in compliance with the
Type “B” screening requirements. A landscape plan prepared by and containing the
seal of a Landscape Architect registered by the State of Connecticut shall be prepared
and include a list and count of all trees and shrubs to be planted by common and
botanical names, size (caliper, height, time until maturity) at planting, and height and
spread maturity shall be part of the PDA application. All trees and shrubs to be
undisturbed shall be tagged, or otherwise identified in the field prior to
commencement of site work, and shall be shown on the landscape plan.
g. Outdoor Illumination. The outdoor illumination provisions of Sec. III.M. of these
regulations shall be applicable to Planned Development Apartments.
h. Solid Waste Disposal. Solid waste stations (dumpsters) shall be placed on a concrete
pad, appropriately screened, maintained, and shown on the approved site plan.
i. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required to provide sufficient and safe pedestrian
circulation both within the site and to abutting properties.
F. TOWN CENTER VILLAGE (TCV) DISTRICT ZONE
1. Purpose.
The purpose of this zoning district is to allow for integrated commercial development which
meets the shopping and service needs of the entire town and encourages a diversity and mix
of uses while preserving and enhancing the distinctive character, landscape, pedestrian
nature, and historic structures within the District. It is the intent of this area to encourage the
conversion, conservation, and preservation of existing buildings and sites in a manner that
maintains the historic and/or unique character of the District; to encourage revitalization and
compatible new development within the District; to promote a mix of compatible land uses;
to promote a pedestrian-oriented environment; to promote human scale; to require traffic
access management; and, to promote traditional-neighborhood design for new construction
and substantial reconstruction to ensure compatibility with current uses.
2. Permitted Uses.
The following uses are permitted as of right in the Town Center Village (TCV) zone subject
to any applicable provisions of these regulations.
a. Customary Home Office or Occupation.
b. Farm or Nursery.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 11
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
c. Funeral Home subject to Site Plan Approval.
3. Special Permit Uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the TCV zone subject to special permit and site
plan approvals in accordance with Sec. XIV of these regulations as long as the maximum
footprint area of any single building is no greater than twenty-thousand (20,000) square
feet, unless said building is in existence at the time of adoption of these regulations.
a. Adult Day Care Center.
b. Apartment or (Residential) Condominium as an accessory use.
c. Bank and Financial Institution.
d. Bed and Breakfast as an accessory use to an owner-occupied Single-Family Dwelling.
e. Child Day Care Center.
f. Farmers’ Market.
g. Municipal Land Use.
h. Museums.
i. Offices.
j. Personal Care or Convalescent Home.
k. Places of Worship.
l. Private Membership Club.
m. Restaurant, including Outdoor Café Service as an accessory use.
n. Retail, personal services.
o. School/Education Center, including restaurant facilities as an accessory use.
p. Theaters (indoor movies).
q. Residential Multifamily Use Apartments or Condominiums. (effective July 5, 2019)
Residential Apartments or Condominiums shall be permitted on Parcels or Lots in the
TCV Zone by special use permit subject to the following conditions:
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 12
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
i. This section shall not apply to parcels or lots that are located either in whole or part
in the Historic District areas of the TCV Zone,
ii. This section shall only apply to parcels or lots that are over three acres in size and
only parcels and lots existing on the effective date of the amendment (as shown on
the assessors records) shall qualify, no existing parcels or lots may be subdivided or
split (to create a smaller lot) or assembled to qualify.
iii. No more than 45 residential units shall be allowed on any parcel and no other uses
shall be allowed on the parcel or lot.
iv. Design standards in Section 6 shall apply, except for Section 6 subsections b and h
and as design standards are modified in this Section 3q.
v. Maximum building height shall be fifty feet with no more than 50% of the building
height exceeding forty feet.
vi. Minimum rear and side yard setbacks for accessory buildings and parking garages,
and the parking setback shall be 5 feet from abutting property lines.
vii. There shall be a minimum of 2 parking spaces per dwelling unit (parking spaces in
garages shall be included).
viii. This section 3.q. shall not apply to apartments or condominiums as an accessory use
under Section 3.b.
4. Applicability.
These regulations shall apply to new construction and exterior modifications of properties
within the TCV District including but not limited to the design and placement of:
a. Buildings.
b. Paving materials.
c. Landscaping.
d. Pedestrian ways.
e. Public and private roadways.
f. Signage.
g. Lighting.
h. Other elements deemed appropriate by the Commission to maintain and protect the
character of the District.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 13
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
5. Parking Requirements.
The off-street parking and loading requirements of Sec. VII of these regulations shall be
satisfied using one or a combination of the following methods:
a. Off-street/Onsite Parking.
Applicants shall provide for the required number of parking spaces off-street/onsite.
b. Shared Parking.
See Section VII.B.1.
c. (Deleted) (9-10-07)
d. Onsite parking is preferred to be located at the rear of a building, except in the case of
corner lots, where said parking may be on the side.
6. Design Standards.
The Commission shall consider the design, relationship and compatibility of structures,
plantings, signs, roadways, street hardware and other objects in public view. Complete
drawings, elevations, and renderings, including color and lighting shall be required so that
the Design Review Board and the Commission can review the proposal as to its compatibility
to the scale and character of the Town Center Village. In approving applications relating to
the exterior of buildings within the Town Center Village District, the Commission shall
consider the standards set forth in the “Connecticut Historical Commission – The Secretary
of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic
Buildings” as well as the following standards:
a. Buildings and their main entrance shall be oriented toward the street. Doorways,
windows and other building façade openings shall be proportionate to reflect
pedestrian scale and movement, and to encourage interest at the street level.
b. First floor street-facing building facade fenestration shall be 50-75% with pedestrian
entrances spaced no greater than thirty-five (35) feet apart. Second and third floor
building fenestration shall be 20-60%. Fenestration requirements shall be met with
the installation of clear glass sufficiently transparent to provide views into interior of
buildings.
c. Windowsill height shall be twenty-four to thirty-six (24-36) inches from ground level
for first floor uses. Glazing is required to be located between sill height and eight feet
above the sidewalk on retail frontages.
d. Blank walls or roof planes shall no be longer than thirty (30) feet.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 14
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
e. Flat roofs on buildings of less than two (2) stories are prohibited where they can be
viewed along the street frontage of said property.
f. Building exteriors shall be constructed of traditional materials such as masonry,
stucco, stone, and wood. The exterior color of buildings shall be selected from the
Historic Colors of America pallet (as approved by the Society for the Preservation of
New England Antiquities) by California Products Corporation or equivalent. Metal
or vinyl siding, exposed concrete block or panels, and reflective glass are prohibited,
as are metallic, neon, and primary colors, unless the DRB determines that existing
conditions warrant such use.
g. No outdoor mechanical equipment, fans, generators, etc., shall be visible from Ffyler
Place, High Street, Mountain Road or Main Street, or be on the roofs of buildings
unless totally screened by means of a parapet wall or a sloped or stepped roof form
that is part of the architecture of the building. Evergreen plantings and/or opaque
fencing shall screen ground-mounted or wall-mounted mechanical equipment.
h. Residential uses are excluded from first-floor storefronts and shall be accessory to the
main use of the building.
i. Operable awnings are permitted to provide for covered walkways, except that
fluorescent lighting and back illuminated awnings are prohibited on facades fronting
streets. No awning, canopy or similar weather shielding device, projecting beyond
the property line of any lot into the sidewalk portion of a public street shall be erected
or maintained on any building or structure unless such awning is at least seven (7)
feet six (6) inches above the level of the sidewalk, nor may any such awning project
beyond six (6) feet of the property line. Any such awning shall be firmly affixed to
the building and no support other than that provided by the building shall be allowed.
j. Refuse receptacles (dumpsters) shall be located in the side or back of buildings and
screened entirely from public and abutting site view with evergreen plantings or
opaque fencing.
k. Pedestrian Amenities. Amenities such as seating benches, sidewalks, covered garbage
cans, bike racks, etc., shall be required by the Commission as deemed appropriate.
l. Signage. Signs shall be approved according to Sec. IX of these regulations and the
Design Review Board.
m. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided according to Sec. VIII of these
regulations.
n. On sites with rear vehicular access; sidewalks must be located a minimum of ten (10)
feet from the front of the building. (7/05/07)
7. Town Center/West Suffield Center Village District Design Review Board (DRB).
In accordance with CGS and these regulations, there shall be a Design Review Board (DRB)
consisting of at least five (5) members appointed by the Commission. Members shall include
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 15
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
at least a licensed architect or landscape architect, or certified land use planner, and a
member of the Historic District Commission, and one (1) business owner or resident from
each District. DRB members shall be appointed for a period of four (4) years. The duties of
the DRB shall include the review of all applications for construction and exterior
modifications, including the placement of signs, parking areas and pedestrian ways within the
district and making advisory recommendations to the Commission with respect to their
consistency with the design standards of Subsection 6 within thirty-five (35) days of
Commission plan acceptance. The DRB report submitted to the Commission shall be entered
into public record and considered in the decision of the Commission. The Commission may
seek other reports and recommendations in accordance with applicable sections of the
regulations. The DRB shall be notified when a variance from these regulations is sought.
(8-4-17)
8. Other Requirements.
a. Minimum lot size: 12,000 SF (7-05-07)
b. Maximum height: Forty (40) feet (3 stories)
c. Maximum lot coverage: Seventy-five (75) percent
d. Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty (20) feet
e. Minimum front yard setback: Zero (0) feet, (See Sec. IV.F.6.n.) (7/05/07)
f. Minimum side yard setback: Ten (10) feet with aggregate of
thirty (30) feet (7/05/07)
g. Minimum frontage: Sixty (60) feet (7/05/07)
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 16
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
G. WEST SUFFIELD CENTER VILLAGE (WSCV) DISTRICT ZONE
1. Purpose.
The purpose of this zoning district is to allow for the creation of commercial development
that meets the shopping and service needs of the community while preserving the rural
character of the District.
2. Permitted Uses.
The following uses are permitted as of right in the WSCV zone subject to any applicable
provisions of these regulations.
a. Customary Home Office or Occupation.
b. Farm or Nursery.
c. Funeral Homes subject to Site Plan Approval.
3. Special Permit Uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the WSCV zone subject to special permit and site
plan approvals as long as the maximum floor area of any single building is no greater than
twenty-thousand (20,000) SF.
a. Adult Day Care Center.
b. Animal Hospital.
c. Antique Shop as an accessory use to an owner-occupied Single-Family Dwelling.
d. Apartment or (Residential) Condominium as an accessory use to a non-residential
development.
e. Banks and Financial Institution.
f. Bed and Breakfast as an accessory use to an owner-occupied Single-Family Dwelling.
g. Commercial Horse Farm.
h. Day Care Center.
i. Farmers’ Market.
j. Greenhouse Operations.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 17
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
k. Municipal Land Use.
l. Museums.
m. Offices.
n. Personal Care or Convalescent Home.
o. Places of Worship.
p. Private Membership Club.
q. Professional Home Office or Occupation as an accessory use to a single-family
dwelling.
r. Restaurant, including Outdoor Café Service as an accessory use.
s. Retail, personal services.
t. School/Education Center, including restaurant facilities as an accessory use.
u. Theaters (indoor movies).
4. Applicability.
These regulations shall apply to new construction and exterior modifications of properties
within the WSCV including but not limited to the design and placement of:
a. Buildings;
b. Paving materials;
c. Landscaping;
d. Pedestrian ways;
e. Public roadways;
f. Signage;
g. Lighting; and,
h. Other elements deemed appropriate by the Commission to maintain and protect the
character of the District.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 18
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
5. Design Standards.
The Commission shall consider the design, relationship and compatibility of non-residential
structures, plantings, signs, roadways, street hardware and other objects in public view.
Complete drawings, elevations, and renderings, including color and lighting shall be required
so that the Design Review Board and the Commission can review the proposal as to its
compatibility to the scale and character of the West Suffield Center Village District. In
approving applications relating to the exterior of buildings within the WSCV, the
Commission shall consider the standards set forth in the “Connecticut Historical Commission
– The Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating
Historic Buildings” as well as the following standards:
a. Buildings and their main entrance shall be oriented toward the street. Doorways,
windows and other building façade openings shall be proportionate to reflect
pedestrian scale and movement, and to encourage interest at the street level.
b. Flat roofs on buildings of less than two (2) stories are prohibited where they can be
viewed along the street frontage of said property.
c. Building exteriors as viewed from the street shall be constructed of traditional
materials such as masonry, stucco, stone, and wood. The exterior color of buildings
shall be selected from the Historic Colors of America pallet (as approved by the
Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities) by California Products
Corporation or equivalent. Metal or vinyl siding, exposed concrete block or panels,
and reflective glass are prohibited, as are metallic, neon, and primary colors, unless
the DRB determines that existing conditions warrant such use.
d. No outdoor mechanical equipment, fans, generators, etc., shall be visible from the
street, or be on the roofs of buildings unless totally screened by means of a parapet
wall or a sloped or stepped roof form that is part of the architecture of the building.
Evergreen plantings and/or opaque fencing shall screen ground-mounted or wallmounted
mechanical equipment.
e. Residential uses are excluded from first-floor storefronts and shall be accessory to the
main use of the building.
f. Operable awnings are permitted to provide for covered walkways, except that
fluorescent lighting and back illuminated awnings are prohibited on facades fronting
streets. No awning, canopy or similar weather shielding device, projecting beyond
the property line of any lot into the sidewalk portion of a public street shall be erected
or maintained on any building or structure unless such awning is at least seven (7)
feet six (6) inches above the level of the sidewalk, nor may any such awning project
beyond six (6) feet of the property line. Any such awning shall be firmly affixed to
the building and no support other than that provided by the building shall be allowed.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 19
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
g. Refuse receptacles (dumpsters) shall be located in the side or back of buildings and
screened entirely from public and abutting site view with evergreen plantings or
opaque fencing.
h. Pedestrian Amenities. Amenities such as seating benches, sidewalks, covered garbage
cans, bike racks, etc., shall be required by the Commission as deemed appropriate.
i. Signage. All signs shall be approved according to Sec. IX of these regulations and the
Design Review Board.
j. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided according to Sec. VIII of these
regulations.
k. Parking. Parking shall be provided according to Sec. VII of these regulations.
6. Town Center/West Suffield Center Village District Design Review Board (DRB).
In accordance with CGS and these regulations, there shall be a Design Review Board (DRB)
consisting of at least five (5) members appointed by the Commission. Members shall include
at least one (1) licensed architect, licensed landscape architect, or certified land use planner,
and one (1) business owner or resident within the District. DRB members shall be appointed
for a period of four (4) years. The duties of the DRB shall include the review of all
applications for non-residential construction and exterior modifications, including the
placement of signs, parking areas and pedestrian ways within the District, and making
advisory recommendations to the Commission with respect to their consistency with the
design standards of Subsection 5 within thirty-five (35) days of plan acceptance. The DRB
report submitted to the Commission shall be entered into public record and considered in the
decision of the Commission. The Commission may seek other reports and recommendation
in accordance with applicable sections of the regulations. The DRB shall be notified when a
variance from these regulations is sought. (8-4-17)
7. Other Requirements.
a. Minimum lot size: 30,000 SF
b. Minimum lot frontage: One-hundred twenty-five (125) feet
c. Maximum height: Thirty-five (35) feet (2½ stories)
d. Maximum lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent
e. Minimum front yard setback: Sixty (60) feet
f. Minimum side yard setback: Twenty (20) feet
g. Minimum rear yard setback: Thirty (30) feet
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 20
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
H. NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC) ZONE
1. Purpose.
The purpose of this zoning district is to allow for neighborhood-oriented commercial,
institutional, and office services which meet the daily needs of a particular neighborhood
within the Town and to encourage a diversity of uses which are complementary to the
surrounding residential areas and among the various uses within the District. It is the
intention of the Commission to require traffic access management within this District.
2. Permitted Uses.
The following uses are permitted as of right in the NC zone subject to any applicable
provisions of these regulations.
a. Customary Home Office or Occupation.
b. Farm or nursery
c. Funeral home subject to Site Plan Approval
3. Special Permit Uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the NC zone subject to special permit and site plan
approvals as long as the maximum floor area of any single building is no greater than twentythousand
(20,000) SF.
a. Active-Adult Housing.
b. Adult Day Care Center.
c. Animal Hospital
d. Antique Shop as an accessory use to an owner-occupied Single-Family Dwelling.
e. Apartments or condominiums as an accessory use
f. Assisted-Living Facility.
g. Banks and Financial Institution.
h. Bed and Breakfast as an accessory use to an owner-occupied Single-Family Dwelling.
i. Day Care Center.
j. Farmers’ Market.
k. Greenhouse Operations.
l. Motor vehicle sales, service, and washing.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 21
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
m. Municipal Land Use.
n. Museums
o. Offices.
p. Personal Care or Convalescent Home.
q. Places of Worship.
r. Private Membership Club.
s. Professional Home Office or Occupation as an accessory use to a Single-Family
Dwelling.
t. Restaurant, including Outdoor Café Service as an accessory use.
u. Retail, personal services.
v. School/Education Center, including restaurant facilities as an accessory use.
w. Theaters (indoor movies).
4. Other Requirements.
a. Minimum lot size: 30,000 SF
b. Minimum lot frontage: One-hundred twenty-five (125) feet
c. Maximum height: Thirty (30) feet (2½ Stories)
d. Maximum lot coverage: Forty (40) percent
e. Minimum front yard setback: Fifty (50) feet
f. Minimum side and rear yard setbacks: Twenty (20) feet, except where it abuts a
residential zone where it shall be thirty(30)
feet.
I. INDUSTRIAL (I) ZONE
1. Purpose.
The purpose of this zoning district is to allow for a range of industrial and manufacturing
facilities that benefit the residents of Suffield and have a minimum impact on the natural
resource base of the Town. It is the intention of the Commission to require traffic access
management within this district.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 22
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
2. Permitted Uses.
The following uses are permitted as of right in the I zone subject to any applicable provisions
of these regulations.
a. Customary Home Office or Occupation.
b. Farm or Nursery.
c. Funeral Home subject to Site Plan Approval.
3. Special Permit Uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the I zone subject to special permit and site plan
approvals in accordance with Sec. XIV of these regulations.
a. Adult-Oriented Establishment.
b. Animal Hospital.
c. Banks and Financial Institution.
d. Contractors’ Yard.
e. Commercial Horse Farm.
f. Crematorium.
g. Day Care Center.
h. Farmers’ Market.
i. Golf Course.
j. Greenhouse Operations.
k. Indoor Recreation.
l. Industrial.
m. Light Industrial.
n. Motor Vehicle Sales, Service, and Washing.
o. Municipal Land Use.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 23
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
p. Offices.
q. Private Membership Club.
r. Professional Home Office or Occupation as an accessory use to a Single-Family
Dwelling.
s. Restaurant, including Outdoor Café Service as an accessory use.
t. Retail or personal services as long as the maximum floor area of any single building
are no greater than twenty-thousand (20,000) SF.
u. School/Education Center, including restaurant and banquet facilities as an accessory
use.
v. Self-Storage Facility.
w. Small Wind Energy Producing Facility
x. Theaters (indoor movies).
y. Warehousing, Wholesaling, and Distribution.
4. Other Requirements.
a. Minimum lot size: 45,000 SF
b. Minimum lot frontage: One-hundred fifty (150) feet
c. Maximum height: Fifty (50) feet
d. Maximum lot coverage: Seventy-five (75) percent
e. Minimum front yard setback: Fifty (50) feet
f. Minimum side setback: Fifteen (15) feet
g. Minimum rear setback: Thirty (30) feet
J. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT INDUSTRIAL PARK (PDIP) ZONE
1. Purpose.
The purpose of this zoning district is to allow for a range of office, research, and light
industrial facilities that can be located relatively close to residential uses without negative
influence and which will have minimum impacts on the natural resource base of the
Town. It is the intention of the Commission to require traffic access management within
this district.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 24
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
2. Permitted Uses.
The following uses are permitted as of right in the PDIP zone subject to any applicable
provisions of these regulations.
a. Customary Home Office or Occupation.
b. Farm or Nursery.
3. Special Permit Uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the PDIP zone subject to special permit and site plan
approvals in accordance with Sec. XIV of these regulations.
a. Active Recreation Facility.
b. Animal Hospital.
c. Banks and Financial Institution.
d. Commercial Horse Farm.
e. Contractor’s Yard, provided the maximum lot area is ten (10) acres; that there is a
minimum 5,000 SF building associated with said use; that no portion of the property
maintaining such use fronts or is directly accessed by South, Hale or Spencer Streets;
provided outdoor material storage is located in bins or alternative encasement deemed
acceptable by the Commission; and, that any outdoor parking of commercial vehicles
or equipment is located behind the building and not visible from Town roads or
residences. Storage area of property to be screened from abutting properties. Based
on site conditions, the Commission may require Type “C” or year-round screening for
outside storage of commercial vehicles, equipment and material containers from
abutting properties. (3/24/06)
f. Day Care Center.
g. Farmers’ Market.
h. Funeral Home.
i. Golf Course.
j. Greenhouse Operations.
k. Hospital.
l. Hotel/Motel.
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 25
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
m. Indoor Recreation.
n. Light Industrial.
o. Municipal Land Use.
p. Offices.
q. Personal Care or Convalescent Home.
r. Private Membership Club.
s. Professional Home Office or Occupation as an accessory use to a Single-Family
Dwelling.
t. Restaurant as an accessory use including Outdoor Café Service.
u. Retail, personal services as an accessory use.
v. School/Education Center, including restaurant and banquet facilities as an accessory
use.
w. Small Wind Energy Producing Facility
x. Theaters (indoor movies).
y. Warehousing, Wholesaling, and Distribution.
4. Other Requirements.
a. Minimum lot size: 60,000 SF
b. Minimum lot frontage: One-hundred fifty (150) feet
c. Maximum height: Fifty (50) feet
d. Maximum lot coverage: Sixty (60) percent
e. Minimum front yard setback: Fifty (50) feet
f. Minimum side setback: Twenty-five (25) feet
g. Minimum rear setback: Thirty (30) feet
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 26
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
K. TEMPORARY USE PERMITS PERMITTED IN ANY ZONE
Activities such as carnivals, fairs, demonstrations, performances, concerts, fundraising events or
similar temporary activities by public and private non-profit organizations may be permitted by
the Zoning Officer for a period not to exceed three (3) days duration. If the Zoning Officer feels
that there is a reasonable question that the use will have or cause significant negative impacts
because of traffic, noise, excessive glare or similar detrimental effects, he/she shall not issue the
temporary permit and shall refer the matter to the Commission which shall review the
circumstances of the request and approve, disapprove, or approve with limitations or
modifications of the proposed activity.
L. PROHIBITED USES
1. Any use not listed as permitted by these regulations is deemed to be prohibited (see Sec. I.C.
of these regulations). Nevertheless, due to their uniquely objectionable characteristics,
certain uses are identified in this Section for specific prohibition in any zone, as principal or
accessory uses, and no use category set forth in these Regulations shall be deemed to include
any use set forth herein. No land, premises, building or structure in any zone shall be used
for any of the following uses:
a. Amusement Parks.
b. Animal by-product rendering.
c. Blast furnaces or smelting of copper, iron, lead, tin or zinc.
d. Bulk or wholesale storage of gasoline, fuel oil, and other petroleum products above
ground, excluding such storage for on-site consumption or otherwise accessory to the
principal use of the property.
e. Chemical manufacturing.
f. Commercial kennel.
g. Drive-in theaters.
h. Drive-thru facilities associated with any use other than a bank and pharmacy.
i. Dry-cleaning facilities using chemicals on site.
j. Fertilizer manufacture.
k. Flea Markets.
l. Heliports.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 26
m. Itinerant peddling, sales or promotions conducted from vehicles or from any other
mobile or portable facility, excluding vendors legally operating within a public
highway right-of-way.
n. Junkyards and storage of junk, including any place in or on which is stored or
deposited old material, glass, paper, metal, cordage, scrap or other waste or
secondhand or unused substances including any material which has been or was
intended to be a part of any fabricated object, or of any vehicle or of any form of
conveyance of any kind or description. Includes motor vehicle junk business and
motor vehicle junkyard as defined by CGS.
o. Manufacture or storage of explosives.
p. Manufacturing uses involving the primary production of raw materials such as
asphalt, rubber (natural and synthetic), cement, charcoal, charcoal fuel briquetting,
lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris; aniline dyes, ammonia, carbide, caustic soda,
cellulose, chlorine, carbon black, bone black, creosote, hydrogen, oxygen, soap,
paper, industrial alcohol; carbolic, phosphoric, hydrochloric, nitric, picric, or sulfuric
acid; and, linoleum, oil cloth, matches, paint, varnishes, turpentine and other solvents.
q. Commercial mining or quarrying operations, including removal of sand, and gravel
operations.
r. Natural, propane, or other gas manufacture by other than a public utility, and natural,
propane, or other gas storage as a principal use, except that the storage for distributing
purposes and the distribution of liquefied petroleum gas may be permitted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals provided that there is compliance with all requirements of
CGS Chap. 541, Part II, and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as the same
may be amended from time to time. This provision shall not be construed to prevent
the storage for use on the premises of liquefied petroleum gas when installed and used
in accordance with applicable Connecticut State laws.
s. Outdoor activities dealing with the racing of motorized vehicles, i.e., cars,
snowmobiles, go-carts, motorcycles, etc.
t. Refining and recovery of products from fish, bones, fat and other animal refuse or
offal.
u. Solid waste facilities (other than for municipal use) as defined by Connecticut
General Statutes.
v. Tattoo parlors.
w. Truck storage yards.
x. Valet parking, car rental, and taxi service facilities.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 27
y. Wind farms.
z. Similar uses to Subsections a. through y. above, which are dangerous by reason of
fire or explosion, or injurious, noxious, or detrimental to the neighborhood because of
emission of dust, fumes, odor, smoke, wastes, noise, vibrations, light, traffic or
because of other objectionable features.
aa. The rental of separate quarters within a single family house. (9-10-07)
bb. The burial of stumps, logs, branches or other construction debris such as scrap
lumber, metal, concrete, asphalt or other discarded material. (10-09-09)
cc. The placement of Membrane Structures (see section II Definitions) in residential
zoning districts as an accessory use to a residence. (10-09-09)
2. The Zoning Board of Appeals is prohibited from granting any variance establishing, enlarging
or extending any use that is otherwise prohibited in the zone in which the property lies.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 28
M. HEIGHT AND AREA SCHEDULE
Maximum Minimum Minimum Developable Maximum Minimum Yards **
Zone Height * Frontage Lot Size Area Lot Coverage Front Side Rear
Farmland
Preservation (FP)
40‘
50’
5 Acres
n/a
n/a
50'
50’
50’
Residential (R-90) ** 30’ 200' 90,000 SF 60,000 SF 10% 50' 30' 50'
Residential (R-45) ** 30’ 175' 45,000 SF 45,000 SF 20% 50' 20' 50'
Residential (R-25) 30’ 125' 25,000 SF 25,000 SF 25% 50' 20' 40'
Residential (R-20) 30’ 100' 20,000 SF 20,000 SF 30% 40' 10' 40'
Residential (R-15) 30’ 90' 15,000 SF 15,000 SF 35% 40' 10' 35'
Residential (R-11) 30’ 75' 11,000 SF 11,000 SF 40% 40' 9' 25'
Planned Development
Apartment (PDA)
50’
500’
10 Acres
n/a
35%
50’
50’
50’
Housing Opportunity
District (HOD)
50’
200’
25 Acres
n/a
35%
50’
50’
50’
Neighborhood
Commercial (NC)
30’
125’
30,000 SF
n/a
40%
50'
20’ or
30'
20’ or
30'
Town Center Village
District (TCV)****
40’
60'
12,000 SF
n/a
75%
0'
10’-
20’.
20'
West Suffield Village
District (WSCV)
35’
125’
30,000 SF
n/a
50%
60'
20'
30'
Industrial (I) 50’ 150' 45,000 SF n/a 75% 50' 15' 30'
Planned Development
Industrial Park (PDIP)***
50’
150'
60,000 SF
n/a
60%
50'
25'
30'
* Accessory buildings in excess of ten (10) feet in height shall observe setback requirements for a
principal building. Accessory buildings ten (10) feet in height or less shall observe five (5) foot
side and rear setbacks except in the R-90 zone which shall be ten (10) feet and in the R-45 zone
which shall be ten (10) feet for rear yard. In-ground pools shall be located not less than fifteen
(15) feet from side and rear property lines in all zones as measured from the edge of the patio
surrounding the pool.
** Subdivisions of twenty (20) acres or greater with five (5) or more lots in the R-90 and/or R-45
zones require a special permit according to Sec. VI of these regulations prior to subdivision
approval.
*** No part of any building or structure shall exceed the height limitations established by the
FAA.
**** Minimum side yard setback shall be an aggregate of thirty (30) feet with a twenty (20) foot
wide fire lane on one side. (7-05-07)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 29
N. HOUSING OPPORTUNITY DISTRICT (HOD)
1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Housing Opportunity District (HOD) is to permit and regulate the
development of multi-family housing within a community that is well-planned and contains
homes that are financially accessible to moderate and low income households. This section
is adopted pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-2 as amended by Public Act 91-392, to encourage multifamily
dwellings and promote housing choice and economic diversity, including housing
for low and moderate income households, and is in conformance with the standards of
C.G.S. § 8-30g. Should any provision of this HOD Regulation conflict with other
provisions of the Suffield Zoning Regulations, the provisions of this section shall control.
2. Definitions.
The following definitions are applicable to the HOD Regulation:
a. Housing Opportunity District Development (“HOD Development”). A housing
development in which, for at least forty (40) years after the initial occupancy of
units within the proposed development: (1) not less than fifteen percent (15%) of
the dwelling units will be conveyed by deeds or leased pursuant to documents
containing covenants or restrictions which shall require that such dwelling units
be sold or leased at or below, prices which will preserve the units as affordable
housing, as defined in C.G.S. § 8-30g, for persons or families whose income is
less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) of the area median income for the
Hartford PMSA or the statewide median income, whichever is less, as determined
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; and (2) not
less than fifteen percent (15%) of the dwelling units shall be conveyed or leased
in the same manner to persons or families whose income is less than or equal to
sixty percent (60%) of the area median income or the statewide median income,
whichever is less.
b. Housing Opportunity Unit. As used in this HOD Regulation, “Housing
Opportunity Unit” means a residential unit for which the sale or resale price, and
unit lease price, is restricted in accordance with these regulations and the
affordability plan required to be filed per section N.2.b., below.
3. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted uses within an HOD, subject to site plan approval by
the Commission, in accordance with Section XIV.A.2 except for XIV.A.2.c.(5) and (19) and
as otherwise set forth in Section IV.N.10 below:
a. Multifamily dwellings consisting of no more than 30 dwelling units per building.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 30
b. On-site active and passive recreational and social uses as shown on the approved
site plan, including any community buildings and clubhouses, swimming pools,
athletic fields, walking trails, bicycle routes, tennis courts, playgrounds, picnic
areas and other similar recreational facilities.
4. Permitted accessory buildings, structures and uses.
a. Uses or structures accessory to the above uses including temporary construction
facilities, trailers and sales offices, and as accessory uses otherwise permitted.
b. Use of a residence for personal business purposes to the extent permitted by, and
subject to the procedures, limitations, and conditions of, these Zoning
Regulations.
5. Parcels eligible for rezoning to HOD.
No parcel (or parcels) of land shall be rezoned to HOD unless, after combining the parcels
into one development parcel for the purpose of constructing an HOD Development, it
satisfies the following criteria:
a. The parcel shall consist of at least 25 acres.
b. The parcel shall have not less than 200 feet of frontage on a public street.
c. The parcel shall be served by public water and sewer.
6. Area and bulk requirements.
Zoning standards and requirements for the HOD Development site are as follows:
a.
b.
c.
Maximum Density Per Gross Acre
Parking Space Requirement
Minimum building setback from
7 dwelling units
1.5 parking spaces per unit
existing public street 100 feet
d. Minimum building setback from
proposed private road(s)
No minimum
e. Minimum building setback from
property boundary HOD Development
50 feet*
f. Minimum Parking Area Setback
Front Yard
50 feet*
Side Yard and Rear Yard 25 feet*
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 31
g. Maximum Lot Coverage 35 percent
h. Maximum Building Height 50 feet
i. Total Minimum Open Space 20 percent of HOD Development site
with no requirement for active
recreation use.
* Bus stops and/or landscape wall treatments are allowed in front, side and rear
yards, or setback areas. Privacy fences are allowed inside the rear yards.
7. Landscaping requirements.
The landscaping plan for an HOD Development shall be prepared by a Connecticut licensed
landscape architect and shall provide, at a minimum, for the following:
a. A landscaped or natural “perimeter buffer” of not less than 20 feet in width
between any proposed building and abutting residentially zoned properties or
a six foot high privacy fence, except where HOD Development roads access
existing streets and highways.
b. Landscaping in vicinity of parking areas shall include the use of shade trees
and ornamentals for visual appeal, and the use of evergreens, where practical,
to screen parking areas and buildings to the extent reasonably possible, from
adjacent residentially zoned properties.
c. All walkways within the HOD Development shall be a minimum of three feet
in width.
8. Parking requirements.
Within an HOD, the off-street parking requirements are as follows:
a. 1.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
b. Tandem parking spaces for ownership units are allowed and count towards the
parking requirement for the entire HOD Development.
9. Signage.
a. Signage within an HOD Development shall be sufficient to safely direct vehicular
and pedestrian traffic within the HOD site.
b. The site plan shall depict the location of all proposed signage at the entrance to
the HOD Development. Any entrance sign shall be no more than 25 square
feet in area per side and may be located within 10 feet of the street line of the
existing public street.
c. No sign permit is required to the extent that proposed signage location and
information on type and size for the HOD Development is depicted on the site plan.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 32
d. The signage requirements at IX.B. and for the PDA district at IX.F.3.(a) apply except
as otherwise indicated above.
10. Lighting.
An HOD Development site plan shall provide, with illustrative detail, for exterior street
lighting fixtures as may be required for the safety of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
11. Utilities.
a. All utility lines shall be located in conformance with applicable Town specifications.
b. No certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued for any dwelling unit until
such unit has been connected to all required utilities.
12. Procedure.
An HOD Development requires a change of zone for the HOD site, amendment of the
official zoning map, and site plan approval pursuant to Section XIV.A.2 excluding the
requirements of subsections XIV.A.2.c.(5) and (19). If these applications are submitted
together with the request to adopt or amend this HOD Regulation, the Commission shall
hold a public hearing to consider all applications simultaneously and shall decide the
submitted applications as one comprehensive proposal and give notice of its decision as
required by law.
13. Additional Submission Requirements.
In addition to the documents required to be submitted pursuant to section XIV.A.2 of the
Zoning Regulation for site plan approval as qualified in section 12 above, the following
items shall be provided as part of the HOD Development application:
a. Traffic study prepared by a licensed engineer.
b. An Affordability Plan as required by C.G.S. §8-30g(b)(1) explaining the
administration of affordability restrictions and covenants.
14. Additional Standards For Administration and Preservation of Price Restrictions For
Housing Opportunity Units.
a. Construction quality and location of units. Housing Opportunity Units shall be of a
construction quality that is comparable to market-rate units within the HOD
Development and shall be dispersed throughout the development.
b. Pro-rata construction. If the HOD Development is to be built in phases, the
Housing Opportunity Units shall be built on a pro rata basis as construction
proceeds.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IV: Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Page 33
c. Monthly payment. Calculation of the maximum monthly payment for a Housing
Opportunity Unit, so as to satisfy Conn. Gen. Stat. § 8-30g, shall utilize the median
income data as published by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development for an ownership or leased unit in effect on the day a bond for deed,
similar contract of conveyance, or lease is accepted by the seller or lessee.
d. Maximum monthly payment. The maximum payment that the occupant for a
Housing Opportunity Unit shall pay shall not be greater than the amount that will
preserve such unit as "affordable housing" as that term is defined in C.G.S. § 8-30g.
e. Principal residence. Housing Opportunity Units shall be occupied only as a
purchaser's or lessee’s principal residence except as provided herein.
f. Notice of availability. At the same time that the market-rate units in an HOD
Development are first advertised to the general public, notice of availability of the
Housing Opportunity Units shall be provided by advertising such availability in
accord with the State regulations for affirmative fair housing marketing programs
and by providing notice to the commission and the local housing authority. All
notices shall comply with the federal Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq.
and the Connecticut Fair Housing Act, C.G.S. §§ 46a-64b, 64c.
g. Forty year period. The forty (40) year affordability period shall be calculated
separately for each Housing Opportunity Unit in an HOD Development, and the
period shall begin on the date of initial leasing or conveyance of said unit.
15. Enforcement.
A violation of the Regulations contained in this section shall not result in a forfeiture or
reversion of title, but the Commission shall otherwise retain all enforcement powers granted
by the Connecticut General Statutes, including the authority under C.G.S. § 8-12 to issue
notices of violation, to impose fines, and to seek injunctive relief.
16. Subdivision.
The HOD Development site may be subdivided subsequent to approval of the HOD
Development site plan. The resultant parcels may be owned by separate and distinct persons
or entities. Such subsequent subdivision or re-subdivision shall not require compliance with
the HOD Development design standards or affordability requirements for each proposed
parcel, as long as the entire HOD Development site remains in compliance with the approved
site plan and affordability requirements. Cross easements and provisions for access to and
use of any common recreational amenities on the HOD Development site shall be required,
as appropriate, to maintain access for all residents of HOD Development across the HOD
site.
Section V: SPECIAL REGULATIONS
A. Active-Adult Housing Development ……………………………… V-1
B. Adult-Oriented Establishment ………………………….…………. V-5
C. Affordable Housing ……………………………………………….. V-6
D. Alcoholic Beverages ……………………………………………….V-7
E. Antique Shops ………………………………………………………V-9
F. Assisted-Living and Personal-Care Facilities, Convalescent
and Nursing Homes ………………………………………………... V-10
G. Back (or Rear) Lots …..…………………………………………….V-12
H. Bed and Breakfast Facility …………………………………………V-13
I. Conversion of One-to-Two-Family Dwelling …………………….. V-14
J. Earth Removal ……………………………………………………...V-14
K. Flood Damage Prevention ………………………………………… V-16
L. Greenhouse Operations (Commercial) ……………………………. V-31
M. Horses for Commercial Purposes …………………………………..V-32
N. Landfill Regulations ………………………………………………..V-33
O. Motor-Vehicle Sales, Service, and Washing ……………………… V-35
P. Outdoor Café Service Requirements ……………………………… V-36
Q. Two-Family Dwelling ……………………………………………...V-37
R. Wireless Telecommunication Regulations …………………………V-38
S. Farm Stand Permanent……………………………………………… V-45
T. Wineries……………………………………………………………..V-46
U. Adaptive Reuse……………………………………………………... V-47
V. Small Wind Energy Producing Facilities……………………………V-49
W. Keeping of Chickens ………………………………………………..V-52
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 1
SECTION V: SPECIAL REGULATIONS
All special permit uses identified in these regulations are declared to possess characteristics of
such unique and distinct form that each specific use shall be considered as an individual case.
Special permit uses as set forth in these regulations are deemed to be permitted uses in their
respective zoning districts when granted by the Commission, subject to the satisfaction of the
requirements and standards set forth in Sec. XIV.B of these regulations. Site plan approval shall
be required for all special permits approved by the Commission.
A. ACTIVE-ADULT HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to permit variations in height, bulk, density, and residential use
types which would not otherwise be possible in order to meet the special housing needs of
those age fifty-five (55) years and older; and to permit flexible site design so that an Active-
Adult Housing Development may be constructed in harmony with natural site features as a
special permit.
2. Pre-Application Conference.
Prior to the submission of an application for an Active-Adult Housing Development, all
applicants are required to initiate a pre-application conference with the Commission and its
staff to discuss the conceptual aspects of the proposed development and to prepare and
present a conceptual plan for informal consideration. The conceptual plan should contain all
necessary information to allow the Commission to make an informed informal consideration,
including the locations of wetlands, slopes in excess of twenty percent (20%), and all
proposed roads, building lots, and open spaces.
3. Procedure.
a. Approval and Filing Requirements. The Commission may permit the establishment
of Active-Adult Housing and their accessory uses in all Residential Zones and the
Neighborhood Commercial Zone. An approved site plan shall be filed as required in
Sec. XIV of these regulations.
b. Homeowners’ Association. Active-Adult Housing Development shall be developed
and occupied in a common interest community form of ownership per CGS Chapter
828, i.e. Common Interest Ownership Act. A homeowners’ association must be
legally established prior to filing the approved plans; membership must be mandatory
for each home buyer and any successive buyer and recorded in all deeds; open space
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 2
restrictions must be permanent and not just for a given period of years; the association
must be responsible for liability insurance, taxes, and the maintenance of recreational
and other facilities; homeowners must pay pro rata share of the cost or the assessment
levied by the Town or same may become a lien upon the delinquent member’s
property and share of the common space in the development; the instrument
establishing the association must be submitted for approval as part of the application;
and, each owner shall own a proportionate share of the common land shown on the
plan and a statement to that effect shall be indicated on said plan.
c. Bonding. Estimates of construction costs for roads, storm drains, sidewalks, hydrants,
streetlights and other common facilities, and site erosion and sedimentation control
shall be prepared and submitted to the Commission for approval after the appeal
period for approval has expired. Sureties must be received and approved by the
Commission’s Counsel and the Treasurer’s Office prior to the start of construction.
4. Area and yard requirements.
Where an active-adult housing project proposes that not less than twenty-five percent (25%)
of the dwelling units be “affordable” as defined in CGS Sec. 8-30g, the Commission may, by
three-fourths (¾) vote, waive any of the following standards if it finds that such waiver will
be harmonious to the Plan of Conservation and Development and will not adversely impact
existing adjacent residential neighborhoods.
a. Minimum lot size: Ten (10) acres.
b. Minimum lot frontage: One-hundred and twenty-five (125) feet on specific
existing collector or arterial streets as specified in
Subsection 7.a. The minimum lot frontage requirement
may be reduced by one (1) foot for every two
(2) feet by which the development’s front yard setback
is increased; provided, however, that the lot
frontage is not reduced to less than fifty (50) feet.
Where the increased setback/reduced frontage
provision is used, no pavement, parking area, or
impervious areas other than the access road shall be
allowed within the additional setback.
c. Maximum density: Five (5) dwelling units per developable acre not to
exceed fifty (50) dwelling units total per development
unless in a PDA zone where seven (7) units per
developable acre are permitted.
d. Minimum building setback One hundred (100) feet.
from existing public streets
e. Minimum building setback Fifty (50) feet unless adjacent to an existing PDA
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 3
from property boundary Zone in which case twenty (20) feet side and forty
(40) feet rear yards.
f. Maximum lot coverage: Thirty (30) percent.
g. Maximum building height: 2½ Stories, thirty (30) feet
h. Distance between structures: Twenty (20) feet minimum
i. Minimum building setback from Twenty (20) feet where no sidewalks are placed
proposed roads in development adjacent to roads and thirty (30) feet where sidewalks
are provided.
j. Minimum setback of parking Side and Rear: Twenty-five (25) feet
areas Front: Fifty (50) feet
5. Open Space Requirements (11/19/04)
A minimum 50% of the site shall be preserved as open space, of which at least 25% must be
suitable for active recreation. The Commission may require the following types of open
space.
a. Open space identified in the Plan of Conservation and Development;
b. Open space that is contiguous to existing open space areas or in areas of the site with
the highest probability of connection with future open space;
c. Pedestrian access between properties and perimeter design concept to facilitate
networking of pedestrian trails;
d. Scenic view easements or preservation of vistas as seen from public roads;
e. Streets to be laid out in a curvilinear fashion;
f. Preservation of historic sites and their environs;
g. Buffer areas to minimize conflict between existing residential uses;
h. No-cut or limited-clearing areas on lots;
i. Covenants or easements to ensure existing fields will be mowed or plowed;
j. Fencing;
k. Agricultural buffers;
l. Screening fences or walls, including landscaped berm along property lines; and,
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 4
m. Active recreational amenities such as tennis courts, swimming pools, community
rooms, etc.
6. Occupancy Restrictions.
The following occupancy restrictions shall be incorporated into the by-laws of the common
interest ownership community:
a. The occupancy of any dwelling unit shall be limited to not more than three (3)
persons, one of whom shall be 55 years of age or older.
b. The spouse who survives his or her qualified spouse may continue to reside in such
unit, notwithstanding that there may no longer be an occupant who is 55 years or
older.
c. No persons under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed to reside in any unit,
except for a paid caregiver.
d. The purchase of any units for investment shall not be allowed. A non-resident family
member may purchase up to one (1) unit for another family member who will reside
in the unit and otherwise comply with the provisions of this Regulation.
e. An owner or family-related member of a dwelling unit must reside in his or her unit
for a minimum of one year.
7. Living Unit Types and Sizes.
a. Single-family detached dwelling units and attached units of no more than three (3)
units per structure shall be allowed.
b. The minimum living areas of residential units shall be as follows:
One (1) bedroom unit: 1,000 square feet
Two(2) bedroom unit: 1,250 square feet
8. Other Design Requirements.
a. Location. Active-adult housing is only permitted on the following arterial and
collector roads with public water and sewer: North and South Main Streets, East
Street, East Street South, South Street, Thompsonville Road, Mapleton Avenue,
Bridge Street, Thrall Avenue, Remington Street and Suffield Street.
b. Public and Private Improvements. All public and private utilities, streets, and related
improvements shall conform to Town of Suffield Subdivision Regulations design
standards, except that a twenty-four (24) foot pavement width is the minimum
required for any private roadway or street in the development and the Commission
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 5
may require a performance bond for private improvements. The owner shall provide
and maintain all private road and parking areas as may be required.
c. Parking. The parking requirements of Sec. VII of these regulations shall be
applicable to Active-Adult Housing except as modified by this section. A minimum
of two and one-half (2½) parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. No
parking spaces shall be located within the required front yard and all parking spaces
visible from a public street shall be landscaped with Type “B” screening according to
Sec. VIII of these regulations.
d. Landscaping Plan. The landscaping provisions of Sec. VIII of these regulations shall
be applicable to Active-Adult Housing except as modified by this section. A forty
(40) foot wide landscaped buffer area shall be provided within the fifty (50) foot
building setback wherever an Active-Adult Housing Development abuts a singlefamily
residential development. The buffer shall be installed in compliance with the
Type “B” screening requirements. A landscape plan prepared by and containing the
seal of a Landscape Architect registered by the State of Connecticut shall be prepared
and include a list and count of all trees and shrubs to be planted by common and
botanical names, size (caliper, height, time until maturity) at planting, and height and
spread maturity shall be part of the Active-Adult Housing application. All trees and
shrubs to be undisturbed shall be tagged, or otherwise identified in the field prior to
commencement of site work, and shall be shown on the landscape plan.
e. Outdoor Lighting. The Lighting provisions of Sec. III.M of these regulations shall be
applicable to Active-Adult Housing.
f. Solid Waste Disposal. Solid waste stations (dumpsters) shall be placed on a concrete
pad, appropriately screened, maintained, and shown on the approved site plan.
g. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required to provide sufficient and safe pedestrian
circulation both within the site and to abutting properties.
B. ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT
The Commission, as a special use after public hearing, may permit the establishment of an adultoriented
use in the Industrial (I) Zone as follows:
1. Location Requirements.
The center of the main entrance of an “adult-oriented establishment” shall not be closer than
eight-hundred (800) feet (measured in a straight line) from the center of the main entrance of
other “adult-oriented establishment”, or the nearest property line of any lot used as a place of
worship, public library, day-care facility, community recreation building, playground or park,
sports field, school (as defined by standards recommended by the State Board of Education
and the State Department of Education), or any residential zone. Said distance requirement
may be waived by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Commission, provided that the Applicant has
submitted a petition, at or before the public hearing, signed by the owners of fifty-one (51)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 6
percent of the residences and commercial establishments within a 1,250 foot distance of the
proposed location and provided that the Commission makes the following findings:
a. The proposed use will not be detrimental to nearby property values, and the spirit and
intent of this regulation will be observed.
b. The establishment of an additional use of this type in the area proposed will not be
contrary to any residential or nonresidential programs of neighborhood conservation
or improvement.
c. The proposed use will not cause additional crime in the area.
2. Time Limit.
Each special permit shall be issued for one (1) year and shall automatically be renewed on an
annual basis without application provided the Zoning Official certifies there were no
violations of the regulation during the year. If certification cannot be made, the Official shall
provide written notice to the holder of the special permit that a new application is required.
The Applicant may continue to operate under the special permit until such time as the new
application for renewal is denied.
C. AFFORDABLE HOUSING
The Commission may grant a special permit after public hearing to allow affordable housing as
defined by CGS.
1. Purpose.
Higher density zoning may be permitted on a limited basis to provide a greater variety of
housing choices. As an incentive to encourage development of affordable housing units, the
Commission, upon petition and after public hearing, may grant a change of zone for a parcel
of land, provided that fifty percent (50%) of the additional housing units allowed, shall be
affordable. In calculating the number of units, provision for open space land (twenty
percent) will not be deducted nor will a fee be collected in lieu of open space if twenty-five
percent (25%) or more of the project units are offered as affordable housing. To protect the
public health and welfare it is necessary to apply a number of measures to a property in
question in order to be assured that such property can accommodate the desired density.
Therefore, the following procedure is employed for consideration of such change of zone.
2. Procedure.
a. An applicant may petition for a change of zone from R-45 to R-25, or R-25 to R-15,
R-11, or PDA as provided in these regulations and in accordance with the following
standards:
(1) A parcel shall be a minimum of ten (10) developable acres.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 7
(2) The land proposed for use shall be of such character that it can accommodate
higher density use.
(3) Public water supply shall be available to service the property in question.
(4) Public sewers shall be available to service the property in question.
(5) The existing streets in the area shall be adequate for proper circulation and
increased traffic generated by more intensive development.
(6) Existing drainage facilities must be adequate to accommodate an
intensification of land use.
(7) Soils must be of such type to accommodate an intensification of land use.
b. A PDA development may be allowed an additional density bonus of forty (40)
percent, provided that fifty (50) percent of the additional units are offered as
affordable housing.
c. A sketch plan shall be submitted to illustrate the number of housing units possible on
a property under its present zoning classification.
d. A preliminary plan, based on the proposed zoning classification, shall accompany the
application. It shall provide adequate information to show that the standards can be
met and that design proposals employed will make development compatible with the
surrounding area. In addition, said plan will be used in conjunction with Subsection
c. above to provide a "bonus" figure for use in calculating the number of affordable
housing units required to qualify under this regulation.
e. In order to absorb the impact on the town's infrastructure and its ability to provide
services, consideration for zone changes will be limited to a total of fifty (50) bonus
units (25 affordable) per year.
f. The commission may consider relaxation of the fifteen (15) percent limitation for
multi-family housing as part of the town's housing stock when twenty-five (25)
percent or more of the proposed units in a project are affordable.
g. A contract certifying the above shall be drawn by the developer, approved by the
town attorney and entered into between the developer and the Town of Suffield. Such
contract shall be drawn in accordance with CGS Sec. 8-2g(a).
h. Ongoing administration of affordable housing units established under these
regulations shall be in accordance with CGS Sec. 8-2g(b).
D. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 8
1. No building or use of land shall be used for the purpose of sale or exchange of alcoholic
liquors, for consumption on or off the premises, at wholesale or retail, if any part of such
building or premises is situated:
a. Within two-hundred (200) feet of any part of a lot or parcel used, intended to be used,
or reserved for a church, college, school or other institution for children, a hospital,
library or charitable or religious institution supported by public or private funds,
except that the distance limitation may be waived by a vote of five-sixths (5/6) of the
Commission in the case of a permitted hotel or restaurant where alcoholic beverages
are sold for consumption on the premises under a hotel permit or a restaurant permit
(as defined in the State Liquor Control Act) provided that the Commission, after a
public hearing, determines that the proximity of said hotel or restaurant or other
buildings or premises used for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises:
(1) Will be subordinate and incidental to the principal use of the premises as a restaurant
where hot meals are served by employees to patrons at tables or as a hotel;
(2) Will not conflict with the general purpose of these regulations as they relate to the
area;
(3) Will not adversely affect the health, safety, or morals of persons attending any
nearby college, school, place of worship, library, park or playground or residing
in any nearby residential zone; and,
(4) Will not hinder the appropriate development and use of adjacent property.
2. In a Residential Zoning District, the Commission may grant a special permit for a:
a. Club under a "club permit".
b. Public golf course location under a restaurant beer permit.
c. School/Education Center under a restaurant permit.
3. In an Industrial Zoning District, the Commission may grant a special permit for a:
a. The bottling and wholesale sale and storage of alcoholic liquors without limitation
of distance from any liquor outlet, under the following permits:
(1) Warehouse bottling permit.
(2) Warehouse storage permit,
(3) Wholesalers permit.
b. The retail sale of beer and wine for consumption on the premises under a restaurant
permit.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 9
4. In Commercial Zoning Districts the sale of alcoholic liquors is permitted only by special
use permit issued by the Commission as follows:
a. For consumption on the premises under a hotel permit, restaurant permit, cafe permit
or club permit.
b. For consumption off the premises under a package store permit, a drugstore permit, or
a drugstore beer permit only when the public entrance to such premises is not less
than 1,500 feet in a direct or straight line to the public entrance of that portion of
another building which is used for the sale of alcoholic beverages under the
aforementioned categories of permits, except for grocery/beer permits.
c. In the case of the forced removal of a package store, or a druggist's permit as defined
in CGS Sec. 30.52, the above limitation of distance shall not apply.
Note: Permits refer to the classifications enumerated in the regulations of the State Liquor Control
Commission.
5. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to be retroactive except that any building
or premises legally in use for the sale of alcoholic liquors in breach of this section, which
is not used for such nonconforming use for a period of thirty (30) days shall thereafter
conform to these regulations.
6. Temporary permits of nonprofit organizations shall be subject only to State Liquor Control
Commission requirements.
E. ANTIQUE SHOPS
The Commission may allow antique shops as an accessory use to a single-family dwelling by
special permit in the R-90, R-45, TCV, WSV, or NC zoning districts, or in the R-25 zoning
district within a historic structure or accessory building identified within the Town’s Survey of
Historical and Architectural Resources prepared by the Capital Regional Council of
Governments, 1979 on file with the Town Clerk’s Office, under the following conditions.
1. The use shall be limited to properties on “arterial” roads, e.g., those with at least 5,000
vehicle trips per day.
2. The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of such dwelling unit and lot
for residential purposes, and shall not change the residential character of the dwelling unit
and lot.
3. Only the resident homeowner may apply for and run the antique shop, except that two (2)
non-resident employees may also be employed.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 10
4. No more than fifty (50) percent of the single-family dwelling unit shall be used for the
antique shop, or a minimum of four-hundred (400) SF for an accessory building shall be
used.
5. The use shall be carried on entirely within the single-family dwelling unit or within a
completely enclosed accessory building permitted on the same lot as the dwelling unit.
6. Parking needs for the residence and the antique shop shall be met on-site according to
Sec. VII of these regulations and shall not take place in required yard setbacks. The
Commission may require the screening of parking areas.
7. No display or storage of antiques on the premises outside of the dwelling unit or the
permitted accessory building in which it is located is permitted.
8. Any auction shall be limited to the residents’ inventory, shall require a Temporary
Special Permit, and shall not be permitted more than once during any calendar year.
F. ASSISTED-LIVING AND PERSONAL-CARE FACILITIES,CONVALESCENT AND
NURSING HOMES
1. Purpose.
The purposes of this section are to permit, as a special use after public hearing, the
establishment of an assisted-living facility consisting of private residential units that provides
assistance with activities of daily life in a group setting and that encourages residents, fiftyfive
(55) years or older, to maintain a maximum level of independence, and to permit the
establishment of a personal-care facility for those sixty (60) years of age and older, subject to
the exceptions provided for in State and Federal fair housing laws, and to provide for
Convalescent Homes as defined in CGS Section 19a-490(o).
2. General. (4-3-2010)
The Commission may permit the establishment of an Assisted-Living or Personal-Care
Facility and their accessory uses in all Residential and Commercial, and the Town Center
Village District Zones as a special permit. (4-3-2010)
3. Area and yard requirements. (4-3-2010)
a. Minimum lot size: Ten (10) acres in residential and commercial zones; one (1)
acre in the Town Center Village District Zone if the
Commission determines that the smaller lot size is
acceptable given abutting property uses, site characteristics,
site design, and site access considerations. (4-3-2010)
b. Minimum lot frontage: Two-hundred fifty (250) feet, except when the Commission
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 11
determines that a smaller amount is acceptable given
abutting property uses, site characteristics, site design, and
site access considerations. In no event shall the minimum
frontage be less than sixty (60) feet in the Town Center
Village District Zone. (4-3-2010)
c. Maximum density: Five (5) units per acre in residential and commercial zones;
one (1) unit per two thousand (2000) square feet in a Town
Center Village District Zone not to exceed thirty 30 units.
(4-3-2010)
d. Minimum building setback One hundred (100) feet, except when the Commission
from property boundaries determines that a smaller amount is acceptable given abutting
property uses, site characteristics, site design, and site access
considerations.
e. Maximum lot coverage: Thirty-five (35) percent in residential zones, forty (40)
percent in commercial zones, and seventy-five (75) percent
in the Town Center Village District. (4-3-2010)
f. Maximum building height: Three (3) stories or forty (40) feet in height.
g. Minimum open space: Sufficient to meet the needs of residents including at least
one-thousand (1,000) SF per dwelling unit, and the
construction of walking paths in residential and commercial
zones only. (4-3-2010)
j. Minimum building Twenty (20) feet where no sidewalks are placed adjacent to
setback from proposed roads and thirty (30) feet where sidewalks are provided in
roads within facility. residential zones only. In the TCVD, setbacks shall
conform to Section IV. M. (4-3-2010)
4. Other Requirements.
a. A plan for transportation services for the residents to shopping areas, banks, senior
center and other business and community services shall be submitted and subject to
review and approval by the Commission.
b. The property shall be in the sewer service area and served by public water and sewers.
c. There shall be a community facility(s) suitably equipped to meet the dining, social
interaction and leisure time needs of the residents. The community facility(s) shall
contain not less than twenty-five (25) square feet per dwelling unit. The Commission
may require additional community space within the facility as it deems appropriate.
In calculating community facilities accessory uses such as a central kitchen and
maintenance areas shall not be included. (4-3-2010)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 12
d. Other accessory uses such as retail and/or commercial office space may be included
provided the area shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet per dwelling unit and the
use is primarily to serve the needs of the residents of the facility. There shall be no
advertising of the activities which occupy said space outside of the facility.
e. All units shall have minimum floor areas as follows: efficiency: 400 square feet; onebedroom:
500 square feet; two-bedroom: 650 square feet.
f. Each unit shall have an emergency call/intercom system connected to a central
station, on-site, staffed twenty-four (24) hours per day when such determination is
made by the Commission.
g. In the event that there is a conflict between this section and the provisions of Section
IV.F, the provisions of this section shall control. (4-3-2010)
G. BACK (or REAR) LOT
The intent of this section is to afford greater flexibility in determining the most appropriate
residential development form for unusually large, deep or oddly shaped lots. Such development
must be in harmony with the area in which it is proposed and must be designed and sited to
protect neighboring property values while respecting the site’s natural and manmade features.
1. Standards and Requirements.
The Commission may grant a special permit to allow the creation of a back lot in residential
zoning districts when they determine that the development of the back lot will provide the
most appropriate use of the land considering such factors as the preservation of the natural
character of the land, drainage, configuration, accessibility, and topography, and where all of
the following conditions apply:
a. The back lot shall contain a minimum fifty (50) foot wide frontage strip (driveway),
which shall be part of said lot and extend from the Town street to the buildable
portion of the back lot. No structures shall be located within the access strip.
b. The back lot shall conform to all requirements prescribed for the zone in which it is
located except that the minimum lot size (exclusive of access strip) shall be at least
five (5) uninterrupted contiguous developable acres.
c. The front yard of the back lot shall be measured from the rear lot line of the front lot
or as determined by the Commission.
d. Driveways longer than two-hundred fifty (250) feet in length shall meet the standards
specific in Sec. III.H. of these regulations.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 13
e. The Town street entrance to the back lot shall be posted with a sign containing the
house number and street name. Such sign shall be a minimum of one and one-half
(1½) square feet per side and a maximum of two (2) square feet per side.
f. An evergreen screen shall be planted along the sides of the access strip (driveway) to
ensure privacy for adjacent lots. Said planting shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in
height at the time of planting, and a minimum of six (6) feet in height and threequarters
(3/4) solid at time of maturity. The Commission may waive this requirement
if topographic conditions or existing vegetation provide adequate screening. The
Commission may also require additional screening or landscaping along the access
driveway or any other property lines where it is needed to protect the privacy of
adjacent parcels.
g. The Commission may permit up to two (2) back lots on a parcel of land in existence
as of June 15, 1954.
H. BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY
The Commission may grant a special permit to allow the conversion of a single-family dwelling
to provide for a bed and breakfast facility in the R-90, R-45, R-25, TCV, WSCV, NC, and FP
zones when used in conjunction with primary residential use by the owner only, subject to
reasonable safeguards and the following standards.
1. A bed and breakfast shall:
a. Be located on a parcel of land which conforms to the minimum lot size requirement
for the zoning district in which the property is located;
b. Not detract from the single-family residential character of the dwelling. There shall
be no external evidence of the bed and breakfast use except for an identification sign
up to four (4) square feet in area; (11/19/04)
c. Have all appropriate state and local approvals;
d. Have appropriate water supply and sewer facilities to meet Health Code requirements
or be connected to public facilities;
e. Not be located on a dead-end street more than 1,200 feet from the beginning of such
dead-end street;
f. The maximum number to be permitted in Suffield shall be ten (10);
g. Not contain more than four (4) guest rooms on a property of one (1) acre or less and
up to six (6) guest rooms for a property in excess of one (1) acre;
h. Provide meals for only overnight guests;
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 14
i. Not contain cooking facilities in any guest rooms;
j. Not have a guest for a period in excess of fourteen (14) consecutive days;
2. Off-street parking shall:
a. Consist of one (1) space per guest room in addition to two (2) spaces for the dwelling;
b. Not be located between the street and building line for bed and breakfast guests;
c. Be screened from the street and abutting residential properties by Type "C" screening;
d. Have lighting adequate for public safety and security without creating a nuisance to
abutters;
e. Have an all-weather surface.
I. CONVERSION OF ONE-TO-TWO-FAMILY DWELLING
The Commission may grant a special permit to allow the conversion of a single-family dwelling
to a two-family dwelling in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones as follows:
1. Only homes constructed prior to 1940 shall be eligible for conversion.
2. There shall be double the lot area required by the underlying zone.
3. The minimum floor area of each dwelling unit shall be 525 square feet. For each
bedroom an additional 150 square feet shall be added to the minimum.
4. No structural alteration made to the exterior of the building shall detract from its singlefamily
characteristics.
5. No stairs above the first floor shall be added outside the existing exterior walls except at
the rear wall of the building, and on a corner lot any new stairs shall be added within the
existing walls of the building or added in the form of a wing that will not detract from the
building's single-family characteristics.
6. Permits shall be issued to the property owner.
J. EARTH REMOVAL
1. Purpose.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 15
The purpose of this section is to preserve a cover crop on the land to prevent erosion and to
control any excavation operations that may create a safety or health hazard to the public or
the adjacent property owners, or be detrimental to the immediate neighborhood or to the
Town of Suffield. This use is only permitted for existing earth removal uses in which a
renewal of a special permit is being sought.
2. General Requirements.
a. Unless otherwise provided in this section there shall be no removal from the
premises in any zoning district of earth, sand, gravel, clay or quarry-stone except
as surplus material not to exceed 1,000 cubic yards resulting from a bona fide
construction, landscape or agricultural operation being executed on the premises
and provided that no permanent damage is done to the landscape.
b. In any zoning district top soil or loam may be removed from the area to be
covered by a building or other construction operation and from any other area
provided that no less than four inches of top soil or loam remains and provided
that the entire area disturbed is seeded with a suitable cover crop or is put to
cultivation.
3. The Commission may grant a special permit for the renewal of existing earth
removal or sand and gravel operations only, under the following conditions:
a. The applicant shall submit a plan showing existing grades in the area from which
the above material is to be removed together with finished grades at the
conclusion of the operation.
b. The plan shall provide for proper drainage of the area of the operation after
completion and no bank shall exceed a slope of one foot of vertical rise in two (2)
feet of horizontal distance. No removal shall take place within twenty (20) feet of
a property line.
c. At the conclusion of the operation, or of any substantial portion thereof, the whole
area where removal takes place shall be covered with not less than four (4) inches
of topsoil and seeded with a suitable cover crop.
d. No stone crusher or other machinery not required for actual removal of the
material shall be used.
e. Before a special permit renewal can be granted under this section the applicant
shall post a bond with the Treasurer of the Town of Suffield in an amount
approved by the Commission as sufficient to guarantee conformity with the
provisions of the permit issued hereunder.
f. In passing on such applications, the Commission shall consider the effect of such
removal on surrounding property and the future usefulness of the premises when
the operation is completed.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 16
g. Such permits shall be issued for a period not exceeding two (2) years.
h. Nothing herein shall prevent filing a revised plan with the Commission,modifying
or reducing the scope of work originally approved, provided that the bond
required above shall not be released until all the requirements of the section shall
have been met.
K. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
1. Statutory Authorization and Purpose. (9/19/08)
The Legislature of the State of Connecticut has in Title 7, Chapter 98, Section 7-
148(c)(7)(A) and in Title 8, Chapter 124, Section 8-2 of the General statutes delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Zoning and
Planning Commission of the Town of Suffield, Connecticut, does ordain as follows:
(9/19/08)
It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific
areas by provisions designed:
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood and control projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special
flood hazards;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development
of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
g. To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special
flood hazard; and,
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their action.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 17
2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this regulation shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
regulation its most reasonable application.
“Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the flood plain within a community
subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent change of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
“Base Flood Elevation” (BFE) The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year
flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of
the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.
(9/19/08)
“Basement” means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
“Building” see definition for “Structure” (Town’s Definition). (9/19/08)
“Cost” As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any construction,
rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be
established by a detailed written contractor’s estimate. The estimate shall include, but
not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing components, structural
components, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials; building equipment
and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in
appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the
building worked on at the same time; contractor’s overhead; contractor’s profit; and
grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specification; survey costs;
permit fees; outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells,
landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures
such as garages, sheds, and gazebos. (9/19/08)
“Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the areas of special flood
hazard.
“Elevated building” a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated
above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings,
columns (posts and piers), shear walls or breakaway walls.
“Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision”: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 18
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community. (9/19/08)
“Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” The preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
(9/19/08)
“Federal Emergency Management Agency” (FEMA) The federal agency that administers
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). (9/19/08)
“Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal water and/or
the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff or surface water from any source.
“Flood Insurance Rate Map” (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. (9/19/08)
“Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) that includes flood profiles, and the water surface
elevation of the base flood. (9/19/08)
“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
“Floor” the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement) i.e., top of
slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction.
The term does not include he floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
“Functionally dependent facility” a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose
unless it is located in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair
or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales or service facilities.
“Highest Adjacent Grade” (HAG) The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. (9/19/08)
“Historic Structure” Any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register
of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 19
listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) By an approved
state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the
Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. (9/19/08)
“Lowest floor” the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. Recreational vehicles and similar
transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or loner shall be
considered manufactured homes for the purpose of this ordinance.
“Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. (9/19/08)
“Market Value” Market Value of the structure shall be determined by the Appraised
Value (total value minus land value) listed on the Assessor’s Online Database. (9/19/08)
“Mean sea level” (MSL) means, for purposed of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
(9/19/08)
“New construction” means structure for which the “start of construction” commenced on
or after the effective date of this regulation. (Effective date: 9/19/08)
“New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads) is completed on or after the effective date, September 19, 2008, of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community. (9/19/08)
“Recreational Vehicle” A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) four hundred
(400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed
to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck; and (d) designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. (9/19/08)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 20
“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs
or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage
of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, nor does it included the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it included excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation of the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. (9/19/08)
“Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a
manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank.
“Substantial Damage” Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. (9/19/08)
“Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the
structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been
damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
definition “Substantial Improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the buildings commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either:
• any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions, or
• any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a
State Inventory of Historic Places.
“Variance” A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain
management regulation that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and
where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. (9/19/08)
“Violation” Failure of a structure or other development to be fully complaint with the
community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development
without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing
certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is resumed to be a violation
until such time as that documentation is provided. (9/19/08)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 21
“Water Surface Elevation” The height, in relation to the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (9/19/08)
3. General Provisions.
a. Lands to which this regulation applies.
This regulation shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of
Suffield, Connecticut.
b. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) in a scientific and engineering report: entitled “FLOOD INSURANCE
STUDY HARTFORD COUNTY, CONNECTICUT (ALL JURISDICTIONS)”, effective
September 26, 2008, which report with accompanying FLOOD INSURANCE RATE
MAPS dated September 26, 2008, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by
reference and declared to be part of this regulation. Since mapping is legally adopted by
reference into the regulation, it must take precedence when it is more restrictive, until
such time as a map amendment is obtained. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at
Town of Suffield Town Clerk’s Office, 83 Mountain Road, Suffield, CT 06078.
(9/19/08)
c. Compliance.
A structure or development already in compliance with this regulation shall not be made
non-complaint by any alteration, modification, repair, reconstruction or improvement.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted,
modified or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this regulation
and other applicable regulations. (9/19/08)
d. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. (9/19/08)
This regulation is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this regulation and other ordinance,
regulation easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes
the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (9/19/08)
e. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this regulation, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 22
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes.
f. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this regulation is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger
floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increase by man-made
or natural causes. This regulation does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This regulation shall not create liability on the part of Suffield, CT, any officer
or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), for any
flood damages that result by reliance on the regulations or any administrative decision
lawfully made there under. (9/19/08)
g. Severability. (9/19/08)
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this regulation should
be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this regulation, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to
this end the provisions of this regulation are hereby declared to be severable. (9/19/08)
h. Adoption Date of Regulation. (9/19/08)
The adoption date of this regulation is September 19, 2008. (9/19/08)
4. Administration
a. Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit. (9/19/08)
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in Section 3b. Application for
each Floodplain Development Permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Town
Engineer and may include but not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, locations, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: (9/19/08)
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a Connecticut registered professional engineer or architect
that the Floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
Floodproofing criteria in Subsection 5; and, (9/19/08)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 23
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated
as a result of proposed development.
b. Designation of the Town Engineer.
The Town Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement this regulation by
granting or denying Floodplain Development Permit applications in accordance with its
provisions. (9/19/08)
c. Duties and responsibilities of the Town Engineer shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Permit Review
(a) Review all Floodplain Development Permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this regulation have been satisfied. The Town shall select and
adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the
regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood
without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at
any point. (9/19/08)
(b) Review all Floodplain Development Permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required. (9/19/08)
(c) Require that until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction or
substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted
within Zones A1-30 and AE unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more that one (1) foot at
any point in the community. (9/19/08)
(2) Use of Other Base Flood Data
When base flood elevation data or floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with Subsection 3, basis for establishing the area of special flood
hazard, the Town Engineer shall obtain, review and reasonable utilize any base
flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer Subsection 5.
(3) Information to be Obtained and Maintained
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures.
(b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 24
• verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level), and,
• maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Subsection 4.
(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
regulation.
(d) In carrying out his duties regarding this section, the Town Engineer may
request that the applicant provide any information, including engineering reports
and surveys, he determines are necessary to complete his review.
(4) Alteration of Watercourse
(a) Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Environmental Protection
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocation portion
of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
(5) Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries
Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of
the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
d. Certification. (9/19/08)
Where under this regulation, a Connecticut registered professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this regulation, such certification must
be provided to the Town Engineer. (9/19/08)
5. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
a. General Standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
(1) Anchoring
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) Construction Materials and Methods
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 25
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(c) All new construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that
have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or
partially over water. (9/19/08)
(3) Utilities
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the
systems into flood waters.
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
(d) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
(e) Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or
inside of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation
(BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent
flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the
BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood
water. (9/19/08)
(4) Subdivision Proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, bas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood damage; and,
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 26
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and
other proposed development which contain at lest 25 lots or 5 acres (whichever is
less).
b. Specific Standards.
(1) In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in Subsection 3.b. (Basis for establishing the areas of special
flood hazard), or Subsection 4.c.(2) (Use of other base flood data), the following
provisions are required: (9/19/08)
(a) Residential Construction
New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood
elevation.
(b) Nonresidential Construction
New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or
other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
• be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passing of water;
• have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
• be certified by a Connecticut registered professional engineer or
architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in Subsection 4.
(9/19/08)
c. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Subsection 3 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the
following provisions apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development unless certification by a registered
Connecticut professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge. (9/19/08)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 27
(2) If the above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provision of
Subsection 5, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
d. Structures or Portions of Structures in Flood Zones. (9/19/08)
(1) Portion of Structure in Flood Zone-If any portion of a structure lies within
the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to
be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction
requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached
additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the
main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood
zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more
restrictive zone. (9/19/08)
(2) Structures in Two Flood Zones-If a structure lies within two or more flood
zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the
entire structure (i.e., V zone is more restrictive than A zone; structure must
be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any attached additions,
garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main
structure. (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will
require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive
zone). (9/19/08)
(3) No Structures Entirely or Partially Over Water-New construction, substantial
improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial
damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water.
(9/19/08)
e. Compensatory Storage. (9/19/08)
The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally
influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or
substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be
compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be
provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it
shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for
flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the
theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to including the 100-year flood
elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory
volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water
body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality.
(9/19/08)
f. Equal Conveyance. (9/19/08)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 28
Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from
filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint
of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a
Connecticut registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic
and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that
same encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood
elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including
work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to
cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity. (9/19/08)
g. Manufactured (Mobile) Homes and Recreational Vehicles (RVs). (9/19/08)
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), any manufactured (mobile) homes to be
newly placed undergoing a substantial improvement or repaired as a result of substantial
damage, shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest floor is at or above the base
flood elevation (BFE). The manufactured home must also meet all the construction
standards per Section 5.b.(1)(a). This includes manufactured homes outside a
manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or on
a site in an existing park which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as
a result of a flood. (9/19/08)
All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be placed on a permanent
foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely
anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement and hydrostatic pressures.
Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. (9/19/08)
All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. Adequate access and drainage should be
provided. Elevation construction standards include piling foundations placed no more
that ten (10) feet apart, and reinforcement is provided for piers more than six (6) feet
above ground level. (9/19/08)
Recreational vehicles placed on sites within a SFHA shall either (i) be on the site for
fewer than 180 consecutive days, and (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use,
OR (iii) meet all the general standards of Section 5.a. and the elevation and anchoring
requirement of Section 5.a.(1) and 5.b.(1)(a). A recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. (9/19/08)
6. Variance Procedures. (9/19/08)
a. Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA). (9/19/08)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 29
Under Section XIII, the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA), as established by the Town of
Suffield, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements
of this regulation. Records of appeal actions are maintained by the Town Clerk. The
record of any variance or appeal action under this Section shall be reported to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) upon request. (9/19/08)
b. Specific Situation Variances. (9/19/08)
(1) Buildings on a Historic Register. (9/19/08)
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of
structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of
Historic Places, or any locally-adopted historic district without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this section and provided the proposed
reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the structure losing its
historical designation. (9/19/08)
(2) Functionally Dependent Use or Facility. (9/19/08)
Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use or facility
provided the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize
flood damage, creates no additional threat to public safety and meets all the
requirements of Subsection 4. (9/19/08)
(3) Floodway Prohibition. (9/19/08)
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result. (9/19/08)
c. Considerations for Granting of Variances. (9/19/08)
(1) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of
this regulation and the items listed below:
• The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of
others;
• The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
• The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and
the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
• The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
• The necessity of the facility to waterfront location, in the case of a functionally
dependent facility;
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 30
• The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or erosion
damage for the proposed use;
• The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
• The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain
management program for that area;
• The safety access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
• The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of
the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the
site; and
• The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions
including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. (9/19/08)
(2) Upon consideration of these factors and the purposes of this regulation, the ZBA
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this regulation. (9/19/08)
d. Conditions for Variances. (9/19/08)
(1) Variances shall only be used upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary to afford relief considering the flood hazard; and in the instance
of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary as
not to destroy the historic character and design of the building and result in the loss of
historic designation of the building. (9/19/08)
(2) Variances shall only be used upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a
determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship,
and; (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisance, damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws, ordinances
or regulations. Only hardships that are based on unusual or unique physical
characteristics of the property in question, characteristics that are not shared by
adjacent parcels, shall qualify to meet subsection (ii) above. (9/19/08)
(3) No variance may be issued within a regulatory floodway that will result in any
increase in the 100-year flood levels. A variance may be issued for new construction,
substantial improvements and other development necessary for the conduct of a
“functionally dependent use” provided that there is good and sufficient cause for
providing relief; and the variance does not cause a rise in the 100-year flood level
within a regulatory floodway. The structure and other development must be protected
by methods that minimize flood damages. (9/19/08)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 31
(4) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the
structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base
flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the lowest floor elevation.
(9/19/08)
e. Enforcement and Penalties for Violation. (9/19/08)
(1) Each Floodplain Development Permit shall authorize, as a condition of approval,
the Town Engineer or designated agents to make regular inspections of the subject
property. The Town Engineer or designated agents are also authorized to inspect any
property in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) where it appears that violations of
these regulations may be taking place. (9/19/08)
(2) If the Town Engineer finds that any person is undertaking any construction,
substantial improvement, filling, or any other activity or maintaining a condition
which is in violation of these regulations, he shall notify the Zoning Enforcement
Officer and cooperate with the Zoning Enforcement Officer in enforcement
procedures indicated in Section XIV.D. (9/19/08)
(3) Penalties shall be as indicated under Section XIV.D. (9/19/08)
L. GREENHOUSE OPERATIONS (COMMERCIAL)
The Commission may grant a special permit to allow commercial greenhouse operations in
accordance with due consideration of the following criteria and standards.
1. Criteria.
a. Conservation of property values.
b. Negligible impact of traffic in the immediate neighborhood.
c. Limitations necessary to protect the immediate and adjacent neighborhoods.
d. General welfare of the Town and consistency with the objectives and principles of
the Plan of Conservation and Development.
2. Standards. The Commission may permit lot coverage by buildings of up to 50% if it
makes additional findings that the plan of the proposed facility as approved will:
a. Be exclusively for the growing and harvesting of horticultural products;
b. Maintain at least 85% of the land beneath the greenhouse structure with no
impervious permanent covering;
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 32
c. Collect and recycle all roof drainage for distribution within the greenhouse for all
rainfall events;
d. Not cause an increase in peak Stormwater runoff off-site;
e. Not permit water withdrawal from private wells which would adversely affect
adjacent wells;
f. Use only USDA approved pesticides, herbicides, or other chemical treatments;
g. Not cause any interior or exterior lighting to shine in a manner which would
interfere with the enjoyment of surrounding properties between 7:00 P.M. and 5:00
A.M.;
h. Not cause sunlight to be reflected in any concentrated manner which would
interfere with the enjoyment of surrounding properties;
i. Provide transparent or translucent greenhouse walls and roofs;
j. Provide at least 100 feet of distance from all developable property lines to any
building, greenhouse or loading or unloading areas;
k. Provide Type “C” screening of all parking and loading areas and any visible
utilities; and,
l. Provide Type “B” screening of all buildings so that the greenhouse use will not
hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent properties.
M. HORSES FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES
The Commission may grant a special permit to allow the keeping of more than ten (10) horses
for breeding, boarding, and/or instruction for commercial purposes in the FP, R-90, R-45, R-25,
WSCV, I, and PDIP zones as follows.
1. The premises shall be not less than ten (10) acres in area and shall be in a predominantly
rural area and existing buildings shall be so located as to create no adverse effect on
neighboring properties.
2. The use may be conducted only by the resident of the premises as an accessory use.
3. Buildings housing animals and areas of concentrated storage of waste, shall be not less
than one hundred (100) feet from any lot line and not less than one hundred fifty (150)
feet from a dwelling on property under other ownership and one-hundred (100) feet from
a stream.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 33
4. In considering such special use, the Commission shall weigh the agricultural and rural, as
well as the residential character and potential of the area and shall find the granting of
such use shall result in an appropriate use of the land and will not have a detrimental
effect on existing or potential residential or other uses in the area.
N. LANDFILL REGULATIONS
The Commission may grant a special permit after public hearing to a landowner under contract
to the Town of Suffield, or the Town of Suffield, to conduct a sanitary landfill. The Commission
may impose any reasonable safeguards as to conditions of approval and shall require the
following:
1. A properly certified key map of the general area at a scale of 1" = 200' showing:
a. Boundary and owner of record of the premises in question;
b. Boundaries and owners of record of all adjacent properties;
c. Topography and contours of the premises and all land within 500 feet of the
premises, with the contour interval at two (2) feet;
d. Existing land use(s) on the premises and within 500 feet of the premises;
e. All public and private roads which provide access to the premises;
f. All natural water courses, wetlands, and drainage areas on the premises and
within 500 feet of same;
g. All existing utilities and easements on the premises.
2. A site plan map, in triplicate, prepared and certified by a professional engineer, at a scale
not smaller than 1" = 100' showing:
a. A-2 boundary survey;
b. All information shown on the key map as it relates to the premises;
c. Proposed contours and finished grades at the completion of the filling operation.
Contours as in key map;
d. Acres of active operation and stockpiling, differentiating between removed topsoil
stockpiling, and other materials;
e. Means of vehicular access to the premises;
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 34
f. Location of any proposed buildings and structures and fixed equipment and
machinery;
g. Such additional information so as to clearly indicate complete compliance with the
required standards and operations set forth herein.
3. Approval of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection including the
following items:
a. Quantity and quality of cover materials for various purposes;
b. Control of surface waters and ground waters;
c. Prevention of water pollution;
d. Depth of landfill;
e. Compaction and timing of placement of cover material;
f. Qualifications of the operator and employees.
g. Erosion and sedimentation control plan according to CT-DEP 2002 guidelines as
amended.
4. Access roads shall be designed and constructed as all-weather roads suitable for carrying
loaded collection vehicles and all-weather access shall be provided from the entrance gate
of the site to an unloading area.
5. Suitable buffer strips to screen operations from adjoining properties or public streets.
6. Operating standards:
a. Operating hours shall be restricted to weekdays (Monday through Saturday)
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., except as may otherwise be
permitted by the Commission.
b. All equipment and machinery shall be maintained in good repair and operated in
such manner as to minimize noise, vibration, smoke, dust, unsightly conditions
and any other nuisance.
c. Access to the site for disposal operations shall be limited to those hours when an
attendant is on duty and only to those authorized to use the site for disposal of
refuse.
d. Hours of operation and other limitations on access are to be displayed
prominently at the entrance gate.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 35
e. The entrance to the site is to have a fence at least six (6) feet in height with gates
that can be locked.
f. Telephone or radio communications are to be provided at the site.
g. Fire extinguishers approved and periodically checked by the Fire Department are
to be kept in the equipment and in all buildings and an adequate supply of water
under pressure or a stockpile of earth is to be maintained reasonably close to the
working face of the fill.
h. Upon completion of a landfill it shall be covered with topsoil and seeded. The
owner and operator shall be responsible to see that adequate growth of seeded
areas occurs.
i. The working fill areas shall be limited to ten (10) acres at a time.
j. Operations shall be in conformance with State and municipal regulations.
7. The sanitary landfill shall be designed in accordance with these requirements and any
additional requirements established by the Commission and/or the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection, by a registered professional engineer. Detailed
plans, specifications, and necessary reports shall be submitted by said engineer to the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection for review and approval.
8. Following approval by the Commission, a mylar transparency and four (4) paper prints of
the site plan noted in Item 2 are to be submitted to the Commission for record.
9. The Commission may modify the items in the site plan under local jurisdiction or it may
require additional information for clarification.
O. MOTOR-VEHICLE SALES, SERVICE, AND WASHING
The Commission may grant a special permit to allow the following uses in the I zone subject to
site plan approval as follows:
1. Car wash as a principle use.
a. Vehicular circulation shall be controlled for safe entrance and exit and all vehicles
awaiting service or being served shall be parked or stacked behind the building line.
b. Entrance and exit driveways shall be not over fifteen (15) feet wide each between the
street line and the building line, shall have adequate radii for junction with existing
traveled ways, and shall be separated by a landscaped median not less than eight (8)
feet wide.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 36
c. All front yards shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet in depth from the street line and
covered with a natural landscape material such as turf, ground cover or stone or slate
paving, but not bituminous material. Each street yard shall have Type "A" screening.
d. Landscape strips shall contain Type "C" screening.
e. All operations, except final hand polishing, shall be confined within the building.
f. All wastewater and liquids used in car wash operations shall be collected by a selfcontained
treatment system on the property. Said system shall be so designed as to
remove all sand and other solids from the used wash water. In addition, if wash water
is to be discharged into a public sewer, approval of the WPCA shall be required. Said
self-contained treatment system shall be subject to approval by the Town Engineer.
2. Motor Vehicle Sales and Service as a principle use.
a. Vehicle display and service shall take place at least fifty (50) feet setback from front
property line.
P. OUTDOOR CAFÉ SERVICE REQUIREMENTS
The Commission may grant a special permit that permits outdoor café service as an accessory
use to a restaurant as follows:
1. Outdoor café service must be entirely on property owned or leased by the applicant.
Proof of adequate insurance coverage for the establishment shall be submitted and the
owner/operator shall sign an agreement indemnifying the Town from liability on adjacent
Town property resulting from the operation of said use prior to the issuance of a building
permit. Public property may not be used for outdoor café service purposes unless a
properly executed lease agreement has been obtained.
2. No more than twenty-five (25) outdoor seats shall be permitted.
3. Hours of operation shall be limited to between 6 AM to 10 PM unless waived or further
limited by the Commission.
4. A photometric plan shall be provided detailing light types(s) and wattage(s), installation
location, mounting height, and ground level lighting intensity of all lighting in the
outdoor eating area within the parcel and at adjacent property lines. Unless otherwise
approved, the ground level lighting intensity caused by lighting of outdoor café areas
shall not exceed 1-foot candle at the property lines.
5. No outdoor window service is permitted.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 37
6. No outside audio system is permitted.
7. No signage on umbrellas, chairs, trash receptacles, etc. is permitted.
8. All evidence (tables, umbrellas, chairs, trash receptacles, etc.) shall be removed between
October 31st and April 1st.
9. The parking regulations of Sec. VII of these regulations shall apply to both indoor and
outdoor seating.
10. Said use shall not create visibility problems for motorists or pedestrians, nor be located in
such a manner as to restrict access by emergency services to any portion of any building.
Walls, fences, and/or plantings should be proposed when necessary to separate seating
from traveled areas.
Q. TWO-FAMILY DWELLING
The Commission may grant a special permit to allow the construction of a new two-family
dwelling in the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones subject to reasonable safeguards and the following
requirements:
1. Architectural plans showing all proposed buildings and structures as well as site plans shall
be subject to approval by the Commission. Architectural plans may be in preliminary
form but shall include exterior elevation drawings, generalized floor plans and
perspective drawings, prepared, except for drawings for signs, by an architect or
professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut.
2. At least one dwelling unit shall qualify as affordable housing as defined in Sec. II of
these regulations.
3. The minimum lot area shall be 45,000 SF, or 90,000 SF in an R-90 zone.
4. Not more than two (2) individual dwelling units shall result.
5. The building exterior appearance shall be consistent with the single-family characteristics
of the neighborhood. There shall be no indication from the street that the building
contains two dwelling units. Design considerations shall include, but are not limited to,
placement of entrance doors, mailboxes, electric meters and garages.
6. The lot design shall be consistent with the single-family characteristics of the
neighborhood. There shall be no indication from the street that the lot is designed for two
dwelling units. Lot design characteristics shall include, but are not limited to, parking
arrangements and exterior lighting. Screening in accordance with the provisions of Sec.
VIII of these regulations shall be employed where appropriate to maintain the appearance
of a single-family home.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 38
7. The minimum floor area for the entire building shall be no less than 2,000 square feet.
8. The minimum floor area of each dwelling unit shall be not less than 1,000 square feet.
9. The contract between the applicant and the town shall be prepared by the applicant
modeled after the criteria set forth in CGS Sec. 8-2g(a). Any such contract shall be
approved as to form by the Town Attorney.
10. Except as specified in this Section, all other requirements that are applicable to the
zoning district in which the two-family dwelling is to be constructed shall apply.
R. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION REGULATIONS
1. Statement of Purpose.
Recent advances in wireless communications technology have resulted in a new generation of
telecommunication services. These new services transmit electromagnetic waves of such a
frequency and power that will likely require numerous antenna locations. These antennas may be
located on buildings, water towers, and other similar structures but will also frequently be
located on new or enlarged towers. This requires that the Town of Suffield regulate wireless
communication system facilities in a different manner than conventional television and radio
transmission towers which are able to transmit their signals at much greater distances.
A number of providers of wireless communication services have recently been licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission and additional providers are expected to be licensed in the
near future. These firms are expected to pursue antenna sites within the Town of Suffield and
these efforts are expected to include requests to construct new communication towers.
The intent of this proposed regulation is to provide for the establishment and or expansion of
wireless telecommunication services within the Town of Suffield while protecting
neighborhoods and minimizing the adverse visual and operational effects of wireless
telecommunications facilities through careful design, sitting, and screening. More specifically,
this regulation has been developed in order to:
a. Maximize use of existing and approved towers and other structures to accommodate new
antennas and transmitters in order to reduce the number of communication towers needed
to serve the community;
b. Encourage providers to co-locate their facilities on a single tower;
c. Site facilities below visually prominent ridge lines;
d. Minimize the location of facilities in visually sensitive areas;
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 39
e. Encourage creative design measures to camouflage facilities;
f. Protect historic and residential areas from potential adverse impacts of communication
towers; and,
g. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering
and careful sitting of tower structures.
2. Definitions.
For the purpose of applying the provisions of this section the terms below shall be defined as
follows:
Antenna means a device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples
include, but are not limited to, whip antennas, panel antennas, and dish antennas.
Co-location means locating wireless communication facilities from more than one provider
on a single site.
Wireless telecommunication services means licensed wireless telecommunication services
including, but not necessarily limited to, cellular, personal communication services (PCS),
specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging,
and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
Wireless telecommunication site means a facility operated by a licensed wireless telecommunication
service provider which consists of the equipment and structures involved in receiving
or transmitting electromagnetic waves associated with wireless telecommunication services.
Height of tower means the vertical distance measured in feet from the average existing level
of the ground surrounding the tower and within ten feet thereof to the topmost point of the
tower including any antenna or other appurtenances. The existing elevation shall mean the
actual or approved elevations of the property at the time of application.
Tower means a structure that is intended to support equipment used to receive and/or transmit
electromagnetic waves. Design examples of towers include: (a) self-supporting lattice, (b)
guyed, and (c) monopole.
3. Location Preferences.
The locations for sitting the equipment involved in receiving or transmitting electromagnetic
waves associated with wireless telecommunication services are listed in Paragraph 1 through 6
below, in order of preference.
a. On existing structures such as buildings, water towers, and utility poles.
b. On existing or approved towers.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 40
c. On new towers less than 75 feet in height located in commercial or industrial zones.
d. On new towers less than 75 feet in height located in residential zones.
e. On new towers 75 feet or greater in height located in commercial and industrial zones.
f. On new tower 75 feet or greater in height located in residential zones.
4. Permitted Uses.
The following uses which generally pose minimum adverse visual effect subject to the standards
in Subsection H.
a. Wireless telecommunication sites located on nonresidential buildings and shielded from
view from all surrounding streets and driveways used by the general public. The method
and materials used to shield such sites must be approved by the Commission as part of
the Site Plan Review.
b. Wireless telecommunications sites where the antenna is mounted on existing towers,
utility poles, water towers, light standards, bridges, or other structures not classified as
buildings provided the following standards are met:
(1) No changes are made to the height of such structure.
(2) No panel antenna shall exceed 72 inches in height and 24 inches in width.
(3) No dish antenna shall exceed 39 inches in diameter.
(4) All accompanying equipment buildings or boxes shall be screened and fenced as
approved by the Commission as part of the Site Plan review.
5. Uses allowed only by Special Permit.
In addition to specific requirements listed in Subsections H. and I., the standards provided in Sec.
XIV shall also apply to applications submitted under this Section.
a. In all zoning districts, wireless telecommunication sites not otherwise permitted in Subsection
D.
6. Site Plan Requirements.
All proposals to develop a wireless telecommunications site as permitted use or special permit
use shall be subject to the site plan requirements listed in Sec. XIV of these regulations. In
addition, the following information shall be submitted in accordance with each particular
application where applicable.
a. Permitted Use
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 41
(1) A plan showing where and how the proposed antenna will be affixed to a particular
building or structure.
(2) Details of all proposed antenna and mounting equipment including size and color.
(3) Elevations of all proposed shielding and details of materials including color.
(4) An elevation of all proposed equipment buildings or boxes. Details of all proposed
fencing including color.
(5) A design drawing including cross section and elevation of all proposed towers. A
description of the tower’s capacity including the number and type of antennas it can
accommodate as well as the proposed location of all mounting positions for colocated
antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas. Where a
monopole is proposed, the design shall illustrate how the tower will collapse upon
itself without encroaching upon any adjoining property line.
(6) A report from licensed engineer indicating that the proposed wireless telecommunication
site will comply with the emission standards found in Subsection H of the
regulation. Such report shall also certify that the installation of such site will not
interfere with public safety communications.
(7) An analysis of the fall zone for the proposed tower prepared by a license engineer.
(8) Proof that either the applicant or co-applicant holds bona fide license from the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to provide the telecommunication services that
the proposed tower is designed to support.
(9) A report or letter from the Federal Aviation Administration that the proposed tower
complies with all airport safety requirements for Bradley International Airport.
(10) A map depicting the extent of the provider’s planned coverage within the Town of
Suffield existing service area and the service area of the proposed wireless telecommunication
site.
b. Special permit.
(1) All of the plans and information required for permitted uses in the previous subsection.
(2) Upon request of the Commission, the applicant shall provide a simulation of the
proposed wireless telecommunication site in order to help the Commission ascertain
the visual impacts associated with such proposal.
(3) For towers located in or within 1,000 feet of any residential zoning district, the
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 42
applicant shall provide a view shed analysis showing all areas from which the tower
would be visible.
7. Height and Area Requirements.
a. Lot size. Wireless telecommunication sites containing a freestanding tower shall not be
located on any lot less than 20,000 square feet in area. Where it is proposed that such a
wireless telecommunication site occupy a lot as a principal use, the lot size shall be equal
to that required for the underlying zone or 20,000 square feet, whichever is greater.
b. Height. The maximum height of a tower proposed under this regulation shall be twohundred
(200) feet including the antenna and all other appurtenances. The height of a
tower mounted on a building shall be measured from the average level of the ground
along all walls of the building to the tallest point on the tower including the antenna and
all other appurtenances. The maximum height of any rooftop-mounted equipment
building or box shall be fifteen (15) feet.
c. Setbacks.
(1) All freestanding monopole towers shall comply with the following minimum property
line setbacks:
(a) Front yard or side yard along a street. A distance equal to 3/4 the height of the
tower or the setback required for the underlying zone, whichever is greater.
(b) Side or rear yards. In residential zoning districts, fifty (50) feet for towers less
than seventy-five (75) feet in height and one-hundred (100) feet for towers
equal to or greater than seventy-five (75) feet depicting the extent of the
provider's planned coverage within the Town of Suffield and the service area
of the proposed wireless telecommunication site. A map indicating the
search radius for the proposed wireless telecommunication site.
i. In non-residential zones, twenty-five (25) feet for towers less than
seventy-five (75) feet in height and fifty (50) feet for towers equal to or
greater than seventy-five (75) feet. However, where a side or rear lot line
is contiguous to a residential zone, the setback for that particular yard shall
be as required for such a tower in a residential zone.
ii. In non-residential districts, all other freestanding towers shall be located a
minimum distance from any property line at least one-hundred (100) feet
or a distance equal to the height of the tower, whichever is greater.
iii. In residential districts, all other freestanding towers shall be located a
minimum distance from any property line equal to 125 percent of the
proposed tower height.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 43
(2) All equipment buildings/boxes or equipment areas each fifty (50) square feet or
greater in area shall comply with the minimum property line setbacks for a
principal building in the underlying zone.
(3) All equipment buildings/boxes or equipment areas each less than fifty (50) square
feet in area shall comply with the following minimum property line setbacks:
(a) Front yard or side yard along a street. Same as for a principal building in the
underlying zone.
(b) Rear and side yards. Twenty (20) feet.
8. General requirements.
a. No wireless telecommunication tower shall be located within two-hundred (200) feet of a
residence.
b. No tower exceeding seventy-five (75) feet in height shall be located within 1,000 feet of
the boundary of an approved Historic District.
c. No lights shall be mounted on proposed towers unless otherwise required by the FAA.
All strobe lighting shall be avoided, if possible.
d. Towers not requiring special FAA painting or markings shall be painted a noncontrasting
blue, gray, or black.
e. Towers may not be used to exhibit any sign or other advertising.
f. Any proposed tower shall be designed in all respects to accommodate both the applicant's
antennas and comparable antennas for at least two additional users if the tower is over
one-hundred (100) feet in height or for at least one additional comparable antenna if the
tower is over fifty (50) feet in height. The Commission may require the tower to be of
such design as to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to
accommodate antennas mounted at varying heights.
g. All towers shall be monopole design unless otherwise approved by the Commission. A
monopole tower shall be designed to collapse upon itself.
h. The Commission may require that monopole be of such design and treated with an
architectural material so that it is camouflaged to resemble a woody tree with a single
trunk and branches on its upper part.
i. Antennas or equipment buildings/boxes mounted to or on buildings or structures shall, to
the greatest degree possible, blend with the color and design of such building.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 44
j. All dish antennas shall be of mesh construction unless otherwise approved by the
Director of Planning and Development in conjunction with an application for a permitted
use and the Commission in conjunction with an application for a special permit.
k. Dish antennas shall not exceed six (6) feet in diameter. Panel antennas shall not exceed
six (6) feet in height.
l. No proposed wireless telecommunication site shall be designed, located, or operated as
to interfere with existing or proposed public safety communications.
m. All applications for wireless telecommunication sites within the Flood Protection Zone
shall comply with the standards found in Subsection L of these regulations.
n. The design of all wireless telecommunication sites shall comply with the standards
promulgated by the FCC for non-ionizing electromagnetic emissions.
o. All utilities proposed to serve a wireless telecommunication site shall be installed
underground unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
p. All generators installed in conjunction with any wireless telecommunication site shall
comply with all state and local noise regulations.
9. Factors upon which special permit decisions of the Commission shall be based.
In passing upon applications for wireless telecommunication sites, the Commission, in addition
to the standards found in Sec. XIV shall also find:
a. In the case where a wireless telecommunication site is proposed to be located on or within
one-hundred (100) feet of a property designated on the National Historic Register, or
historic district that such proposal will preserve the historic and/or architectural character
of the landscape or any structure.
b. In the case where an application for the proposed location of a wireless
telecommunication site is not a preference 1 through 3 location the applicant has
adequately described the efforts and measures taken to pursue those preferences and why
a higher preference location was not technologically, legally, or economically feasible.
The supplied documentation should evaluate the following factors:
(1) The planned equipment would cause unacceptable interference with the operation
of other existing or planned equipment on an existing or approved tower as
documented by a qualified licensed engineer and that the interference cannot be
prevented or eliminated at a reasonable cost.
(2) The planned equipment cannot be accommodated on existing or approved towers
due to structural deficiencies as documented by a qualified licensed engineer and
that such deficiencies cannot be eliminated at a reasonable cost.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 45
(3) The existing or planned equipment on an existing or approved tower would cause
unacceptable interference with the equipment proposed by the applicant as
documented by a qualified licensed engineer and that the interference cannot be
prevented or eliminated at a reasonable cost.
(4) Any restriction or limitation imposed by the FCC.
10. Abandonment.
A wireless telecommunication site not in use for twelve (12) consecutive months shall be
removed by the service facility owner. This removal shall occur within ninety (90) days of the
end of such 12-month period. Upon removal, the site shall be restored to its previous appearance
and, where appropriate, re-vegetated to blend with the surrounding area. The Commission may
require that an appropriate bond be submitted as surety.
11. Expiration of permit.
The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless
construction of the project commences within one (1) year and is completed within two (2) years
from the date of the approval granted by the Commission. For purposes of this regulation, the
term start of construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation.
The Commission may grant up to two (2), six (6) month extensions of this period upon written
request by the applicant. The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions
unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations
which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to
provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period
sought. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required
government approvals and project financing. Any appeals of such special permit, site plan,
inland wetlands, or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one (1) year period the
length of such appeal. The Commission may, as a condition of approval of a special permit,
establish a time period such special permit shall remain in effect.
S. FARM STAND PERMANENT (11/17/08)
The Commission may grant a Special Permit to allow a permanent farm stand in the FP, R-90, R-
45 and R-25 zones as follows. (11/17/08)
1. The farm stand building location must comply with section IV.M, requirements for
principle buildings. (11/17/08)
2. The stand located on the premises of and accessory to an active farm with a minimum of
five (5) acres. (11/17/08)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 46
3. Outdoor display, sales or storage of goods or materials must comply with section III.P.
(11/17/08)
4. All signs must comply with section IX. (11/17/08)
5. The Commission may limit the size and scope of a farm stand in relation to the size of the
farm based on acreage and production. (11/17/08)
6. The stand shall be operated by the farm owner, or the leaseholder. (11/17/08)
7. No sales shall be made before 7:00 a.m., or after 8:00 p.m. on any day. (11/17/08)
8. The stand must meet all state and local codes and health requirements. (11/17/08)
9. All items sold at the stand shall be “Connecticut and/or Massachusetts Grown” farm
products such as fruits, vegetables, cider, plants, potted flowers, trees, shrubs, processed
foods such as jams, conserves, preserves, pickled foods, honey, syrup, baked goods, eggs
and a full range of dairy products including soft-serve ice cream, Christmas trees, wreaths
and gift baskets. (11/17/08)
T. WINERIES (11/17/08)
The Commission may grant a Special Permit to allow wineries in the FP, R-90, R-45 and R-25
zones as follows. (11/17/08)
1. The winery building location must comply with section IV.M, requirements for principle
buildings. (11/17/08)
2. The winery located on the premises of and accessory to an active farm with a minimum
of five (5) acres. (11/17/08)
3. Outdoor display, sales or storage of goods or materials must comply with section III.P.
(11/17/08)
4. All signs must comply with section IX. (11/17/08)
5. The Commission may limit the size and scope of a winery in relation to the size of the
farm based on acreage and production. (11/17/08)
6. The winery shall be operated by the farm owner or the leaseholder. (11/17/08)
7. The winery must meet all state and local codes and health requirements. (11/17/08)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 47
U. ADAPTIVE REUSE (6/4/2010)
The Commission may permit, by Special Permit, the rehabilitation or adaptive reuse of nonresidential
buildings which have been at least sixty [60] percent vacant for a period of not less
than eighteen [18] months in the R-90, R-45, R-25, R-20, R-15, R-11 and NC zones, in
accordance with the following regulations: (6/4/2010)
a. Criteria. (6/4/2010)
1. Substantial benefit to the Town.
2. Compatibility with the surrounding area.
3. Substantial inability to develop the property in conformance with its’ current
zoning.
b. Special Permit Use. Multi-family use provided that the Commission finds that the
above criteria are met. (6/4/2010)
c. Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the submission of an application for
Adaptive Reuse, all applications are required to initiate a pre-application
conference with the Commission and its staff to discuss the conceptual aspects of
the proposed development and to prepare and present a conceptual plan for
informal consideration. (6/4/2010)
d. Procedure. (6/4/2010)
1. Site Plan/Special Permit Review.
a. A site plan and application for special permit shall be submitted and
reviewed in accordance with Section XIV of these regulations except as
modified by Section d.1.b. below. The Commission shall require a
minimum of 2.5 parking spaces for each approved dwelling unit. The
Commission may require additional parking spaces when deemed
appropriate. If, in order to meet the coverage requirements of this
section, the coverage requirements of Section IV.D.4 or IV.H.4 of these
regulations are exceeded, the Commission may increase the allowable
maximum coverage to accommodate the parking requirements of this
section. All other parking standards in Section VII of the regulations
shall be adhered to, where applicable.
b. Dwelling units shall be limited to existing buildings only. No new
buildings or additions to existing buildings shall be constructed on the
site to house dwelling units. The site requirements pertaining to the
applicable Zone with Section IV, Subsection M of these regulations
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 48
shall apply to those portions of the property proposed for such
residential development, with the following exceptions:
i. The minimum parcel area, maximum density, and frontage
requirements shall not apply. Increases in building height to
accommodate additional dwelling units shall not be permitted.
The existing lot area and coverage of the parcel under
consideration shall be considered the required lot area and
coverage, unless they exceed the minimum area and coverage
requirements of the underlying zone, in which case the least
restrictive requirements shall apply.
ii. The existing front, side, and rear yard of the building to be
converted shall be considered to be the required front, side and
rear yard setback, unless they exceed the minimum yard
requirements of the underlying zone, in which case the least
restrictive requirements shall apply.
iii. The maximum overall density of dwelling units in the proposed
development shall be as deemed appropriate by the Commission
for the general vicinity of the proposed project. In making said
determination, the Commission shall give consideration to the
size of the building being converted and the location of the
building in relation to retail, medical and transportation
facilities, and the unit mix within the building. To aid in this
determination, the applicant shall supply a vicinity map showing
all parcels of land within five-hundred [500] feet of the subject
property and shall include all land uses, numbers of dwelling
units and the overall density of each parcel of land.
iv. All buildings shall be connected to public water and public
sanitary sewer systems or to private systems that meet the
minimum requirements of the Town and State Departments of
Health.
v. To the extent that the existing parcel areas, yards, and coverage
are non-conforming, in no case shall such non-conformities be
increased except as may be necessary to comply with applicable
parking requirements. Notwithstanding the above, the
Commission may approve the construction of accessory building
which may cause the otherwise applicable coverage requirement
to be exceeded.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 49
e. Buildings and Conformity. Accessory buildings shall not contain dwelling units
and shall be incidental to a proposed use or uses within structures [i.e. garages,
storage sheds]. Accessory buildings must meet the current setbacks for the
underlying zone as outlined in Section IV.M. Additions to existing buildings to
accommodate the overall rehabilitation processes associated with converting a
building may be permitted and are not to exceed fifteen [15] percent of the gross
floor area. All exterior renovations, modifications and additions shall be done in
a manner that is compatible with the historic character of the existing buildings.
(6/4/2010)
f. Applicability of Ordinances and Regulations. The Town of Suffield Zoning
Regulations [except as otherwise noted in this Section], Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Agency Rules and Regulations, and Subdivision Regulations are,
where applicable, in full force and effect with respect to any application for
Special Permit hereunder. Not final Site Plan shall be approved until the
applicant has complied fully with all of the above ordinance and regulations.
(6/4/2010)
V. SMALL WIND ENERGY PRODUCING FACILITIES (12/14/2011)
The intent of this Section is to promote the safe, effective, and efficient use of small wind energy
systems with a nameplate rated capacity of not more than one hundred (100) kW, the primary
purpose of which is to reduce the onsite consumption of utility supplied electricity.
The Commission may grant a special permit for the installation of a small wind energy
producing facility in the FP, I, PDIP, PDA, R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones as follows;
1. Definitions
a. On-Site Wind Energy Facility - A wind facility located at a residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, institutional, or public facility that will
consume more than 50% of the electricity generated by the facility.
b. Wind Turbine - A wind energy conversion facility that converts kinetic wind
energy into rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. These facilities
generally include but are not limited to a tower, accelerator platform or nacelle
body, and one or more rotors with two or more blades for each rotor, transmission
lines and support structures, as well as storage, collection, and supply equipment.
c. Turbine Facility Height– The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower,
plus any blade that extends above the tower at any point in its arc is defined as
the turbine height.
2. General Requirements
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 50
a. On-site wind energy facilities shall be secondary to the principal use of the
premises.
b. The applicant shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) requirements, or any other town, state, or federal codes, standards, or
requirements.
c. If the Commission determines that a proposed facility will result in significant
negative impacts, it shall not be approved.
3. Specific Standards
a. On residentially zoned properties, a wind turbine’s nameplate rated capacity shall
not exceed 10 kW.
b. Except during short-term events such as severe wind storms, and utility outages,
the facility shall be designed, installed, and operated so that noise generated by
the system shall not exceed sixty (60) decibels (dB), as measured at the closest
property boundary.
c. Wind facility shall be no higher than 120 feet in height provided that in all cases,
the facility complies with all FAA requirements.
d. The wind facility shall be setback, as measured from the center of the tower, a
distance equal to the overall height for the tower plus the required property line
setback. This distance may be reduced by the Commission if the fall zone is equal
to the distance of the tower plus required property line setback from the nearest
habitable structure and an easement and/or other non-revocable, legally binding
agreement is granted by the affected property owner.
e. The Commission may reduce the minimum fall zone, as appropriate, based upon
site specific considerations.
f. The wind facility shall be sited in a manner that eliminates shadowing or flicker
impacts on surrounding properties. The applicant has the burden of proving that
flicker does not have a significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses
through either siting or mitigation.
g. All utilities serving the facility shall be underground.
h. Base equipment structures, cabinets, and fencing of ground-mounted facilities
shall not be located within any required yard setback of the underlying zone.
Adequate landscaping to buffer the ground level equipment and structures from
adjoining properties shall be provided if the Commission deems it appropriate.
4. Structural Standards
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 51
a. Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, all towers proposed under this
section shall be monopole.
b. Unless required by the FAA, no lights shall be permitted on any facility above 15
feet of the surrounding grade.
c. Unless required by the FAA, the color of the on-site wind energy facility shall be
a neutral, non-reflective exterior color that blends with the surrounding
environment.
d. The owner shall maintain the on-site wind facility in good condition.
Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and
integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level
satisfactory to emergency first responders (Fire, Police, and Ambulance).
5. Signage
a. Signs on the wind facility shall be limited to those necessary to identify the
owner, provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number, and warn of any
danger.
? Those required by state or federal law.
? Educational signs providing information about the facility and the
benefits of renewable energy.
? Wind turbines shall not be used for displaying any advertising, except for
reasonable identification of the manufacturer.
6. Abandonment or Decommissioning
a. Any wind facility which has reached the end of its useful life, or has been
abandoned, shall be removed. The applicant shall notify the Commission of its
intent to abandon an on-site wind facility by certified mail no less than 30 days
prior to abandonment or decommissioning.
? If the owner fails to give such notice, the on-site wind facility shall be
considered abandoned upon discontinuation of operations for more than
12 months.
b. The owner shall physically remove the wind facility no more than 120 days after
the date of abandonment.
? Removal of the wind facility shall consist of physical removal of all wind
turbines, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines
from the site. Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site shall be required as
necessary to minimize erosion.
? If the owner fails to remove the on-site wind facility in accordance with
this section within 120 days of abandonment or decommissioning, the
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 52
Town shall have the authority to enter the property and physically remove
the facility, and charge the landowner for any costs incurred.
7. Other
a. To determine the wind potential of a site, wind monitoring or meteorological
towers shall be permitted as temporary structures for one year in proposed
locations provided that Town staff determines the equipment will not create a
nuisance, hazard or excessively compromise the character of the area.
b. To evaluate the proposed site for a wind facility, the Commission may require
balloon tests, photo simulations, and other studies in connection with any
application.
c. The Commission may retain a technical expert in accordance with Section
XIV.F.2 of these regulations.
d. The applicant shall coordinate with emergency services personnel in developing
an emergency response plan.
In granting a special permit for an on-site wind energy facility, the Commission shall have the
power to impose such additional standards and requirements as it deems necessary to carry out
the purposes of these regulations.
W. KEEPING OF CHICKENS (11/5/2015)
Statement of Purpose – It is the intent of this Section to allow for the keeping of domestic
chickens in residential areas for the sole use and enjoyment of the residents of the lot on which
such animals are kept and not for commercial purposes. It is also the intent of this section to
protect and promote the health, safety, and welfare of residents by limiting the number of hens
that can be kept in order to protect the quality of life of the surrounding neighborhoods.
1. Locations Allowed. The keeping of hens is allowed as an accessory use on any lot which is
at least ¼ acre (10,890 SF) in size in single ownership, located in a residential zone, and which
contains a detached single family home.
2. Number and Type of Chickens Allowed. Up to six (6) hens of any breed may be kept on
residentially zoned properties of at least ¼ acre in size. Five (5) additional hens may be kept on
properties every ¼ acre after the first up to five (5) acres in size (i.e. properties ½ acre in size
could have up to eleven (11) hens). Roosters are prohibited on properties less than five (5) acres.
3. Limitations. The keeping of chickens shall be for personal or household use only and the
owner of the chickens must be a resident of the dwelling situated on the lot where they are kept.
The chickens shall be kept to the owner’s property at all times and shall not be permitted to roam
onto adjacent properties. A building is required for housing the chickens (i.e. chicken coop
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section V: Special Regulations
Page 53
including chicken tractors or henhouse). Audible predator alarms are prohibited on properties
less than five acres.
4. Buildings housing chickens and fenced enclosures. Any building used for housing
chickens and fenced enclosures associated with the building shall be located in the side or rear
yard at least 75 feet from the street line, 25 feet from side and rear property lines, and at least 50
feet from any residential dwelling on adjoining property under separate ownership.
5. Applicable Authorities. All chickens shall be kept in a manner that conforms to all
applicable regulations of the public health code, the Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection (DEEP), CT Department of Agriculture, and CT General Statutes.
Section VI: FLEXIBLE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
A. Statement of Purpose ……………………………………………….. VI-1
B. Applicability …………………………………………………………VI-1
C. Pre-Application Conference …………………………………………VI-2
D. Application …………………………………………………………..VI-2
E. Conservation Commission Review ………………………………….VI-2
F. Development Standards and Requirements ………………………… VI-3
G. Design Guidelines ………………………………………………….. VI-4
H. Conveyance of Open Space ………………………………………… VI-5
I. Conditions …………………………………………………………... VI-5
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VI: Flexible Residential Development
Page 1
SECTION VI: FLEXIBLE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to require, as a special permit after public hearing, the
establishment of a Flexible Residential Developments (FRD) which provides opportunity for
cluster or smaller lots than those normally required by these regulations in order to permanently
conserve natural, scenic, or historic resources; to permanently preserve or provide open spaces
for active or passive use that will benefit present and future generations of Suffield residents; to
enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests, wildlife preserves, or
other open spaces; to reduce infrastructure costs and impervious surfaces; and, to promote
development that is compatible with surrounding areas and is in harmony with the natural site
features, while at the same time maintaining the density limitations of the particular district. The
special permit for an FRD would be approved prior to the subdivision approval; however, both
would have a common public hearing.
B. APPLICABILITY
All applications proposing land for subdivision comprising ten (10) or more acres with five
(5) or more lots in the R-90, R-45 and R-25 Residence Zones shall be designed in accordance
with the Flexible Residential Development (FRD) standards, requirements, and design
guidelines. Applicants proposing land for subdivision that is less than ten (10) acres may
obtain a special permit for a FRD. If it’s determined by the Commission during the preapplication
review process that the stated purpose of this regulation will not be met by the
proposed development; the Commission will allow the submission of a traditional
subdivision application. (6/17/2013)
When the Commission approves a special permit for a FRD, the dimensional requirements of
the underlying zones are hereby superseded in their entirety, except that the maximum
number of units permitted in any FRD shall be the lesser of the number of units shown on a
plan prepared by the Applicant be based on the maximum number of units permitted in the
underlying residential district as shown on a plan submitted by the applicant conforming to
the plan requirements of Section IV.M or as calculated below. (11/19/04, 2/10/06)
Example to show how to determine the Maximum Number of Lots Permitted
- for illustrative purposes only -
R-90 R-45 R-25(2/10/06)
1. Subtract from the total gross area Total area: 100.0 acres 100.0 acres 50.0 acres
the total amount of wetlands, water- Wetlands: - 20.0 acres - 20.0 acres -10.0 acres
courses, water-bodies, areas with Uplands: 80.0 acres 80.0 acres 40.0 acres
slopes in excess of 20%, and areas
with easements effecting development. (11/19/04)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VI: Flexible Residential Development
Page 2
2. Subtract 20% for open space. Open Space: - 16.0 acres -16.0 acres -8.0 acres
64.0 acres 64.0 acres 32.0 acres
R-90 R-45 R-25
3. Subtract a fixed percentage of 10% ROWS: - 6.4 acres -12.8 acres -6.4 acres
of the remaining acreage in the R-90 Net: 57.6 acres 51.2 acres 25.6 acres
and 20% in the R-45 and R-25 Zoning
Districts for street right-of-ways (ROWS).
4. Divide the underlying district lot area (90,000 SF) (45,000 SF) (25,000 SF)
requirements to obtain the maximum 27 dwellings 49 dwellings 47 dwellings
of dwellings permitted.
C. PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE
Prior to the submission of an application for a FRD all applicants are required to initiate a preapplication
conference with the Commission and its staff to discuss the conceptual aspects of the
proposed development and to prepare and present a conceptual plan for informal consideration.
The conceptual plan should contain all necessary information to allow the Commission to make
an informed informal consideration, including the location of wetlands, slopes in excess of
twenty (20) percent, and all proposed roads, building lots, and open spaces (and their uses).
D. APPLICATION
An applicant for the FRD permit shall file with the Commission the following:
1. A completed special permit application form and fees in accordance with these
regulations and in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations.
2. A landscaping plan prepared by and containing the seal of a Landscape Architect
registered by the State of Connecticut to include a list and count of all trees and shrubs to
be planted by common and botanical names, size (caliper, height, time until maturity) at
planting, and height and spread at maturity. (2/10/06)
3. At least four (4) full size and eleven (11) half-size copies of the proposed plans showing
all information required by these regulations and the Subdivision Regulations.
(6/17/2013)
4. The proposed method by which all site utilities will be provided; the manner of
ownership and maintenance of any private or public facilities and any commonly owned
real property rights, including open space; and, a description of the proposed open space,
including the method of proposed protection.
E. CONSERVATION COMMISSION REVIEW
An applicant for the FRD permit shall file a copy of the application with the Conservation
Commission. The Conservation Commission may submit written comments regarding the
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VI: Flexible Residential Development
Page 3
suitability of open space to the Zoning and Planning Commission within forty-five (45) days of
the filing date. Failure by the Conservation Commission to comment within the specified time
shall be deemed lack of objection to the proposed development plan.
F. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
1. It is the intention of theCommission to provide permanently preserved open space parcels
of significant size; therefore, open space land to be preserved by these regulations shall
comprise not less than fifty percent (50%) of the total parcel less wetlands, and shall not
contain any portion of a developable lot. (6/17/2013)
Example to show how to determine Open Space Requirement
- for illustrative purposes only -
a. Subtract from the total gross area Total area: 100.0 acres
the total amount of wetlands and Wetlands: - 20.0 acres
areas with easements effecting Uplands: 80.0 acres
development. (11/19/04)
b. Calculate 50% for open space. Open Space: x 0.5 = 40.0 acres
2. The location and extent of open space even if it is to be left in its natural state shall be
identified at the time of the Special permit application and shall be subject to the approval
of the Commission.
3. The open space preserved under these regulations shall preserve land outlined in the Plan
of Development; create public parks, playgrounds, or other outdoor non-commercial
recreation areas; conserve agricultural soils; preserve existing natural buffers; conserve
forests, wildlife, agricultural and other natural resources; and/or, provide a network of
trails and corridors on which motorized vehicles shall be prohibited.
4. At least 50% of the required open space shall be suitable for active recreation, e.g.,
uplands. (2/10/06)
5. In FRDs the minimum lot area, frontage, and yard setback requirements may be reduced
as follows:
a. Minimum Lot Area: 18,200 square feet
b. Minimum Lot Frontage: (11/19/04) 25 feet in areas with public water
and sewer; all other areas 50 feet 1
c. Minimum Front Yard Setback: 25 feet 2
1 In the R-90, R-45, and R-25 zones every three (3) contiguous lot frontages shall have a combined minimum lot
frontage of at least 300 feet, 250 feet, and 200 feet respectively as measured along the street line. (2/10/06)
2 Lots on existing streets may be required to have a setback of up to 100 feet if the Commission deems it appropriate
to require screening of the development from existing residential properties. (6/17/2013)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VI: Flexible Residential Development
Page 4
d. Minimum Side Yard Setback: 20 feet 2
e. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 25 feet 2
6. Each approved lot shall contain a developable area of at least ten-thousand (10,000)
square feet into which a square of ninety feet (90’ x 90’) can be located exclusive of
regulated areas (wetlands, setbacks, and agricultural buffers), and on which the dwelling
must be located. In the R-25 zone, each approved lot shall contain a developable area of
10,000 square feet into which a square of (75’ x 75’) can be located exclusive of
regulated areas. (6/17/2013)
7. Each approved lot shall contain a driveway in which at least two (2) cars can be parked.
8. Dwelling units shall contain foundation plantings so that a minimum of 75% of the
foundation wall at finished grade when viewed from public streets is covered by plant
materials. The requirements of this section shall be certified by a landscape architect.
(2/10/06)
9. Each lot within the FRD shall have by deed or other instrument recorded in the Office of
the Suffield Town Clerk a scenic easement over the open space as may be determined by
the Commission.
10. When lots are proposed behind other lots, substantial vegetative screening is required.
11. The Commission may reduce the open space requirements of this section under the
following conditions:
a. Where soil conditions clearly prevent a reduction in the minimum lot size
outlined within the underlying zone as required in Sec. IV;
b. Where no less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the dwelling units are
proposed as “affordable” as defined in CGS Sec. 8-30g; and,
c. Where no new road construction is proposed.
d. When less than ten (10) acres is to be subdivided. (2/10/06)
G. DESIGN GUIDELINES
All Flexible Residential Developments shall be laid out to permanently protect and preserve the
open space and to protect adjoining property values. The development shall also be laid out to
achieve any one or a reasonable mix of the following objectives:
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VI: Flexible Residential Development
Page 5
1. To promote the preservation of the kinds of open spaces identified in the Plan of
Conservation and Development.
2. To preserve and maintain all or part of any existing forests, fields, pastures and other
land in agricultural use be preserved and maintained, together with sufficient buffer areas
of not less than thirty (30) feet nor more than one-hundred (100) feet to minimize
conflict between residential and active agricultural use. The Commission may reduce the
minimum buffer requirement where existing features exist which provide an acceptable
buffer.
3. To provide for pedestrian access between properties to open space and for a perimeter
design concept intended to facilitate the networking of trails for pedestrian use.
4. To locate open space primarily in areas which are contiguous to existing open space
areas or in areas of the site with the highest probability of connecting with future open
spaces.
5. To preserve scenic views and vistas, as seen from public roads.
6. To layout streets in a curvilinear fashion, and to design both streets and homes using
passive solar energy techniques as shown in Subdivision Regulations Sec. 917.
7. To preserve historic sites and their environs, as needed to protect the character of the site.
8. To protect existing residential areas, by the creation of buffer areas to minimize conflict
between existing residential use and the proposed FRD.
H. CONVEYENCE OF OPEN SPACE
The permanent preservation of open space parcel(s) shall be accomplished by deeding the
property in perpetuity granting preservation easements, or by any other method that
accomplishes irrevocable preservation in the manner listed in Sec. 803 of the Subdivision
Regulations. The conveyance of open space shall be completed within one (1) year of the date of
approval of the FRD and prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any of the
subdivision lots.
I. CONDITIONS
The Commission may establish conditions or restrictions to ensure that the purposes of these
regulations are carried out, including but not limited to the following:
1. Granting of a covenant or easement to ensure that existing fields or pastures will be
plowed or mowed periodically;
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VI: Flexible Residential Development
Page 6
2. Granting of an easement providing and defining rights of public access;
3. Designation of no-cut or limited-clearing areas on lots;
4. Imposing measures to ensure the maintenance of scenic views and vistas;
5. Requiring evidence that at least two (2) organizations are willing to accept the
responsibility for the preservation and maintenance of the open space;
6. Requiring the boundary lines of all open space to be marked;
7. Phasing the proposed improvementswithin the development;
8. Minimizing the impact of proposed development on traffic volumes and congestion in the
area including the adequacy and safety of existing State and Town roads expected to
serve or to be affected by the proposed development;
9. Monitoring compatibility of the proposed development with other existing land uses in
the area and with uses permitted under these Regulations and the Subdivision
Regulations; and,
10. Requiring screening fences or walls, including a landscaped berm up to five (5) feet in
height along any property line.
Section VII: PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
A. Statement of Purpose ……………………………………………….. VII-1
B. General Parking and Loading Provisions ……………………………VII-1
C. Dimensions of Parking Space and Aisles ……………………………VII-2
D. Parking Space Requirements in any Zone ………………………….. VII-2
E. Loading Space Requirements ………………………………………..VII-4
F. Submission and Approval of Plans …………………………………. VII-4
G. Restrictions on Unregistered Motor Vehicles ……………………… VII-4
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VII: Parking and Loading
Page 1
SECTION VII: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The purpose of this regulation is to provide for sufficient off-street parking and loading facilities
to accommodate the safe movement of motor vehicles and their occupants, pedestrians,
employees, customers, delivery services, and other persons normally visiting the premises at any
one time; to protect and maintain property values; and, to assure that parking and loading
facilities do not degrade water quality.
B. GENERAL PARKING AND LOADING PROVISIONS
1. With the exception of parking associated with a dwelling, joint use of off-street parking
facilities is permitted providing the parking requirements of all uses are satisfied
according to approved site plans, and the parking spaces required of a use on a lot are
within a five-hundred (500) foot radius of any part of any building which it is intended to
serve and safely accessible from said building. In such cases, the owner of the property
where the parking is to be located shall be required to submit an application for site plan
approval for the provision of shared parking. The owner of the property utilizing off-site
shared parking shall present an easement in recordable form to the Commission
establishing permanent and irrevocable rights to the parking spaces. In addition the site
plans for each property shall contain a note indicating the existence of the parking
easement. (7/05/07)
2. No parking spaces shall be permitted within the required front yard for a special permit
use in a residential zone or within twenty-five (25) feet of an abutting property line.
3. In the Industrial (I) or Planned Development Industrial Park (PDIP) zones, no part of any
parking or loading facility shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any residential zone
boundary, except where in the opinion of the Commission additional safeguards are in
place to adequately buffer the more intensive zone from the less intensive zone.
4. A storm-water-management plan shall be submitted with each application that encourages
infiltration and incorporates the landscaping islands and vegetated areas in storm water
management when required by the Commission.
5. Vehicles shall not overhang walkways.
6. The Commission may require a sidewalk within the public right-of-way if in its opinion
circumstances warrant such facility.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VII: Parking and Loading
Page 2
7. Painted lines and/or wheel stops shall delineate parking and loading spaces, which shall
be maintained in perpetuity.
8. All parking spaces shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any building.
9. Lighting used to illuminate parking or loading areas shall be designed according to Sec.
III.M. of these regulations.
10. Parking and loading areas shall be constructed with a minimum two and one-half (2½)
inch pavement in two (2) courses on eight (8) inch processed aggregate base on hard
stable sub-grade, unless heavy truck traffic is anticipated in which case a heavier
pavement structure and base shall be required.
11. Any area of 100 square feet or more in a parking lot which is not required for a parking
space, loading space, aisle, driveway or walkway shall be landscaped.
12. In every parking area at least one (1) tree shall be provided for each ten (10) parking
spaces provided in said parking area. The trees shall be distributed over the entire
parking lot.
13. Parking areas shall be planted and screened according to the landscaping requirements of
Sec. VIII. of these regulations.
14. Adequate locations for snow removal storage shall be provided.
C. DIMENSIONS OF PARKING SPACES AND AISLES
1. Parking spaces. Each off-street parking space shall be nine (9) by twenty (20) feet.
2. Aisle widths. Aisle widths shall be as follows, except that the main entrance to a development
shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet wide.
One-way * Two-way
a. Parallel parking or <46-degree angle parking 12 feet 20 feet
b. 46 to 79-degree angle parking 18 feet 20 feet
c. >79-degree angle parking 20 feet 24 feet
* One-way aisles located between a parking area and building requires a 20-foot minimum width.
D. PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS IN ANY ZONE
1. ASSISTED-LIVING or PERSONAL-CARE FACILITY, CONVELESCENT or
NURSING HOME, or similar. At least one (1) space per bed plus one (1) per employee.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VII: Parking and Loading
Page 3
2. DAY-CARE CENTERS. At least one (1) per employee, plus one (1) per ten (10)
enrollees, plus five (5) in a clearly delineated drop-off/pick-up area. In addition, a
separate area for school bus drop-off may be required.
3. DWELLINGS. At least two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
4. DWELLING with PROFESSIONAL OFFICE/OCCUPATION. At least four (4) spaces
including the dwelling unit plus one (1) space per employee. The final number of
parking spaces to be approved by the Commission as part of the Special Permit
application.
5. FUNERAL HOME. At least forty (40) spaces, plus twenty (20) spaces for each parlor or
chapel in excess of one.
6. HOTEL, MOTEL, BED AND BREAKFAST, LODGING/BOARDING HOUSE. At
least one (1) space for each room of rent plus two (2) additional spaces. Additional
spaces are required for restaurants and conference rooms.
7. INDUSTRIAL. At least two (2) spaces per three (3) employees in the largest working
shift. The Commission may waive the immediate installation of up to one-half (1/2) the
industrial parking requirement and retain the right to require the installation of the full
parking requirement according to these regulations, if it finds that:
a. sufficient evidence has been presented to determine that the reduced parking supply
will adequately serve said land use;
b. the Applicant has provided in their application, plans for the installation of the full
parking requirement according to these regulations; and,
c. before approval, the Applicant has filed an agreement with the Commission stating
that they will install such additional parking facilities within one (1) year after the
date of the Commission’s vote to require such installation when deemed necessary by
the Commission.
8. OFFICE. At least one (1) space per 250 square feet of gross floor area excluding storage,
utility, stair and hall areas. In the case of medical offices, at least one (1) space per
doctor and one (1) space per employee plus two (2) spaces per examining room.
9. PLACES OF ASSEMBLY, including CHURCH, THEATER, AUDITORIUM. At least
one (1) space per each three (3) seats.
10. RESTAURANT. At least one (1) space per three (3) seats or one parking space per 100
square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater, plus one (1) space per employee per
shift.
11. RETAIL, including BANK. At least five (5) spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VII: Parking and Loading
Page 4
12. When multiple uses are present on the premises the Commission may consider
overlapping use of parking spaces based upon the various hours of operation and peak
usage for each use. For all other uses, the Commission shall determine the minimum
number of parking spaces.
E. LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
1. One (1) off-street loading space shall be required for 2,000 to 9,999 square feet of gross
floor area for non-residential uses, which shall measure not less than twelve (12) feet
wide by twenty-five (25) feet long.
2. One (1) off-street loading space shall be required for each ten thousand (10,000) square
feet of gross floor area for non-residential uses, which shall measure not less than twelve
(12) feet wide by fifty-five (55) feet long and have fourteen (14) feet of clearance in
height.
F. SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF PLANS
Applications for building and/or zoning permits, except for one-family houses, shall be
accompanied by a site plan according to Sec. XIV.A.2. of these regulations showing the location,
size and arrangement of parking and loading facilities required by these regulations and the
means of access to said facilities from the public street and any separate egress from such
facilities. Such plan shall also show all proposed screening, landscaping, lighting fixtures,
drainage and other improvements required by these regulations, as well as the location of all
existing buildings and drives within two-hundred (200) feet. The parking plan shall be submitted
to the Commission for approval as complying with the Zoning Regulations, including adequate
relationship of entrances and exits to the flow of traffic on the public streets, safeguarding of
pedestrians on public sidewalks and in the parking facility itself and to the adequacy of access
and circulation of the vehicles and pedestrians using the parking facility. The parking plan shall
be approved before a building and/or zoning permit is issued. When the scale or complexity of a
proposed use warrants, according to Sec. XIV.F.2. of these regulations, the Commission may
require that an outside independent professional study be conducted at the Applicant’s expense.
G. RESTRICTIONS ON UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLES
Parking or storage of unregistered motor vehicles shall not be permitted in any zone except
within an enclosed building. Vehicles used on a farm or those stored on a Connecticut
Department of Motor Vehicles licensed premise are exempt, but in no event shall such vehicles
be kept in front of any building or front building line. (11/19/04)
Section VIII: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERS
A. Statement of Purpose ……………………………………………….. VIII-1
B. Definitions ………………………………………………………….. VIII-1
C. General Requirements ……………………………………………… VIII-2
D. Screening and Buffers ……………………………………………… VIII-3
E. Other Requirements ………………………………………………… VIII-4
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VIII: Landscaping
Page 1
SECTION VIII: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERS
A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The purpose of this regulation is to protect and maintain property values by preserving existing
vegetation and requiring the planting of new materials; to reduce excessive heat, glare, and
accumulation of dust; to provide for water recharge areas; to protect privacy from visual
intrusion; to provide natural visual screening of parking and loading areas; to prevent the erosion
of soil and runoff of storm water; to ensure public safety by using landscaping materials to define
parking and loading areas and manage internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation; to reduce
sound pollution; and, to improve the environmental quality and aesthetics of the Town of
Suffield.
B. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of applying the provisions of this section the terms below shall be defined as
follows:
Berm: An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable
views, buffer properties from adjoining uses, reduce noise, or control the direction of surface
water flow.
Flowering Trees: Dogwood, Redbud, Crabapple, or similar.
Ground Cover: Grass, turf, vinca, pachysandra, myrtle or other plants. White gravel, brick
or stone paving may be used in combination with plants.
Hedge: Evergreens at least four (4) feet in height at the time of planting, which shall be
maintained at a height of six (6) feet. A hedge shall provide complete visual screening.
Landscaped: An area covered with grass or ground cover, where additional planting is either
specifically required or left to the discretion of the property owner.
Screening Fence or Wall: Contiguous plantings or fencing as determined by the
Commission, which create a complete visual screening at least six (6) feet in height.
Shade Trees: Deciduous shade trees such as Sugar Maple, Oak, London Plane, or Linden,
and conifers such as White Pine, Austrian Pine, or Canadian Hemlock.
Type “A” Screening: The desired effect is partial visual screening of an object. The width of
the screening strip may be varied by the Commission or the Applicant, but shall be at least
five (5) feet. Plant material shall consist of shade trees spaced forty (40) feet on centers or
flowering trees spaced twenty (20) feet on center or a mixture of both. Where a continuous
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VIII: Landscaping
Page 2
landscaped screening strip is impractical, trees may be located in islands at least twenty (20)
square feet in area.
Type “B” Screening: The desired effect is partial visual screening between zoning districts.
Plant material shall be the same as specified for Type “A” screening except that one-half
(1/2) of the trees shall be evergreens and the number of trees required is doubled.
Type “C” Screening: The desired year-round effect is complete visual screening of parking
and loading areas. The screening material shall consist of a berm, hedge, screening fence or
wall, or a combination thereof. The screening strip shall be at least five (5) feet wide for a
fence or wall and landscaped, and at least ten (10) feet for a hedge.
Type “D” Screening: The desired effect is separation and partial visual screening without
creation of visual obstructions for traffic. The screening material shall consist of planting
materials with low growth habits interspersed with flowering trees at about twenty (20) feet
on center and deciduous shade trees space forty (40) feet on center. Said strip shall not be
less than ten (10) feet in width within the property line.
C. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
These regulations shall apply to any use requiring a special permit or site plan approval, and
shall include all associated disturbed portions of property not otherwise used for buildings,
structures, parking and loading areas, sidewalks, or similar purposes. In addition, the following
shall apply.
1. All plant materials required by these regulations shall be nursery grown and conform to
the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen.
2. All plant materials shall be planted in a growing condition according to acceptable
horticultural practices and shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition.
3. All landscaping, planting, and ground-cover materials shall be of a non-invasive species.
Non-native invasive species are not permitted.
4. Trees and shrubs shown on an approved site plan that are not in growing condition shall
be replaced by the property owner during the next planting season.
5. At the time of planting, trees shall be balled and burlapped and shall be of the following
minimum size caliper according to the American Nursery and Landscape Association:
a. Shade trees: two and one-half to three (2½-3) inch caliper
stacked on two (2) sides with wire guide
b. Evergreen trees: six (6) foot high
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VIII: Landscaping
Page 3
c. Flowering trees: singe stem (two inch caliper), clump form (eight foot high)
6. Mulched planting beds at least four (4) inches deep shall be placed around all trees and
shrubs to help retain moisture. Mulching material shall be shredded bark, wood chips, or
other organic substitute and shall be replaced yearly.
7. No trees twelve (12) inches or greater in caliper as measured four (4) feet above grade
shall be removed unless approved by the Commission.
8. Landscaping, trees and screening material contiguous to parking and loading areas shall
be properly protected by barrier, curbs, or other means.
9. All portions of non-residential properties which shall be proposed as locations for
buildings, structures, off-street parking and loading areas, sidewalks or similar
improvements shall be landscaped and permanently maintained in such manner as to
minimize storm-water runoff and harmoniously blend such non-residential uses in with
the residential character of the town.
10. Depending on site conditions and the type of use proposed, the Commission may require
a landscaping plan prepared by and containing the seal of a Landscape Architect
registered by the State of Connecticut.
D. SCREENING AND BUFFERS
Screening and buffers shall be required as follows:
1. Agricultural Buffer. The Commission may require partial or complete screening in an
agricultural buffer.
2. Uses in Industrial Zoning Districts that abut Residential Zoning Districts.
a. Front Yard: Type “B” for buildings and Type “D” for parking.
b. Side and Rear Yards: Type “B” for buildings and Type “C” for parking and
loading areas.
3. Uses in Industrial Zoning Districts that abut non-residential zoning districts.
a. Front Yard: Type “A” for buildings and Type “D” for parking.
b. Side and Rear Yards: Type “A” for buildings and parking areas, and Type “C” for
loading areas visible from the street.
4. Uses in Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District.
a. Type “B” when abutting a residential lot.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section VIII: Landscaping
Page 4
5. Uses in Town Center Village Zoning District.
a. Type “B” when abutting a residential lot.
6. Uses in West Suffield Village Zoning District.
a. Type “B” when abutting a residential lot.
E. OTHER REQUIREMENTS
1. The Commission may consider and approve modifications to the landscape requirements
when unusual conditions require more extensive screening for noise abatement or to
protect surrounding residential properties, or when excellence in building or landscape
design demand less landscaping.
2. All landscaping shown on the approved plan shall:
a. be completed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, or
b. be guaranteed of completion by filing a bond with the town, in an amount and
form satisfactory to the Town Engineer and Commission Counsel, assuring
completion within a specified time (not to exceed one year); which bond shall be
forfeited if the required work is not completed.
Section IX: SIGNAGE
A. Statement of Purpose ………………………….……………………. IX-1
B. Measurement of Sign Area …………………………………………. IX-1
C. General Requirements ……………………………………………….IX-1
D. Height and Shape of Signs …………………………………………. IX-2
E. Prohibited Signs …………………………………………………….. IX-3
F. Dimensional Requirements ………………………………………….IX-3
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IX: Signage
Page 1
SECTION IX: SIGNAGE
A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The purpose of these Signage Regulations are to provide for adequate advertising of residences,
home occupations, and business entities throughout Town, while controlling the location, size,
shape, number, manner of lighting and architectural appearance of signs located on all buildings
and premises; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the Town’s ability to
attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to
provide for proper review and oversight of signage; and, to minimize the possible adverse effects
of signs on nearby public and private property.
B. MEASUREMENT OF SIGN AREA
The area of a sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest circle, square, rectangle or
triangle that contains the entire sign, including all lettering, wording, design, or symbols together
with any background, material, or color different from the balance of the wall on which it is
located, if such background is designed as an integral part of and obviously related to the sign.
The supports that affix a sign to the ground or to a building shall not be included in the area of
the sign unless such supports are obviously designed to be part of the sign as defined in these
regulations. Square foot limitations contained in these regulations refer to each face of multifaced
signs. Maximum number of sign faces shall not exceed two in residential and business
districts, arranged back-to-back; signs with three (3) sides, arranged in a triangular configuration
may be permitted in industrial districts. The height of a sign shall be measured from ground
level to the top of the sign, or any part thereof, including supports and lights.
C. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. New freestanding or ground signs shall be subject to site plan approval by the
Commission.
2. No permanent sign shall be erected, relocated, or altered without a sign permit approved
by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and issued by the Building Official, except when said
sign is located in a Village District which shall also require the review and
recommendation by the Design Review Board. All signs shall meet all requirements of
the Building Code and these Regulations. Application for sign permits shall be made on
forms supplied by the Building Official. Failure to maintain signs shall be considered a
violation of these regulations.
3. Externally lit signs are permitted if illumination is confined to the surface of the sign.
Such lighting shall be shielded to prevent direct light from being visible from the street or
from adjacent property. Exterior lighting in any non-residential zoning district shall
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IX: Signage
Page 2
comply with the maximum and minimum lumen levels specified in the recommended
practices and ANSI standards contained in Lighting for Parking Facilities or in Lighting
for Exterior Environments as published by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America as amended.
4. The light source in any lighted sign shall be shielded to prevent glare upon traffic or
adjoining properties. Lights shall not be used where they create conflict with highway
control traffic signals.
5. No sign shall project more than twenty-four (24) inches from the face of a structure or
more than twelve (12) inches beyond any street line and shall be at least eight (8) feet
above the level of any walkway it may overhang. No sign shall be placed in such a
position as to endanger pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
6. Off-premises, directional signs, pointing to businesses not readily visible from the main
thoroughfare, are permitted on a Town right-of-way where such placement does not
cause sight line problems or unduly detract from surrounding areas. Such signs shall be
five (5) inches high by twenty-four (24) inches long, black letters on white background
and mounted no higher than eight (8) feet on a two (2) inch metal post, permanently
secured in the ground. No more than three (3), two-sided signs are allowed on one post.
Intersection quadrants shall not contain more than two posts which shall be within twohundred
(200) feet of the intersection.
7. One off-premises directional sign, indicating "HOUSE FOR SALE" will be allowed at
the entrance to a street on which such house or houses for sale are located. Said sign
shall not bear logos, company names, or other identifications marks and shall be used by
all real estate agencies and owners with property for sale. Signs shall not be larger than
one (1) by two (2) feet, mounted no higher than three (3) feet above finished grade, and
placed in such a way as to not interfere with sight lines or traffic.
8. Signs pertaining to a removed use, business, or proprietor shall be removed within thirty
(30) days.
D. HEIGHT AND SHAPE OF SIGNS
1. No sign attached to a structure shall project higher than two (2) feet above the exterior
wall of the structure, except in an industrial district where a sign may project up to six (6)
feet above the exterior wall of such structure provided the sign is not within five-hundred
(500) feet of the boundary of a residential district and visible from said district.
2. No portion of any permanent freestanding sign shall measure higher than ten (10) feet
above finished grade.
3. Where more than one sign is permitted on a building, such signs shall be uniform in
height, size, and location. In addition, such signs shall be uniform in terms of color and
shape in a Village District.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IX: Signage
Page 3
E. PROHIBITED SIGNS
1. Animated Signs.
2. Banners or pennants, except as provided in Subsections F.2.f. and 6.c.
3. Flashing, rotating, sequential lighting, or intermittent illumination signs, except those
indicating time and/or temperature by means of white lighting, provided the longest
dimension of such sign does not exceed five (5) feet, and traditional barbershop signs,
provided the longest dimension of such sign does not exceed three (3) feet.
4. Internally lit signs, unless specifically approved by the Commission.
5. Internally lit canopy signs, i.e., gas station canopies.
6. Off-premise sign, except as provided for in Subsections C.6. and 7.
7. Inflatable signs and tethered balloons, except temporary signs in connection with a grand
opening as determined by the Zoning Officer.
8. Exposed festooned lights in non-residential districts, except during the months of January
and December.
9. Interior signs visible from the street which do not comply with these regulations.
F. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Permanent signs in single-family RESIDENTIAL (R) and FARMLAND PRESERVATION
(FP) Zoning Districts:
Maximum Maximum Permit
Type of Sign Size # of Signs Location Required
a. Non-illuminated nameplate sign. 1 SF 1 per lot Back of street line No
b. Non-illuminated sign pertaining 4 SF 1 per lot Back of street line Yes
to a profession or occupation
permitted as an accessory use
without a special permit.
c. Sign pertaining to a profession or 6 SF 1 per lot Back of street line Yes
occupation where a special permit
is required (non-illuminated sign only).
d. Sign pertaining to institutional uses 25 SF 1 on each 15 ft. front setback Yes
including places of worship, schools, street frontage
nursing homes by special permit.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IX: Signage
Page 4
2. Temporary signs in single-family RESIDENTIAL (R) Districts:
Maximum Maximum Permit
Type of Sign Size # of Signs Location Required
a. Sign pertaining to the sale, 6 SF 1 on each Back of street line No
lease or rental of property street frontage
on which they are located.
b. Sign pertaining to and during 6 SF 1 per lot 15 ft. front setback Yes
construction of property.
c. Sign offering lots and/or homes 25 SF 1 on each 15 ft. front setback Yes
for sale within an approved sub- street frontage
division to be displayed for no
more than twelve (12) months,
with one (1) extension permitted.
d. Sign of civic and non-profit 25 SF 1 per property 15 ft. front setback Yes
organizations displayed for no
more than thirty (30) days in
a twelve (12) month period.
e. Holiday decoration without 15 ft. setbacks No
commercial advertising.
f. Seasonal decorations without 72” vertical 1 per utility pole Located not to impair No
commercial advertising 30” horizontal pedestrian or vehicular
sponsored by the Town. traffic site lines.
3. Signs permitted in PLANNED DEVELOPMENT APARTMENT (PDA) Districts:
Maximum Maximum Permit
Type of Sign Size # of Signs Location Required
a. Nameplate signs indicating 12 SF 1 for each street 15 ft. front setback Yes
the name of development. or frontage where
25 SF access exists. 30 ft. front setback Yes
b. Signs identifying the rental or 6 SF 1 for each street Back of street line No
property management agency. frontage where
access exists.
c. Signs pertaining to the sale, 25 SF 1 per property 15 ft. front setback Yes
lease or rental of property for
a period of twelve (12) months.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IX: Signage
Page 5
4. Permanent signs permitted in the NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC),
INDUSTRIAL, (I), and PLANNED DEVELOPMENT INDUSTRIAL PARK (PDIP)
District Zones:
Permit
Type of Sign Location Required
a. The total combined sign area for each unit of occupancy on the first
floor and permanent freestanding signs shall not exceed one (1) square
feet for each linear front foot of exterior building wall as follows.
(1) The number of permanent signs on a building wall shall be Building Wall Yes
restricted to one (1) per unit of occupancy, except that units
with frontage on two (2) streets may have two (2) signs.
(2) One (1) single or double-faced permanent freestanding or ground Ground, 20 ft. Yes
sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area nor ten (10) setbacks
feet in height may be erected on each lot containing frontage.
b. Within ten (10) feet of each entrance of a building, one (1) Back of street line Yes
common nameplate sign may be erected which allows for not
more than one (1) square foot of sign area for each unit of
occupancy that is served by said entrance.
c. Each unit of occupancy above the first floor may only displaya Second Floor No
sign on the inside of each window serving said unit of occupancy,
provided that the combined area of such signs shall not exceed
six (6) square feet. Such restriction shall not apply if units of
occupancy above the first floor have direct access to common
areas on the outside of the building where signs may be displayed.
5. Permanent signs permitted in the TOWN CENTER and WEST SUFFIELD
CENTERVILLAGE District Zones subject to review and recommendation of the Design
Review Board:
Permit
Type of Sign Location Required
a. The total combined sign area for each unit of occupancy on the first
floor and permanent freestanding signs shall not exceed one (1) square
feet for each linear front foot of exterior building wall as follows.
(1) The number of permanent signs on a building wall shall be Building Wall Yes
restricted to one (1) per unit of occupancy, except that units
with frontage on two (2) streets may have two (2) signs.
(2) One (1) single or double-faced permanent freestanding or ground Ground, 0 ft. Yes
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IX: Signage
Page 6
sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area nor ten (10) Setback (7/05/07)
feet in height may be erected on each lot containing frontage.
b. Within ten (10) feet of each entrance of a building, one (1) Behind street line Yes
common nameplate sign may be erected which allows for not
more than one (1) square foot of sign area for each unit of
occupancy that is served by said entrance.
c. Each unit of occupancy above the first floor may only display a Second Floor No
sign on the inside of each window serving said unit of occupancy,
provided that the combined area of such signs shall not exceed
six (6) square feet. Such restriction shall not apply if units of
occupancy above the first floor have direct access to common
areas on the outside of the building where signs may be displayed.
d. The exterior color of a sign shall be selected from the Historic Colors of America pallet (as
approved by the Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities) by California
Products Corporation or equivalent, and/or primary colors.
e. All permanent signs permitted in the Town Center Village District and West Suffield Village
District are subject to review by the Design Review Board.
6. Temporary signs permitted in the NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC),
INDUSTRIAL (I), TOWN CENTER VILLAGE, and WEST SUFFIELD CENTER
VILLAGEDistrict Zones.
a. Signs temporarily attached or painted on a door, window, or wall announcing sales or special
features are permitted, provided they do not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of
said door, window or wall. Said signs shall be removed immediately after the termination of
such sale or special feature and shall be permitted for no more than thirty (30) days.
b. Freestanding sandwich-board type signs may be allowed in non-residential districts for a
maximum period of sixty (60) days from the date of the permit required below, provided:
(1) Signs are limited to one (1) per occupant;
(2) Signs are secured to prevent movement by wind or other elements;
(3) Signs are displayed only during hours of business operation;
(4) Signs shall measure no more than two (2) by three (3) feet;
(5) A permit is issued by the Zoning Officer;
(6) A $20.00 administrative fee is collected;
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section IX: Signage
Page 7
(7) Signs shall meet all other aspects of these regulations; and,
(8) All signs shall be located behind the street line. (10-09-09)
c. Restaurant signs advertising lunch or dinner specials are exempt from the sixty (60) day limit
on display of sandwich-board signs.
d. Outdoor advertising devices, including but not limited to plaques, banners, pennants, and
streamers are permitted for a period of not more than two (2) weeks after the opening of a
new business. Said device shall be behind the street line.
Section X: RIDGELINE PROTECTION ZONE
A. Statement of Purpose ………………………………………………... X-1
B. Definitions …………………………………………………………... X-1
C. Permitted Uses ……………………………………………………… X-2
D. Ridgeline Protection Standards …………………………………….. X-2
E. Application …………………………………………………………. X-4
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section X: Ridgeline Protection Zone
Page 1
SECTION X: RIDGELINE PROTECTION ZONE
A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this regulation to implement the provisions of Public Act 95-239 which
amended Sections 8-2 and 8-23 of the General Statutes to permit regulations concerning the
protection of traprock ridgelines. This regulation is intended to provide minimum standards for
the preservation and of land within the Ridgeline Setback Area and is designed to promote
development practices which will support the following goals:
1. Preservation of the aesthetic beauty and natural environment of the Town;
2. Preservation of the environmentally sensitive land within and adjacent to the ridgeline area
of West Suffield Mountain and Manitook Mountain;
3. Preservation of the unique flora, fauna and other environmental attributes within and
adjacent to the ridgeline area of West Suffield Mountain and Manitook Mountain; and
4. Preservation of ridgeline vistas of West Suffield Mountain and Manitook Mountain as seen
from the Town.
B. DEFINITIONS
Building (for purposes of this Section only): Any structure other than (A) a facility as defined
in Section 16-50i of the Connecticut General Statutes or (B) structures of a relatively slender
nature compared to the buildings to which they are associated, including but not limited to
chimneys, flagpoles, antennas, utility poles and steeples.
Clear-cutting: The harvest of timber in a fashion which removes from any four-hundred
(400) square foot or larger area all or substantially all trees measuring two (2) inches or more
in diameter at a height of four (4) feet.
Development: The construction, reconstruction, alteration, or expansion of a building.
Passive recreation: Non-motorized use of the land such as hiking, picnicking or
birdwatching.
Ridgeline conservation area: An area extending 250 feet horizontally from a ridgeline to a
parallel line on either side of such ridge as shown on the Zoning Map. Said map shall be
used as a guide, for general information and illustrative purposes only. The actual presence
and location of the Ridgeline Setback Area, as defined in Public Act 95-239, shall be
determined by an applicant's qualified technical professionals in connection with a proposed
development.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section X: Ridgeline Protection Zone
Page 2
Ridgeline setback area: The area bounded by (A) a line that parallels the ridgeline at a
distance of one hundred fifty feet on the more wooded side of the ridge, and (B) the contour
line where a ridge of less than fifty percent is maintained for fifty (50) feet or more on the
rockier side of the slope, mapped pursuant to Sec. 8-2 of the General Statutes, as amended by
Sec. 2 of Public Act 95-239.
Selective timbering: The harvesting of trees at least six (6) inches in caliper for purposes
other than development.
Traprock ridgeline: The lines(s) on West Suffield Mountain and Manitook Mountain created
by all points at the top of a fifty (50) percent slope, which is maintained for a distance of fifty
(50) horizontal feet perpendicular to the slope and which consists of surficial basalt geology,
identified on the map prepared by Stone, et all., U.S. Geological Survey, entitled "Surficial
Materials Map of Connecticut".
C. PERMITTED USES
1. As of right
a. Emergency work necessary to protect life and property;
b. Any non-conforming uses that were in existence and that were approved on or before
the effective date of regulations adopted under this Section and;
c. Selective timbering, grazing of domesticated animals and passive recreation.
2. Uses permitted in the underlying zone, including clear-cutting, may be allowed by the
Commission as a special permit after public hearing and subject to ridgeline protection
standards.
3. The following may be permitted, subject to ridgeline protection review by the Commission
of project site plans prior to the issuance of a building permit:
a. Any construction or significant alteration of any dwelling or other structure if any such
action affects the exterior appearance. A significant alteration is defined as any alteration
which adds to the height of a structure or which substantially alters the visual profile of
the property or structures thereon;
b. The Commission may waive any and all requirements of the ridgeline protection
review for dwelling additions and/or accessory buildings of 400 square feet or less and
less than ten (10) feet in height.
D. RIDGELINE PROTECTION STANDARDS
No roof, antenna, satellite dish, tower or other feature that may be above the roof level shall be
visible above the ridgeline when viewed from a public way. Buildings and landscaping are to be
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section X: Ridgeline Protection Zone
Page 3
designed and located on the site to blend with the natural terrain and vegetation and to preserve
the scenic character of the site, conforming to the following standards:
1. Building Characteristics
a. Exposed foundation walls shall not extend more than two (2) feet above the proposed
finished grade.
b. Buildings, alterations, additions, or structures should be located downgrade of the
ridgeline (where possible).
c. Building materials shall blend with the natural landscape.
2. Landscaping
a. Removal of native vegetation, especially large timber, shall be minimized and the
replacement of vegetation and landscaping shall be compatible with the vegetation of
the subject area.
b. Trees may only be removed for location and construction of streets, driveways, septic
areas or structures. With approval from the Commission, selective clearing for views
may be permitted where the view is obstructed by dense vegetation.
c. Retaining walls, of natural materials only, may be used to create usable yard space.
Retaining walls on the exposed side and downhill portions of a lot which are in view
or visible from a public way shall be screened with appropriate landscaping material.
d. Landscaping and plantings shall be utilized to screen main buildings in open or
prominent areas from significant views, both when installed and when mature.
3. Grading.
Any grading or earth moving operation is to be planned and executed in such a manner
that final contours appear to be consistent with the existing terrain, both on and adjacent
to the site.
4. Prevention of erosion and sedimentation.
No area of 100 square feet or more on any parcel shall have existing vegetation clearstripped
or be filled six (6) inches or more so as to destroy existing vegetation unless in
conjunction with agricultural activity or unless necessarily incidental to construction on
the premises under a currently valid building permit. No stripped areas which are
allowed shall remain through the winter without a temporary cover of winter rye or
similar plant material to provide soil control.
5. Utilities
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section X: Ridgeline Protection Zone
Page 4
The Commission shall determine whether utilities will be constructed and routed
underground and will take into consideration those situations where natural features
prevent the underground siting or where safety considerations necessitate above ground
construction and routing. Above ground utilities shall be constructed and routed to
minimize detrimental effects on the visual setting.
6. Site Planning.
In the building of more than one structure, variable setbacks, multiple orientations and
other site planning techniques shall be incorporated in order to avoid the appearance of a
solid line of development.
7. Accessory Structures.
Construction of a tower, satellite dish, windmill, antenna, or other installation shall not
obstruct the view of, or from a public way, or from an abutter's dwelling, or be visible
from off the ridge.
E. APPLICATION
Application to the Commission is required where a property or a portion of a property lies within
the Ridgeline Conservation Area.
Application shall be submitted in accordance with appropriate procedures under Section XIV.A
of the Suffield Zoning Regulations according to the type of review necessary. To facilitate siting
and design of buildings sensitively related to the natural setting, aerial markers shall be placed at
points corresponding to the highest point of a proposed building or structure. Applications for
ridgeline protection review of proposed development must be accompanied by the following:
1. A site plan or plot plan, as the case may be, in accordance with Section XIV.A.2 of the
Suffield Zoning Regulations.
2. Photographs of the development site with aerial marker(s) in place, taken from points
along the street rights-of-way which provide a view of the site together with a map
indicating the distance between these points and the site.
3. An architectural drawing of all existing and proposed buildings and structures on the site
showing how they fit into the ridgeline protection area.
4. A computer generated three-dimensional view may be substituted for item “3” above.
Section XI: NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
A. Statement of Purpose ……………………………………………. XI-1
B. Nonconforming Lots …..………………………………………….. XI-1
C. Nonconforming Uses …………………………………………….. XI-2
D. Nonconforming Structures ………………………………………. XI-2
E. Other ………………………………………………………………... XI-2
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XI: Nonconforming Uses or Structures
Page 1
SECTION XI: NONCONFORMING USES OR STRUCTURES
A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
Within the zoning districts established by these regulations or by amendments that may later be
adopted, there exist lots, uses and structures which were lawful at the time these regulations were
adopted or amended but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the provisions
of these regulations or future amendments. Such lots, uses and structures are declared by these
regulations to be nonconforming. It is the intent of these regulations to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival. It is
further the intent of these regulations that nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded or
extended nor be used as basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the
same zone.
1. Nonconforming uses are declared by these regulations to be incompatible with permitted
uses within the zoning districts where they are located. After the effective date of
adoption or amendment of these regulations, a nonconforming use, a nonconforming
structure or a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination shall not be
enlarged or expanded.
2. Nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully
begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations and upon
which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. "Actual construction"
is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an
existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation
or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work
shall be carried on diligently.
B. NONCONFORMING LOTS
In any zoning district, a principal building and customary accessory buildings may be erected on
a lawful lot existing as of the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations. This
provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the lot area requirements or developable
area of the zoning district in which such lot is located, provided that the setbacks and
requirements other than those applying to lot area and/or developable area shall conform to the
requirements of the district in which such lot is located. Nothing herein shall permit the
construction of any buildings on a lot or parcel of land which does not have frontage along a
street.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XI: Nonconforming Uses or Structures
Page 2
C. NONCONFORMING USES
Where a lawful use exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations,
which use is no longer permitted under these regulations as adopted or amended, such use may
be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. Such nonconforming use shall not be enlarged to occupy a greater floor area, a greater
bulk or greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of these regulations.
2. Such nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of
the land.
3. If such nonconforming use is substituted by a permitted use, it shall thereafter conform to
the requirements of the zone in which it is located, and the nonconforming use shall not
thereafter be resumed.
D. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these
regulations which could not be built under the provisions of these regulations as enacted or
amended by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot or
other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. Any nonconforming building or structure which does not contain a nonconforming use
may be structurally altered, provided that no other zoning regulations are violated or that
the nonconformity is not increased in any manner.
2. If such nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or
by public enemy, it may be repaired or replaced to an extent which does not increase the
nonconformity. Such repair or replacement shall commence within one (1) year after the
damage or destruction occurs and shall be completed within two (2) years of
commencement. If such repair or replacement is not accomplished within such time
periods, the structure shall be reconstructed in conformity with the requirements of the
zone in which it is located.
3. If such structure is moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter
conform to the requirements of the zone in which it is located after it is moved.
E. OTHER
1. Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land In Combination.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XI: Nonconforming Uses or Structures
Page 3
Where a lawful use of a structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of these regulations which is no longer permitted under the
provisions of these regulations as enacted or amended, such lawful use may be continued
so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
a. Any existing structure devoted to such nonconforming use shall not be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered in a manner
which increases the nonconformity, except to change the use of the structure to a
use permitted in the zone in which it is located.
b. Any nonconforming use of a part of a structure may not be extended to any other
part thereof, and no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside the
structure.
c. A nonconforming use may be changed only to a conforming use. Whenever a
nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use it shall not thereafter
be changed to a nonconforming use.
Section XII: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
A. Statement of Purpose ………………………………………. XII-1
B. Definitions …………………………………………………. XII-1
C. Activities RequiringCertified Erosion/Sediment Control Plan XII-2
D. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan ……………………… XII-2
E. Minimum Acceptable Standards …………………………. XII-3
F. Issuance of Certification ……………….…………………. XII-4
G. Conditions Relating to Soil Erosion and Sediment Control …XII-4
H. Inspection and Other Requirements ……………………… XII-5
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XII: Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Page 1
SECTION XII: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this regulation to carry out the mandate of the Connecticut Legislature in
Public Act 83-388 codified in Section 22a-325 through 22a-329 of the General Statutes to
provide for proper regulations concerning soil erosion and sediment control during development.
These regulations are meant to provide minimum requirements by inclusion or reference for soil
erosion and sediment control plans:
1. To prevent costly repairs to gullies, washed out fills, roads and embankments;
2. To prevent sediment from polluting water bodies and wetlands;
3. To prevent degrading of aesthetic, recreational, fish and wildlife values;
4. To prevent clogging of storm sewers and road ditches that reduce capacities and cause
flooding and damage to adjoining properties; and
5. To prevent erosion that destroys the soils' capabilities to support vegetation.
B. DEFINITIONS
Certification: A signed written approval by the Commission (or its designated agent) that a
soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable requirements of these
regulations.
County soil and water conservation district: The North Central Conservation District, Inc.,
which was formed by combining the Hartford County and Tolland County Districts,
established under subsection (a) of CGS Sec. 22a-315.
Development: Any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate.
Disturbed area: An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land
subject to accelerated erosion.
Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or
gravity.
Grading: Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth
materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XII: Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Page 2
Inspection: The periodic review of sediment and erosion control measures shown on the
certified plan.
Sediment: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or
has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
Soil: Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.
Soil erosion and sediment control plan (E&S Plan): A scheme that minimizes soil erosion
and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and
narrative.
C. ACTIVITIES REQUIRING CERTIFIED EROSION/SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN
A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted as part of any application for
development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half
(1/2) acre.
D. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN
1. To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain
proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce
the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available
technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found
in the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control.
2. Said plan shall contain, but not be limited to:
a. A narrative describing:
(1) The development.
(2) The schedule for grading and construction activities including:
(a) Start and completion dates;
(b) Sequence of grading and construction activities;
(c) Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment
control measures;
(d) Sequence for final stabilization of the project site.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XII: Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Page 3
(3) The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and
storm water management facilities.
(4) The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures
and storm water management facilities.
(5) The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and
sediment control measures and storm water management facilities.
(6) The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment
control measures and storm water management facilities.
b. A site plan map at a sufficient scale to show:
(1) The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties;
(2) The existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetlands, watercourses
and water bodies;
(3) The existing structures on the project site, if any;
(4) The proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas
and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property lines;
(5) The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures and storm water management facilities identified by standard
symbols and nomenclature shown in the 2002 guidelines;
(6) The sequence of grading and construction activities;
(7) The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment
control measures;
(8) The sequence for final stabilization of the development site.
c. Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested
by the Commission or its designated agent.
E. MINIMUM ACCEPTABLE STANDARDS
1. Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these
regulations using the principles as outlined in the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines For Soil
Erosion And Sediment Control. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a
development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XII: Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Page 4
and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause significant off-site
erosion and/or sedimentation.
2. The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the 2002 Connecticut
Guidelines For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control, as amended. The Commission (or its
designated agent) may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant if technically
sound reasons are presented.
3. For soil erosion and sediment control measures requiring engineered measures per the
2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control as amended,
calculations by a Connecticut professional engineer shall be used in determining peak
flow rates and volumes of runoff.
F. ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATION
1. The Suffield Zoning and Planning Commission or its agent shall by its approval certify
that the soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the requirements and
objectives of this regulation.
2. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the
approval of any application under Chapters 124, or 126 of the General Statutes.
3. Prior to approval, any plan submitted to the Town may be reviewed by the North Central
Conservation District which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided
such review shall be completed within thirty days of receipt of such plan.
G. CONDITIONS RELATING TO SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
1. The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as
specified in the certified plan, that are a condition of certification of any modified site
plan may be required to be covered in a performance bond or other assurance acceptable
to the Commission in accordance with the provisions specified under Section XIV.C. of
the regulations.
2. Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is
approved and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation
prior to site development are installed and functional.
3. Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as
scheduled according to the approved plan.
4. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure
compliance of the approved plan.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XII: Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Page 5
H. INSPECTION AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS
1. Inspection shall be made by the Commission or its designated agent during development
to ensure compliance with the approved plan and that control measures and facilities are
properly performed or installed and maintained. The Commission or its designated agent
may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and
sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to
the approved plan and are being operated and maintained.
2. Modifications to plans may be necessary and field changes may be required in the event
that upon inspection it is found that the intent of the regulations is not being met.
Section XIII: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
A. General …………………………………………………... XIII-1
B. Powers and Duties ……………………………………… XIII-1
C. Procedures ……………………………………………… XIII-2
D. Application Form and Content ………………………… XIII-3
E. Time Limit on Variance ………………………………… XIII-3
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIII – Zoning Board of Appeals
Page 1
SECTION XIII: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) established in accordance with the Statutes
authorizing such Board. The ZBA shall have those powers and duties as prescribed in CGS and
as set forth herein.
A. GENERAL
In accordance with CGS Sec. 8-6, the Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby prohibited from
approving a variance which has the effect of permitting a use in any zone in which the use is not
otherwise permitted. In addition, the Board is also hereby prohibited from hearing appeals from
site plan applications.
B. POWERS AND DUTIES
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties, and may adopt such
rules as may be necessary to carry out these regulations.
1. Appeals.
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, or decision made by the town official charged with the enforcement of these
regulations.
2. Variances.
To determine and vary the strict application of the requirements of these regulations in
cases of exceptional physical conditions for which strict application would result in
exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship that would deprive owners of the reasonable
use of land or buildings involved so that substantial justice will be done and public safety
and welfare secured. Variances are to be granted sparingly and only to the minimum
extent necessary. No variance shall be granted by the Board of Appeals unless it finds
that all of the following conditions are substantially met:
a. Such action would be in harmony with the Plan of Conservation and Development
and the stated Purpose of these regulations stated in Sec. I.B.
b. The exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship claimed has not been created by the
owner or his/her predecessor in title.
c. There are conditions that apply to the land or structures for which the variance is
sought, which conditions are peculiar to such land or structures and not to the
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIII – Zoning Board of Appeals
Page 2
personal or financial circumstances of the appellant, and which conditions are not
affecting generally the area in which such land or structure is situated. Minor
infractions in the location or height of a structure or the dimension or area of a lot,
caused by human error, may be considered sufficient cause for an affirmative finding
of this paragraph, unless, in the opinion of the Board, such infractions can be repaired
without impairing the use of the land or structure.
d. The aforesaid conditions are such that the strict application of the requirements of
these regulations would deprive the appellant of the reasonable use of the land or
structure and that the variance, as granted by the Board, is the minimum variance that
will accomplish this purpose.
e. That the Applicant has demonstrated that there are no reasonable alternatives other
than to grant the requested variance.
3. To act on requests concerning the location of motor vehicle dealers and repairers license
pursuant CGS 14-54.
C. PROCEDURES
1. The Board shall hold a public hearing on all applications and appeals, and shall publish a
notice of said hearing as prescribed by these regulations and the CGS as amended.
2. In accordance with CGS Sec. 8-6a, whenever an application for a variance is joined with
an appeal of any order, requirement, or decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the
Board shall decide the issues presented in the appeal before considering the variance
application.
3. The Board shall hold a public hearing, close such hearing, and render its decision on any
application within the time limits imposed by CGS Sec. 8-7d. The Board may reverse or
affirm wholly or partly any order, requirement or decision appealed from, and make such
order, requirement or decision as in its opinion should be made. Such order, requirement
or decision, and any grant of any variance, may be subject to such conditions and
restrictions as appear necessary to the Board in order to insure that the granting of the
application or petition shall be in harmony with the purposes of these regulations as set
forth in CGS Sec. 8-2.
4. In granting any variance, the Board shall describe specifically the exceptional difficulty
or unusual hardship on which its decision is based, and why the granting of the variance
is in harmony with the purposes of these Regulations.
5. Any variance that is granted by the Board shall be placed upon the Land Records of the
Town of Suffield by recording a copy of the variance with the Town Clerk or as
otherwise provided by the CGS as amended.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIII – Zoning Board of Appeals
Page 3
6. The concurring vote of four (4) Board members shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement or decision of the Zoning Officer, or to vary the application of these
regulations.
7. The time limit for filing an appeal of an order, requirement, or decision of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer to the Board shall be fifteen (15) days from receipt of an order.
D. APPLICATION FORM AND CONTENT
Applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by
the Board through the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and shall include a filing fee and the
following information to facilitate a thorough review of said application:
1. Evidence of approvals from the Conservation Commission, North Central Health District
(if not on sanitary sewers), and Historic District Commission (if within District).
2. An A-2 quality certified property plan when a frost-protected foundation is proposed or
when in the opinion of the Board said plan is necessary.
3. Building elevations and floor plans.
4. Contours or sufficient detail to show general topography.
5. A plan to scale showing the total layout of the property including all buildings on
adjacent lots within one-hundred (100) feet of the proposed structure for which the
variance is being sought if in the opinion of the Board said plan is necessary.
6. Name and address of record owner of land, who must sign the application.
7. Names and addresses of abutting property owners within one-hundred (100) feet of the
property line, including across the street.
8. The staking of the proposed corners of any proposed structure requiring a variance.
9. The specific provisions of the regulations involved and the details of the variance that is
applied for, and the grounds on which it is claimed that relief should be granted.
E. TIME LIMIT ON VARIANCE
Any variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals that is not exercised within a period of
three (3) years from date of decision shall automatically become null and void and shall be stated
as such in the Board’s decision.
Section XIV: ADMINISTRATION
A. Required Permits and Information ……………………... XIV-1
B. Approvals …………………………………………………. XIV-5
C. Bonding …………………………………………………… XIV-7
D. Enforcement ……………………………………………… XIV-8
E. Zoning Amendments ……………………………………. XIV-9
F. Fees ………………………………………………………. XIV-9
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIV: Administration
Page 1
SECTION XIV: ADMINISTRATION
A. REQUIRED PERMITS AND INFORMATION
No building or structure shall be erected, expanded, or structurally altered and no land use shall
be established until a permit therefore has been issued as required below:
1. Special Permit.
All applications for a special permit shall be submitted in writing to, and in a form
prescribed by, the Commission. The Commission shall adopt administrative procedures
therefore, including but not limited to application forms, fees, map submission
requirements, number of copies and filing deadlines. Failure of an applicant to comply
with these application submission requirements shall be grounds for the Commission to
reject or deny such application. In addition:
a. A special permit use identified as such in these regulations shall also require Site Plan
Approval including said plan requirements according to Subsection A.2. below.
b. The application submission shall address all off-site and on-site impacts,
requirements, improvements and considerations, including but not limited to building
location, traffic, storm drainage, sanitary sewerage, water supply, parking and
loading, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, landscaping, and environmental and
aesthetic considerations. Sufficient information to address these major impacts shall
be provided by the applicant so that the Commission can make an informed decision.
c. Special permit uses proposing high traffic generators where the construction involves
more than twenty-five (25+) homes, fifty (50+) parking spaces, or 20,000+ square
feet of floor area, or any proposal which in the Commission’s judgment would
generate high levels of traffic shall be accompanied by a traffic study prepared by a
licensed Traffic Engineer. (The Commission may waive this requirement if it finds
that the projected use is of a nature that a significant traffic impact is not anticipated.)
At a minimum, the traffic study shall include data and information on existing and
projected average daily vehicle trips on streets within 1,000 feet of the development,
peak-hour traffic, adequacy of rights-of-way and travel ways, existing roadway
capacity, traffic accidents, the traffic impact of the proposed development, traffic
generation data, traffic lights and intersections, and recommendations for safe
pedestrian and vehicular circulation, including provisions for safe sidewalks and
crosswalks for pedestrians. Where applicable, the Applicant shall include the written
recommendations of the Connecticut Department of Transportation.
d. Where it is projected that the additional traffic resulting from the proposal will reduce
the Level of Service (LOS) to D or below, the Commission shall not approve the
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIV: Administration
Page 2
project unless and until provision has been made for the improvement of said
condition.
e. Additional information may be required of the applicant during the Commission’s
consideration of an application for a special permit as deemed necessary by the
Commission to determine compliance of the proposed use with these regulations.
Such additional information may include but not be limited to environmental impact
analysis.
2. Site Plans.
Applications for site plan approval or special permit use shall include the following
information:
a. Town of Suffield Site Plan Application, including a list of abutters within twohundred
(200) feet according to the most recent Assessor’s records and an application
fee in accordance with Subsection F. below.
b. Statement of Purpose or comprehensive written record detailing the proposed use(s)
of the site and building(s) thereon.
c. Four (4) prints of the site plan of the premises at a scale of 1” = 40’, 24” x 36” in size,
and ten (10) 11” x 17” reduced prints, certified by a licensed surveyor, engineer, or
landscape architect showing the following:
(1) Name and address of developer and owner of record. Scale of drawing,
north arrow, date of preparation and revision(s), and if a lot in a subdivision
a reference to the original subdivision plan.
(2) Lot boundaries, dimensions, and lot areas. A boundary survey of the lot
may be required, which shall conform to Class A-2 requirements of the State
of Connecticut.
(3) An area map, drawn to a scale not larger than 1” = 100’ showing all
properties with owners' names and address within two-hundred (200) feet.
(4) The zoning and proposed use of the lot or lots subject to the application and
of the adjacent land within two-hundred (200) feet of the perimeter of the
site.
(5) Locations and outlines of all significant natural or man-made features within
two-hundred (200) feet of the perimeter of the site, including buildings
fences, signage, roadways, and driveway entrances to lots on both sides of
the street(s) abutting the subject property.
(6) The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures above
and below ground.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIV: Administration
Page 3
(7) Perspectives or elevations of proposed building(s) as viewed from public
roads. (2/10/06)
(8) Access and egress details, including signage, pedestrian crossings, vehicular
movement on the site, pavement materials and construction specifications.
(9) The layout of existing and proposed parking and loading facilities and
access thereto, including snow storage location and any parking barriers or
walkways. A calculation shall be shown on the plan to show that the
parking and loading spaces meet the requirements of Sec. VII. of these
regulations.
(10) Existing contours of the land at two (2) foot intervals and proposed
contours if any change in the grading is proposed.
(11) An Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan and narrative if required by
Sec. XII. of these regulations.
(12) All present and proposed uses of all structures.
(13) Location of the proposed sanitary disposal system, whether by sewer
connection or sub-surface disposal area, and appropriate agency approvals,
e.g., Health Department or WPCA.
(14) Where surface or subsurface drainage facilities are to be constructed or
modified, existing and proposed structures and piping with flow line
elevations shall be shown.
(15) Wetland soils.
(16) Locations of existing and proposed water supply either by private well or
public water.
(17) The type, location, and specifications for any outdoor lighting proposed in
accordance with Sec. III.M. of these regulations. Depending on the site
conditions and type of use proposed, the Commission may also require that
a photometric plan be provided which details the type(s) and wattage(s),
installation location, mounting height, and ground level lighting intensity of
all lighting within the parcel and at adjacent property lines.
(18) The type, size and location of all signs where applicable in accordance
with Sec. IX. of these regulations.
(19) Existing (including those to be removed) and proposed trees and shrubs
with a list and count of all trees and shrubs to be planted by common and
botanical names, size (caliper, height, time until maturity) at planting, and
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIV: Administration
Page 4
height and spread maturity. Required buffers/screening between properties
shall also be labeled on the plan in accordance with Sec. VIII. of these
regulations. Depending on site conditions and type of use proposed, the
Commission may require a landscaping plan prepared by and containing the
seal of a Landscape Architect registered by the State of Connecticut.
(20) Such additional information as required by the Zoning Officer, Town
Planner, or the Commission, where it is necessary to determine that the
requirements of these regulations are met.
(21) The Zoning Officer may excuse compliance with requirements for specific
information otherwise required on the plot plan where such compliance is
not necessary to determine that zoning or other code regulations are met.
3. Other.
a. Upon determination of the Zoning Officer that a proposed structure or use complies
with these regulations, the Building Official can issue a building permit.
b. Upon determination of the Zoning Officer that a proposed structure or use complies
with these regulations and applicable laws, the Building Official can issue a
Certificate of Occupancy.
c. An application that does not require a site plan as described above shall consist of
those items that the Zoning Officer determines are necessary to review a proposal for
zoning compliance.
d. Four (4) copies of elevations and floor plans of the building to scale, and
specifications to indicate the size, kind, and quality of the proposed construction.
e. Measures to be taken to control erosion and sediment, if required, may be described
and provided for in a construction agreement and the estimated costs of accomplishing
such measures may be covered in a performance bond acceptable to the Commission.
f. Letters of approval from the Conservation Commission, Historic District
Commission, Health District, WPCA, and Water Company, as appropriate.
g. Bond estimates as required in Subsection C.
h. Intersections and driveways shall meet the intersection sight distance requirements of
AASHTO. Applicants shall determine the 85th percentile of operating speed on
existing streets by conducting a speed study or by determining the AASHTO site
distance requirements for the posted speed limit plus ten (10) miles per hour.
(2/10/06)
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIV: Administration
Page 5
B. APPROVALS
1. Special Permit.
Except as otherwise provided therein, a use allowed by special permit shall conform to all
requirements of the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located and the following
standards and conditions. A special permit may be approved, approved with conditions,
or denied by the Commission upon completion of a duly advertised and held public
hearing according to the standards specified below and elsewhere in these regulations.
a. Procedure for Approval. A public hearing for a special permit application shall be
held within sixty-five (65) days of the Commission’s receipt of said application,
unless the Commission and the applicant consent to an extension of up to sixty-five
(65) days. The public hearing associated with said application shall be no longer than
thirty-five (35) days, unless the applicant consents to an extension of up to thirty-five
(35) days. The Commission shall decide on the special permit application within
sixty-five (65) days of the close of the public hearing unless otherwise extended
according to CGS.
b. Standards for Approval. The Commission may grant a special permit after
considering the health, safety, and welfare of the public in general and the immediate
neighborhood in particular, and must find that each of the following standards is met,
and, where necessary, shall attach specific conditions to its special permit approval, if
in its opinion, such conditions are essential to making the finding that:
(1) The location and size of the proposed use; the nature and intensity of the operation
associated with the proposed use; the size, shape, and character of the site in
relation to the proposed use; and the relationship of the proposed use and site to
adjacent land uses, sites, and streets giving access to it are such that it will be in
harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it
is located.
(2) The kind, location, size, and height of all proposed structures and the nature and
extent of the proposed landscaping on the lot are such that the use will not hinder
or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent properties.
(3) The impact of the proposed use on traffic safety and circulation on nearby streets
will not be negative and the ability of such streets to adequately accommodate the
traffic to be generated by the proposed use will be adequate.
(4) The parking and loading facilities are adequate and properly located for the
proposed use, and entrance and exist driveways are laid out so as to achieve
maximum safety.
(5) The proposed use is in compliance with the Plan of Conservation and
Development.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIV: Administration
Page 6
c. Conditions of Approval. In granting a special permit, the Commission may attach
such conditions as may be required to protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare and to ensure continued compliance with these regulations. Such conditions
may include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Hours and days of operation.
(2) Maximum number of employees.
(3) Date of expiration of the special permit.
(4) Periodic review and renewal of the special permit by the Commission or the
Zoning Officer as the case may be, to determine continuing compliance.
(5) Improvements to existing public facilities to accommodate the use.
(6) Conservation restrictions necessary to protect and permanently preserve unique
natural site features.
(7) Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures.
(8) Requiring a Performance Bond for site improvements.
(9) In cases where a reasonable and necessary need for off-site improvements for
public safety purposes are demonstrated or required by the proposed development
application, and where no other property owners receive a special benefit thereby,
the Commission may require the construction of off-site improvements at the
applicant’s expense.
d. Other.
(1) A special permit shall authorize only the particular use or uses specified in the
Commission’s approval.
(2) A special permit may be amended or modified provided that application shall be
made according to Subsection A. above.
(3) No special permit shall become effective until it has been filed in the town’s land
records in accordance with the provisions of the CGS.
(4) Failure to strictly comply with the special permit conditions approved by the
Commission, as a part of the special permit shall be a violation of these
regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant, in
writing, of the specifics of the noncompliance and shall provide a reasonable time
period for compliance therewith. Unless there is full compliance within such time
period, the Commission may, following a duly advertised public hearing, rescind
and revoke such special permit.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIV: Administration
Page 7
2. Site Plan.
A site plan may be approved, approved with modifications, or denied by the Commission
within sixty-five (65) days of receipt of application, unless the applicant and the
Commission consents to one or two extensions of such time period, or the applicant
withdraws. In addition:
a. Minor revisions to an approved site plan may be approved by the Town Planner or
Zoning Officer when proposed changes are limited to landscaping, parking, finish
grading, or building additions or additional structures that are less than ten percent
(10%) of the gross floor area of the building and not to exceed 2,000 square feet in
total floor area. The Town Planner shall report all such approvals to the Commission
at its next meeting and plans indicating such changes shall be filed with the
Commission. If there is disagreement on any such issue between the staff and the
applicant, the applicant will be referred to the Commission for site plan approval.
b. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until as-built drawings in both hard copy
and in Disk/CD AutoCad format if applicable, have been submitted to the Planning
Office and are determined by the Zoning Officer to be in substantial compliance with
the approved site plan.
c. All work in connection with a site plan shall be completed within five (5) years after
the approval of the plan. Failure to complete all work within such period shall result
in automatic expiration of the approval of such site plan. The Commission may grant
one or more extensions of the time to complete all or part of the work in connection
with the site plan, provided the total extension or extensions shall not exceed ten (10)
years from the date such site plan was approved.
C. BONDING
As a condition of special permit or site plan approval, the Commission may require that the
applicant post with the town a performance bond to guarantee satisfactory completion of all
proposed site improvements (excluding buildings) shown on the approved site plan. When a
performance bond is required by the Commission, the following shall apply:
1. An itemized estimate of the cost of the site improvements shall be prepared by the
applicant and shall be submitted to the Town Engineer for approval at time of
application.
2. Before the release of a performance bond, the site shall be inspected by the Town
Engineer to determine if the required site improvements have been satisfactorily
completed in accordance with the approved site plan. Based upon these findings, the
Town Engineer, in consultation with the Town Planner, may authorize the release of such
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIV: Administration
Page 8
bond as along as the applicant has submitted as-built drawings in hard copy and
electronic format.
3. The Town Engineer shall file a quarterly report with the Commission listing all
outstanding performance bonds and those recently released under this section.
4. Performance and maintenance bonds required under this section shall:
a. Be in a form and with security satisfactory to the Commission’s Counsel; and
b. Be in the form of cash; a certified check payable to the town; a savings passbook
or certificate of deposit in the name of the town to be held in escrow by the town,
together with a letter from the applicant stating that the passbook is being
provided in accordance with the approved site plan and may be drawn against by
the town, if necessary, or an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank chartered to
conduct business in Connecticut.
D. ENFORCEMENT
1. These regulations shall be enforced by the Commission through the Zoning Enforcement
Officer or other designee, who is hereby empowered to cause any building, structure,
place or premises to be inspected and examined and to order, in writing, the remedying of
any condition found to exist therein or thereon in violation of any provisions of these
regulations or, when the violation involves grading of land or the removal of earth, to
issue in writing a cease and desist order to be effective immediately.
2. The owner or agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of these
regulations has been committed or exists; or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or
an entire premises where such violation has been committed or exists; or the owner,
agent, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or premises in which such violation has
been committed or exists; or the agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person
who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or
premises in which any such violation exists shall be subject to penalties in accordance
with the provisions of CGS Sec. 8-12, as may be amended.
3. Any person who, having been served by the Zoning Enforcement Officer with an order to
discontinue any such violation, fails to comply with such order within ten (10) days after
such service; or, having been served with a cease and desist order with respect to a
violation involving grading of land or removal of earth, fails to comply with such order
immediately; or continues to violate any provision of these regulations in the manner
named in such order shall be subject to penalties in accordance with the provisions of
CGS Sec. 8-12, as may be amended.
4. Erosion and sedimentation control inspections/enforcement shall be conducted by the
Conservation Commission or their designee.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIV: Administration
Page 9
E. ZONING AMENDMENTS
The requirements for a proposed amendment to the Zoning Regulations or Zoning Map are as
follows:
1. A completed Town of Suffield Zone Change application form with application fee and
letter of explanation of why the change is being requested.
2. Applicants requesting an amendment to the Zoning Map shall provide a preliminary site
plan for property to be developed under the proposed zone. Said plan shall show
proposed buildings and uses, parking, preliminary grading, driveway locations and other
proposed features that that will aid the Commission in its deliberations. Supporting
reports such as traffic studies, feasibility studies, compliance with the Plan of
Conservation and Development, etc., shall be submitted at the time of application to the
Commission in order to allow adequate review by the Commission and its staff. This
requirement shall not apply to proposals by the Commission.
3. A proposed amendment to the Zoning Map shall include:
a. A legal description of the area proposed to changed;
b. Four (4) prints of a map drawn to scale of not more than one (1) inch to one hundred
(100) feet showing the proposed change and the zoning district boundaries of the
Zoning Map.
c. A list, as taken from the most current Assessor’s records, containing the name, street
address, mailing address, and land use of all property owners whose property, or any
portion thereof, is within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed Zoning Map
amendment. This requirement shall not apply to comprehensive or large area
revisions as determined by the Commission.
F. FEES
All applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as established below.
1. The fees for the various permits and applications required by these Regulations are
hereby established as follows, except that the Commission and Board of Appeals may
waive all or a portion of a fee which shall be accompanied by a statement of reason.
a. Zone Change: $200.00 per acre (minimum of $400.00)
plus $60 DEEP fee.
b. Amendment to Zoning Text: $200.00 plus $60 DEEP fee.
c. Site Plan: $0.005 per square foot of disturbed area
(minimum of $200.00) plus $60 DEEP fee.
Suffield Zoning Regulations
July 12, 2004
Section XIV: Administration
Page 10
d. Site Plan Modification: $0.005 per square foot changed (minimum
of $100.00).
e. Planned Development Apartments: $400.00 plus $75.00 per unit plus $60 DEEP
fee.
f. Special Permit Use: $0.005 per square foot of disturbed area
(minimum of $400.00) plus $60 DEEP fee.
g. Special Permit Use Renewal: $100.00, except for Earth Removal
Operations where fee shall be $250.00 plus
$60 DEEP fee.
h. Subdivision/Resubdivision – New Lots:$300.00 per each building lot over two
(2) (minimum of $600.00) plus $60 DEEP
fee.
i. Subdivision/Resubdivision - $200.00 per each building lot over 2
Modification of Prior Approval: (minimum of $400.00) plus $60 DEEP fee.
j. New Road Construction: $1.00 per lineal foot.
k. Temporary Special Permit Use: $25.00.
l. Board of Appeals: $250.00 plus $60 DEEP fee.
m. Zoning Compliance Certification: $60.00 (7/01/19)
2. Financing of Special Study.
Certain applications for extraordinarily large and/or significant projects may pose
environment, traffic, and/or other problems beyond the expertise of the Commission’s
staff to evaluate and make appropriate recommendations. In such instances, if the
Commission, after reviewing the matter with its staff, reasonable concludes that an
outside, independent study or consultation is necessary for the Commission to decide the
issue before it, the Commission may require an applicant, as a condition of processing its
application, to pay for the cost of such study or consultation. In such cases, the applicant
will be required to place a sum not to exceed $10,000.00 into a fee account, the balance
of which will be returned to them after the study and/or consultation is completed.
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
0
ZONING AND PLANNING
COMMISSION
0BSUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
(Amended through February 10, 2006)
TOWN OF SUFFIELD
This pamphlet is a reprint of Appendix B, Subdivision Regulations, of the Code of Ordinances of the
Town of Suffield, Connecticut, published by order of the Board of Selectmen.
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS *
SUFFIELD, CONNECTICUT
Sec. 100 AUTHORITY ………………….……………………….……………………….. 2
Sec. 200 DEFINITIONS ……………………….……………………….………………… 2
Sec. 300 GENERAL REGULATIONS …………………………………...…..…...…….. 3
Sec. 400 FORM AND CONTENT OF PLAN ……………….……….…………………... 6
Sec. 500 (RESERVED)
Sec. 600 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ………….……………………………………... 9
Sec. 700 ACCESS TO LOTS AND ADJOINING LANDS ………….…………………. 10
Sec. 800 REQUIRED OPEN SPACES ……………….…………………………………. 12
Sec. 900 PROPOSED STREETS AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS …….………. 14
Sec. 1000 APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE ………….……………………………... 21
Sec. 1100 BONDING REQUIREMENTS ……………….……………………………….. 22
Sec. 1200 VARIANCE, AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF REGULATIONS ………... 24
Sec. 1300 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS ………………………….……………………….. 24
Appendix I FEE SCHEDULE FOR PROCESSING SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS ….. 35
* Note - Printed herein are the subdivision regulations of the Town adopted by the zoning and
planning commission on February 20, 1973 with amendments. A history note appears at the end
of each amended section indicating the date of adoption of the amendment.
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
2
APPENDIX B
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SUFFIELD, CONNECTICUT
100. AUTHORITY AND GENERAL REGULATIONS
The Zoning and Planning Commission of the Town of Suffield, pursuant to the provisions of
Section 7 of 1.949 Special Act No. 528, an Act Establishing a Zoning and Planning Commission
for the Town of Suffield, hereby adopts the following regulations as the Subdivision Regulations
of the Town of Suffield. These regulations may be amended from time to time in accordance
with the procedure outlined in the general statutes. The following regulations shall supersede
any subdivision regulations heretofore adopted which may be inconsistent herewith, which
inconsistent regulations are hereby repealed. These regulations and any amendments thereto
shall become effective on the twentieth (20th) day after publication of their adoption as provided
in General Statutes Section 9-28, as the same may be amended from time to time.
200. DEFINITIONS
201. Applicant: Any person, firm or corporation or partnership who shall apply to the omission
for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision either for himself or itself or as agent for himself
or itself or as agent for others.
202. Commission: The Zoning and Planning Commission of the Town of Suffield.
203. Cul-de-sac: The turn-around portion of a dead-end street. (6/25/01)
204. Date of Submission: The date of receipt as defined in General Statutes Section 8-7d, as the
same may be amended from time to time.
205. Dead-End Street or Dead-End Street System: A Street or connected series of streets with
its only means of entrance and exit through one common point. (6/25/01)
206. Gradient: The number of feet rise in 100 feet of horizontal distance, expressed as percent.
207. Resubdivision: "Resubdivision" as the same is defined in General Statutes Section 8-18, as
the same may be amended from time to time: which word is defined at the date this regulation is
enacted as follows: "Resubdivision" shall mean a change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision or resubdivision if such change:
(a) Affects any street layout shown on such map;
(b) Affects any area reserved for public use; or
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
3
(c) Diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon, and creates an additional building lot, if any
of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map.
208. Street: Any way which is an existing Town or State Highway or any way shown on a
recorded subdivision map duly approved by the Town Zoning and Planning Commission, or any
map duly recorded and approved prior to the adoption of Subdivision Regulations. (4/2/90)
209. Subdivider: The owner of record at the time of filing of an approved subdivision plan.
210. Subdivision: "Subdivision" as the same is defined in General Statutes Section 8-18, as the
same may be amended from time to time: which word is defined at the date this regulation is
enacted as follows "Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land into three or
more parts or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development,
expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes, and
includes resubdivision.
211. Zoning Regulations mean those zoning regulations which are in effect when the Final Plan
for a subdivision is filed with the Commission.
300. GENERAL REGULATIONS
301. No subdivision of land shall be made until a plan for such subdivision has been approved
by the Commission.
302. Should a developer have built upon the same tract or parcel of land two or more houses, or
have divided said tract or parcel of land into three or more lots, and it seems otherwise evident to
the Commission that he is in fact developing a subdivision even though no application for said
subdivision has been made, the Commission may declare said tract or parcel a subdivision and
require the developer to make application as required in these regulations, unless the developer
can reasonably prove to the Commission that his actions do not constitute a subdivision. Failure
to follow the action of this Commission shall make the developer liable to appropriate penalties
as indicated in Paragraph 303 of these regulations, and no further building permits will be
granted to said tract until the developer has complied.
303. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision of land without the
approval of the Commission shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars for each lot sold or
offered for sale or so subdivided. The Town may enjoin such action by a subdivider by action
for injunction and/or may recover such penalty by civil action; the remedies shall be cumulative,
not alternative. (12/17/90)
304. Land to be subdivided: Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used
for residential purposes without danger to health and safety. Land not to be subdivided for
residential purpose includes land that:
(a) Is subject to flooding;
(b) Cannot be adequately sewered;
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
4
(c) Could be a hazard to public health, safety, welfare, property or life of present or future
residents;
(d) Is classified as wetlands which cannot be used for construction purposes as determined by
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency. (4/7/80)
305. All subdivision plans must conform to the Zoning Regulations of the Town and to the
subdivision regulations herewith prescribed, and they shall be guided in their layout by the Plan
of Development covering the area involved, before receiving final approval.
306. Lot sizes and geography
(a) The size of lots shall be as required by the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Suffield,
and the dimensions, shape, orientation and ground conditions of each lot or parcel shall be
conducive to its maximum usefulness.
(b) Land of such geophysical nature, that in its present state, cannot safely be used for
building purposes because of hazards such as danger to health, peril from fire or flood,
inadequacy of public drainage systems, difficult site drainage, temporary flooding, erosion,
steep slopes, or any other condition deemed by the Commission to make the land unfit for
building purposes, shall not be approved for residential subdivision unless the Commission is
satisfied that the proposed engineering for treatment of the site will eliminate such hazards.
(c) Larger lot sizes than the minimum under the zoning regulations may be required by the:
Commission in areas to be served by private sewage disposal systems where adverse soil or
topographic conditions make such necessary in order to meet the requirements of the Director
of Public Health.
307. Existing Streets
Relationship to existing Streets: Proposed subdivisions and any proposed streets therein shall be
planned to coordinate with existing streets as follows:
(a) Abutting streets: Proposed subdivisions abutting an existing Town street or a State
highway shall provide for proper widening of the right-of-way of such street or highway to the
width appropriate for the classification given such street or highway by the Commission.
Provision shall also be made for improvements in the travel way as to width, grade and
alignment (vertical and horizontal), base, drainage and pavement as, in the opinion of the
Commission, may be necessary for the creation of the subdivision.
(b) Access: Any proposed street in a subdivision shall connect to an existing Town Street or
State highway or to another street in the proposed subdivision or to a street in another
subdivision approved by the Commission where the applicant has access rights.
(c) Suitability of access: The existing street to which the proposed subdivision street connects
shall be of sufficient width and have a suitable travel way, grade and alignment as determined
by the Commission to provide adequate access for fire protection, other emergency, utility and
high-way maintenance services to the subdivision and sufficient to accept the traffic to be
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
5
generated by the proposed subdivision street without undue hazards to vehicles and
pedestrians. (5/21/90)
308. Waivers
Where conditions exist which affect the subject land and are not generally applicable to other
land in the area and where strict conformity to these subdivision regulations would cause undue
hardship to the landowner or where the particular requirement of the subdivision regulation
would not be of benefit to the public, then such requirement may be modified or waived by the
Commission provided that no waiver shall be granted that would have significant adverse effect
on adjacent property or on the public health and safety. All requests for modifications or waivers
shall be submitted in writing and must receive a three-quarters vote of all the members of the
Commission.
Each waiver or modification of the requirements shall be voted upon separately and the reasons
for each such modification or waiver shall be entered in the records of the Commission and noted
on the subdivision plan prior to affixing signatures for filing.
Waivers may be granted or modifications approved for the following:
(a) Installation of sidewalks: Where the Commission finds that such facilities will serve no
useful purpose.
(b) Open space: Where the amount of land to be set aside would be insignificant or lot sizes
are to such size that common open space would be superfluous.
(c) Curbs and gutters: Where subdivision lots are on existing streets that have adequate
drainage, pavement and proper grading to make such improvements unnecessary or on new
streets where topography or other physical factors make such improvements nonessential.
(d) Design standards: Minor deviations to engineering standards due to physical
characteristics of the land or problems created by existing improvements may be permitted
provided that resulting design changes are minimal.
(e) Other waivers as provided. (4/11/88)
309. The Commission may prescribe the extent to which and the manner in which streets shall
be graded and improved and public utilities and services provided and in lieu of the completion
of such work and installations previous to the final approval of a plan, the Commission may
accept a bond in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it scouring the Town
the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities within a period
specified in the bond. The Commission, in lieu of the completion of the work and installations
referred to herein, previous to the final approval of a plan, may provide for the assessment or the
method whereby the Town is put in an assured position to do such work and make such
installations at the expense of the owners of the property within the subdivision.
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
6
400. FORM AND CONTENTS OF PLAN OF SUBDIVISION
401. No plan of subdivision shall be approved unless it is drawn on sheets of permanent
transparent drafting material not larger than 24" by 36" and to a scale of 1 " = 40'. Prior to filing
the plan of subdivision the owner shall also submit four (4) copies reproduced by black and
white print or similar process, and one permanent transparency. The plan shall contain the
following statement: "The Subdivision Regulations of the Suffield Town Zoning and Planning
Commission are a part of this plan, and approval of this plan is contingent on completion of all
the requirements of said Subdivision Regulations, excepting only any variances or
modifications made in writing by the Suffield Town Zoning and Planning Commission, and
attached hereto," together with the following information: (12/5/77)
(a) Name of record owner of land;
(b) Name of subdivision, if any, and sub-divider;
(c) Certificate of registered professional engineer and/or land surveyor;
(d) North point, scale of map and date;
(e) Boundary lines of subdivision and accurate distances and bearings shall conform to Class
A-2 Transit Survey as set forth in the Code of Connecticut Technical Council, Inc.;
(f) Names and addresses of abutting property owners within two-hundred (200) feet of
property line (including across the street) according to the most recent Assessor’s records. A
separate list of these abutters/addresses shall be submitted as part of the subdivision
application; (11/19/04)
(g) Layouts of lots, showing accurate dimensions, angles, building lines, and zone or zones,
and location of any monuments or markers to be placed at corners or angles of all lots.
Dimensions of lots on curved streets shall be given in arc lengths;
(h) Accurate location and description of monuments to be placed at corners and angles of all
streets, at all curvature, and points of tangency of curved streets, with accurate reference to
some existing recognized governmental monument or marker;
(i) Layout of existing streets and proposed new streets, easements, rights-of-way including
those for utilities, sewers, and drainages, either on or off site, open spaces reserved for parks,
playgrounds, or other common or public uses. Bearings and dimensions shall be accurate, and
shall include arc length, radius, and central angle of all curves. The map at scale one inch
equals five hundred (500) feet locating the subdivision within the surrounding proposed and
existing street system;
(k) Locations and outlines of all existing buildings within or two hundred (200) feet adjacent
to the proposed subdivision, and all wetlands, waterways, and other significant site features,
including stone walls, fences, trees 24 inches in diameter measured four (4) feet above the
ground, wooded areas, rock ridges and outcroppings on the site; (6/25/01)
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
7
(l) A tabular summary which includes: (6/25/01)
1. The proposed and required lot area and frontage for each lot required by the Zoning
Regulations;
2. The total land area, including ratio of wetlands to non-wetlands;
3. The percentage and area of proposed open space to be included in the subdivision,
including the ratio of wetlands to non-wetlands;
4. The average lot area (in square foot) proposed in the FRD.
402. Additional accompanying statements and data required as part of the “Subdivision Plan”:
(6/25/01)
(a) At least one test hole per lot or more if there appears to be considerable variation in
subsurface conditions shall be dug to determine soil conditions for drainage. Seepage tests,
made in accordance with the procedure recommended by the State Health Department will be
required in areas served by subsurface sewage disposal systems. The statement of a registered
professional engineer showing results of these tests, and soil conditions, shall be attached;
(b) The location of all existing and proposed sanitary and storm water sewers, catch basins,
manholes, bridges, and culverts. Invert elevations of all drainage structures shall be shown;
(c) Methods of proposed sanitary sewerage, methods of storm water drainage into existing
sewers or into existing natural watercourse, method of supplying water;
(d) Methods of dedication of proposed easements, rights-of-way, and open spaces which may
be required in Sections 604, 605, 801, and 802, and shall contain a written acknowledgment of
the developers responsibility for maintenance, and the assumption by him of liability for
injuries and damages that may occur on any land to be dedicated for public use, until such
land has been legally accepted by the Town of Suffield;
(e) Final street plan profiles drawn in ink on plan profile paper at scales of one inch equals 40
feet horizontally and one inch equals four feet vertically: one print on a stable transparent
material, and four black line prints on white paper;
(f) Contours, in sufficient detail to show general topography, watercourses and drains. In
general, contours shall be shown at no less than two (2) foot intervals; (6/25/01)
(g) Flow-line elevations for all brooks shall be given at one hundred (100) foot stations and
the location and size of all culverts shall be given;
(h) Approved plan of the Suffield Conservation Commission concerning Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses; (4/11/88)
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
8
(i) Approved plan of the Suffield Conservation Commission for Erosion and Sediment
Control; (4/11/88)
(j) Report of the North Central Health District concerning septic systems and/or wells if
proposed; (4/11/88)
(k) A street lighting plan; (4/11/88)
(1) A one hundred (100) scale plan which shows the following:
1. All property lines as they abut the outside perimeter of the subdivided tract together
with the outside perimeter dimensions and bearings for description purposes;
2. All proposed lot lines and lot numbers without dimensions, together with easements,
rights-to-drain, open space, conservation easements, slope rights and power and
utility easements (permanent or temporary);
3. All utilities and associated structures including storm water drainage systems (and
curtain drains if any), sanitary sewer system, if any, public water systems, if any,
(including) hydrants; shown graphically to scale with appropriate symbols, structure
numbers, pipe sizes and length of run, percent of grades, but no top of frame or invert
elevations;
4. A transparency of number three (3) above to which shall be added drainage areas
from off-site contributing to site and leaving the site (pre-and-post subdivision),
drainage areas contributing to each inlet structure; all of which shall be coordinated
with an attached detailed storm water drainage analysis and computations; (4/11/88)
(m) A tree plan shall be prepared which shows the location and species of proposed street
trees located outside of the street right-of-way line of existing or proposed streets
approximately ten (10) feet from said right-of-way. Street trees shall be required at a
minimum of forty (40) feet apart on both sides of all streets, shall be not less than three (3)
inches in caliper measured four (4) feet above grade, and shall be a variety of non-invasive
species; (6/25/01)
(n) To facilitate the review of the subdivision plan, at the time of filing, the applicant shall
stake the centerline of all proposed streets no greater than every one hundred (100) feet with
the center line station as marked on the plans. An application shall be considered incomplete
without staking; (6/25/01)
(o) A plan showing the general location of proposed buildings (building envelope) and
driveways for each lot; (6/25/01)
(p) Four (4) full-size copies of all plans and supporting materials, and eight (8) half-size
reductions of all plans; (6/25/01)
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
9
(q) Upon completion of construction and prior to final acceptance by the Town, the
applicant shall provide final as-built drawings submitted on mylar transparencies and in
Disk/CD AutoCad format; (6/25/01)
(r) A report containing the final decision of the Suffield Conservation Commission for
subdivision involving regulated activities under the Suffield Inland Wetlands and Water
Courses Regulations. (2/15/02)
403. Index map
If more than one (1) sheet is required to show the entire subdivision, one print on a stable tracing
material and four black line prints on white paper of a map showing the entire street system at a
scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet shall also be submitted.
404. Resubdivision
Necessity to provide information: All plans of resubdivision shall include sufficient information
to enable the recorded original subdivision plan to be identified in the Town records.
Requirements and procedures of subdivision shall normally be followed for all resubdivisions.
405. Master development sketch
Where all land proposed for development or land under ownership of applicant is not included in
the proposal, a master development sketch shall accompany the original submission. This
sketch, at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet, shall show proposed rightsof-
way and lot layout. Additional information may be required by the Commission where any
part of the subdivision would be affected by development of another part. Sections in proposed
order of development shall be labeled with Roman numerals and each section shall be applied for
and processed individually.
500. (Reserved)
600. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISION OF LAND
601. An adequate subsurface storm water drainage system shall be provided unless, in the
opinion of the Commission, the natural topography and/or easy access to natural watercourses
make storm drains unnecessary. Drainage plans shall be based on seepage tests made in a
sufficient number of test holes by a professional engineer, whose data shall be submitted to the
Commission with the drainage plans.
602. In the case of subdivisions to which water, sewers and/or electric street lighting are to be
furnished from a public source, all necessary mains, branch offsets to each lot, fire hydrants and
street lighting equipment shall be installed as approved by the corporation or municipal
department having jurisdiction.
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
10
603. The Commission may impose reasonable and necessary conditions in connection with the
approval of subdivision plans.
604. Where it is necessary to discharge water from a public right-of-way across private land is
not included in the subdivision, the developer shall obtain from the owners of said private lands
an agreement which grants to the Town of Suffield a right to permanently discharge water across
said lands, and shall submit copies of said agreements to the Commission at the time of
application for subdivision plan approval.
605. Where it is necessary to drain a public highway across lands included in the subdivision,
the plans shall provide an easement for the discharge of water in favor of the Town of Suffield.
The location of such easements shall be satisfactory to the Commission.
606. Easements shall be obtained prior to subdivision plan approval. Subject to utility design
standards, the following minimum easement widths shall apply:
(a) Sanitary – twenty (20) feet;
(b) Storm – twenty-five (25) feet;
(c) As approved for all other purposes.
607. Metal boundary-marker pins shall be permanently established at the corners of each lot. If
it is impractical to establish pins at a corner, reference pins shall be established on the lot line as
close as possible to the corner.
608. Metal boundary-marker pins shall be permanently established to define all easements.
609. Agriculture buffers shall be established adjacent to actively farmed land in accordance with
Sec. 804 of these Regulations and shall be identified on the subdivision plan. Interior boundaries
shall be identified in the field by metal boundary-marker pins placed on the lot lines. (11/9/87)
610. Street signs, in accordance with Town standards, shall be provided and installed by the
developer. Where the Chief of Police determines the traffic signs are warranted, said signs shall
be provided by and installed by the, developer in accordance with Town and/or State standards.
(4/11/88)
700. ACCESS TO LOTS AND ADJOINING LANDS
Land shall not be subdivided in such a manner as to prejudice the possibility of further
subdivision of the land or of the convenient subdivision of adjoining lands.
(a) There shall be direct access to each lot from a public street; (4/21/90)
(b) There shall be access provided by street-width reserve parcels to allow further subdivision
of the lands and to provide access into adjoining lands. The location of the access reserve
parcels shall be determined by the Commission, and any such reserve parcel shall be
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
11
designated as a future street on all subdivision plans. The Commission may require the
developer to deed to the Town said reserve parcels, or otherwise give rights to said parcels;
(c) Reserve strips controlling access to land dedicated or to be dedicated to public use will not
generally be permitted, nor will reserve strips of land which may prove to be un-taxable for
improvements be permitted.
701. Preservation of natural features.
Due regard shall be given to the preservation and potential enhancement of natural features, large
trees, scenic points, and other assets of a community nature.
(a) All watercourses shall be protected during the construction stage of the subdivision, and
shall be left in a condition satisfactory to the Town Engineer or his authorized representative;
(b) No watercourse shall be disturbed, re-routed or otherwise altered unless approved by the
Suffield Conservation Commission and the Town Engineer and all other local, State and/or
Federal requirements are satisfied. (5/9/88)
702. Dedication of streets
Approval of a final subdivision plan shall not constitute an acceptance by the Town of any street,
as defined in Section 207, included in the plan. However, the filing of an approved final
subdivision plan in the office of the Town Clerk shall constitute an irrevocable offer of
dedication to the Town for acceptance as a street of any land shown as a street on said plan. Said
offer of dedication shall be binding upon the owner of said land, his heirs, successors and
assigns.
703. Flexible Residential Development (FRD)
For subdivisions proposed in the R-90 and R-45 and R-25 zones on parcels of ten (10) or more
acres with five (5) or more lots, or for those choosing to utilize Flexible Residential
Development subdivision procedure, reference is made to Section VI of the Zoning Regulations.
(6/25/01)
704. Undergrounding of Utilities
All utilities shall be placed underground wherever new streets are installed. Undergrounding of
utilities shall be required in general, unless specifically waived by the Commission. Location
shall be in accordance with Town standards.
705. Provision of buffer strips
The Commission may regulate the location and orientation of lots along existing streets for
public safety and may require the installation of planting strips along existing streets for the
purpose of providing buffer screens for present or future residences abutting such streets.
(4/7/80)
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
12
800. REQUIRED OPEN SPACES
801. The Commission shall require such open spaces for passive or active recreation as it may
deem proper. Areas shall be conveniently accessible to all lots and shall be accessible from
public ways. Land reserved for such purposes shall be of suitable area, dimensions, topography
and natural character for the purpose intended. The Commission may require that the area or
areas so reserved shall be located and laid out for use in conjunction with similar areas of
adjoining subdivisions or of probable future subdivisions or as part of additions to areas shown
in the Plan of Development for open space uses. Areas reserved for park or playground purposes
shall not contain less than one acre of land, but may be part of a similar area in an adjoining
subdivision so that the total area is not less than one acre, unless otherwise specifically approved
by the Commission. Land to be reserved for open space purposes shall amount to twenty (20)
percent of the gross area of the subdivision. Land so reserved shall be graded to properly dispose
of surface water and shall be left in condition for the purposes intended, as required by the
Commission. Should the Commission determine that an open area should be fenced; such
fencing shall be installed and paid for by the developer. (11/9/87, 12/18/00, 6/25/01)
802. In order to permit the subdivision of land most suitable for residential use; to preserve for
farming, land most suitable for such use; and to accomplish the purpose of the requirements for
public open lands.
(a) When part of a parcel of land under one ownership, is to be subdivided for residential use
and the balance of such parcel is to be reserved for farming or future development;
(b) When the required open spaces may be properly and more advantageously located in that
part of such parcel of land not immediately to be developed;
(c) When the proposed plan, Section 402(a), shows all the land in such parcel, and either a
tentative layout of future subdivision or the adequacy of the balance of the parcel to provide
for future open spaces for the entire parcel;
(d) When the developer shall agree to dedicate an area of land in the undeveloped portion of
such parcel equal to the requirements for open spaces in the developed portion or portions and
shall grant to the Town an option to accept such dedication when such undeveloped portion is
hereafter subdivided.
Then the Commission may waive the requirement for the immediate provision of open spaces in
a subdivision which is part of a larger parcel of land.
803. Land dedicated as permanently preserved open space shall by legal instrument approved by
the Commission be by one (1) or more of the following: (6/25/01)
(a) Deeded to the Town of Suffield;
(b) In the form of a conservation easement;
(c) Deeded to the Suffield Land Conservancy or similar non-profit organization;
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
13
(d) Deeded to the State Department of Environmental Protection with a conservation
easement;
(e) In the form of an agricultural easement;
(f) Deeded to a homeowners’ association.
803.1. Such legal instrument shall:
(a) Provide that no structure may be erected on such open land except that which is approved
by the Commission;
(b) Provide that the Town of Suffield, its agents, servants and employees may, without
liability, enter upon such land and remove, or cause to be removed, any thing, object or
condition which may be deemed to be a nuisance or in the nature of a nuisance.
803.2. If a homeowners association is established, it must be legally established and fulfill the
following requirements:
(a) The association must be established prior to filing of the approved subdivision plan;
(b) Membership must be mandatory for each homebuyer and any successive buyer and
recorded in all deeds;
(c) Open space restrictions must be permanent and not just for a given period of years;
(d) The association must be responsible for liability insurance, taxes and the maintenance of
recreational and other facilities;
(e) Homeowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost of the assessment levied by the
Town or same may become a lien upon the delinquent member's house, lot and share of the
open space in that subdivision;
(f) The instrument establishing the association must be submitted for approval by the
Commission as part of the subdivision application;
(g) Each lot owner shall own a proportionate share of the common open space shown on the
subdivision plan and a statement to that effect shall be indicated on said plan. (4/7/80)
804. Open space fee
In lieu of providing open space the Commission may accept a fee equivalent to ten percent
(10%) of the fair market value of the land to be subdivided. The fair market value shall be
determined by an appraiser jointly selected by the Commission and the applicant (cost to be born
by applicant). A developer shall be exempted from payment of such fee if twenty percent (20%)
of the total housing units to be constructed in the subdivision is affordable housing. Also
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
14
exempted are transfers of subdivision, of less than five (5) parcels to a parent, child, brother,
sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, or first cousin for no consideration. Fees shall be
held by the Town Treasurer in a fund reserved for the preservation or acquisition of open space.
(12/17/90, 2/25/91)
805. Agriculture buffer strips
Buffers adjacent to actively farmed land shall be established in residential subdivisions. Said
buffer strips, when required shall be no less than thirty (30) feet in width and may be required up
to a width of one hundred (100) feet, (depending on the type of agriculture or farm use, the
topography and the proposed design and planting of such strip). It shall be the responsibility of
the developer, subject to approval by the Commission, to provide an effective barrier that will
reasonably protect adjacent residential living areas from dust and spray drift. It shall be the
responsibility of individual lot owners where such buffers are established on their lots, to
maintain the buffer in accordance with the designed intent. Such responsibility shall be
specifically noted on the subdivision plan and in the deeds of affected lots. Where a buffer strip
is part of a common open space: the responsibility for maintenance will be assumed by a
Homeowners Association or by other arrangement that is acceptable to the Commission.
In addition, the following statement shall be noted on the subdivision plan: "This property abuts
or is in proximity of an active agricultural or farming operation which is a permitted zoning use.
Agricultural operations sometimes emit noise, run-off, odor, dust or chemical spray drift during
either the day or night that are annoying or irritants to some people. (11/19/04)
If abutting actively farmed land comes under development then these requirements are voided.
(11/9/87)
806. Aircraft Noise
Properties lying within or partially within the sixty-five (65) decibel or higher noise exposure
contours (as shown on the Bradley International Noise Abatement Maps) as amended, applicant
shall be required to provide warnings to potential buyer. Said warnings shall be, at minimum,
noted on the subdivision plan and shall be placed in the deed of each property transferred for
residential use. The warning shall state that: "This property lies within or partially within the
sixty-five (65) decibel noise exposure contour for Bradley International Airport as depicted on
map dated ____. Aircraft noise experienced may be annoying to some people or detrimental to
their well being." (2/16/98)
900. PROPOSED STREETS AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
901. Street design standards
(a) Streets in each subdivision shall be laid out so as to provide for continuation of the
principal streets adjoining or entering the subdivision and/or for the proper production of
streets in the proposed subdivision into adjoining land where there are no existing streets.
Said streets shall be laid out so as to maintain harmony with existing or proposed
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
15
thoroughfares shown in any plan of development for the Town adopted by the Commission.
They shall be so arranged and of such width as to provide an adequate and convenient system
for present and prospective traffic needs, and special attention shall be given to assure safe
intersections with present and proposed thoroughfares;
(b) Streets designated to accommodate presently or at any future time traffic other than that of
the immediate neighborhood shall be indicated as secondary thoroughfares and if required by
the Commission shall be not less than sixty (60) feet wide. Principal thoroughfares as
indicated on the Town Plan shall be of such width as the Commission may deem necessary.
All other streets shall be not less than fifty (50) feet wide. Thoroughfares shall have grades
not greater than five (5%) percent and the curves of radii not less than three hundred (300)
feet, measured at the centerline.
902. Ingress and egress
Normally a subdivision shall have two means of ingress and egress. In the case of physical or
other hardship, the Commission shall determine whether a subdivision will require two entrances
and exits or a divided roadway for safety purposes. (5/9/88)
903. Streets shall be built to establish Town of Suffield standards, but streets which may be used
as secondary to principal thoroughfares, may be required to have pavement of greater than
minimum width. Such requirement will be determined by the Commission after pre-application
scrutiny.
904. Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, where required in the opinion of the Commission, shall be
constructed in accordance with the specifications of the Town of Suffield.
905. Dead-End Streets or Dead-End Street Systems will only be allowed under the following
conditions:
(a) To provide access to undeveloped rear land surrounded by subdivided land, or to solve a
topographic problem;
(b) The turn-around diameter of the cul-de-sac right-of-way shall be at least one hundred-ten
(110) feet, and shall have a minimum pavement radius of forty-five (45) feet to the outside
curb;
(c) A dead-end street or dead-end-street system(s) shall be limited to twelve-hundred (1,200)
feet as measured from the edge of the connecting street to the center of the proposed cul-desac
unless waived by the Commission for severe topographic reasons or for the purpose of
fulfilling Subdivision Regulation Sec. 801 when said street has public water and has no more
than a total of thirteen (13) lots in the R-90 zone, fifteen (15) lots in the R-45 zone, or twenty
(20) lots in the R-25 zone. (11/19/04)
906. Minimum gradient for streets with curbs and gutters shall be not less than 1.0 percent.
Maximum gradient shall not be generally more than ten (10%) percent.
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
16
907. Street line deflections will require an inside radius of at least seventy-five (75) feet.
908. Street intersections shall be straight line intersections and as nearly at right angles as
possible, and in no case shall be less than sixty (60) degrees. Intersection right-of-way lines at
street intersections shall be connected by a curve of at least twenty-five (25) foot radius.
909. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than two hundred (200) feet shall be prohibited.
910. Proposed street names are subject to approval of the Commission. No street name in use in
Suffield shall be used, and no street name phonetically similar to any street name in use in
Suffield shall be used.
911. Lot and block standards
(a) Each subdivision lot must front on an approved street at least fifty (50) feet in width
(unless it fronts on a State Highway marginal access street), whether the street is private or
public. An existing street shall have adequate right-of-way width, suitable road surface, and
suitable drainage for increased traffic;
(b) Block width shall not be less than two hundred-forty (240) feet, and block lengths shall
not generally be longer than one thousand-two hundred (1200) feet, nor less than six hundred
(600) feet. In blocks longer than one thousand (1000) feet; pedestrian crosswalks may be
required to serve community facilities such as schools or shopping centers. Such walkways
shall not be less than ten (10) feet wide and shall be straight from street to street with fencing
on each side and walks installed.
912. Engineering and Construction
(a) All engineering and construction shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Town of Suffield Engineering Standards and Specifications, as the same may be amended
from time to time, which standards and specifications are on file in the Commission's office
and available for inspection during regular business hours of said office;
(b) The developer shall be required to carry away by pipe or open ditch, based on
recommendations of the Town Engineer, any spring water that may exist. The developer shall
have designed by a licensed professional engineer a storm water drainage system that shall
contain where necessary, culvers, catch basins, head walls, storm sewers and other structures
or facilities suitable to give the streets and adjacent lots proper drainage. It will be the
responsibility of the developer to install an adequate storm water drainage system which will
handle the runoff from a fifty (50) year storm;
(c) A culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to accommodate
potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the
subdivision. Size of facility based upon potential development and anticipated runoff from a
fifty (50) year storm shall be subject to approval by the Town Engineer. The culvert or
drainage facility from the subdivision shall continue to a natural watercourse;
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
17
(d) Downstream drainage effect of each proposed subdivision outside the area of the
subdivision shall also be calculated. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident
to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility
during a fifty (50) year storm, the Commission shall not approve the subdivision until the
subdivider has made such provision for the improvement of such potential condition as the
Commission deems reasonable to require of the subdivider. The Commission shall notify the
chief administrative officer of the Town of such potential condition where facilities may be
involved prior to final approval;
(e) Where a subdivision of land proposes building lots on an existing approved road, or where
the tract of land to be subdivided presently receives storm water drainage from an existing
road or watercourse, it will be the responsibility of the developer to provide an approved
storm water drainage system suitable to give the existing road and adjacent lots of the
proposed subdivision proper drainage;
(f) The engineering and construction in the field shall be in accordance with plans which have
been approved by the Commission, except that filed changes may be authorized by the Town
Engineer or his authorized representative;
(g) The site shall be graded in accordance with plans which have been approved by the
Commission, except that field changes may be authorized by the Town Engineer or his
authorized representative, provided that the drainage characteristics of the site are maintained.
The grading of the land on each lot shall be such that each lot is adequately drained;
(h) When building storm sewers are constructed prior to house construction, the piping shall
be installed to a point not less than six (6) feet within the lot if sidewalks are proposed;
(i) The construction in the field shall be carried on with a minimum of nuisance to the general
public, and effective measures shall be taken to reduce the hazards of dust and flooding;
(j) Safety precautions and measures shall be implemented during the construction to protect
the public against hazards which may be caused by construction machinery and heavy
equipment, earthmoving, erosion slopes, excavated holes and similar construction works;
(k) Adequate environmental protection is to be achieved, in part, through recommendation of
the Hartford County Soil and Water Conservation District. Data concerning soil
characteristics of the parcel of land to be subdivided shall be submitted in written form with
an overlay indicating soils classification. Test pit data may be part of the subdivision;
(l) Stumps, logs, branches or other construction debris such as scrap lumber, metal, concrete,
asphalt or other discarded material shall be removed from the construction site. In no case
shall such material be buried or left on the site. This requirement shall not prohibit the use of
wood chips or like products for mulching or other landscape purposes. (4/11/88)
913. Sanitary sewage
Sanitary sewage disposal: Provision shall be made for Sanitary Sewage disposal as follows:
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
18
(a) Where a subdivision in the opinion of the Commission is within a reasonable distance of
an existing sewer line, a complete sanitary sewer system shall be installed and connected to
the existing Town sewers by the developer or subdivider. Said sanitary sewer systems shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the Suffield Sewer Commission's Regulations
and Specifications for Housing Developments as adopted. October 1966, as the same may be
amended from time to time. A copy of the regulations can be obtained at the Office of the
Suffield Sewer Commission located in the Suffield Town Hall;
(b) Where a subdivision is located beyond the range of an existing sewer, but is in an area
planned to be served by a future extension of the sewer system, the subdivider shall install a
complete capped sanitary sewer system and shall make provisions for a future house sewer
lateral connection from the street sewer to each dwelling. He shall provide a surety bond,
based on the estimated cost of installing a capped sewer system in all streets of the
subdivision to cover the cost of installing such sewers at the subdivider's expense. The
capped Sanitary Sewer System shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
Suffield Sewer Commission Regulations and Specifications for Housing Developments as
adopted October 1966; as the same may be amended from time to time. Under such
conditions septic tank systems shall also be installed to serve each dwelling;
(c) Where a subdivision is located in any area of the Town to which future extension of the
sewer system is not planned, septic tank systems shall be used in accordance with current
State Sanitary Code Regulations. Lots to be served by septic tank systems shall contain
sufficient land of proper character to permit satisfactory performance of septic tank disposal
fields. (In general: where public water supply is available such lots shall have an area of at
least one-half (1/2) acre; where both private sewage disposal system and a well are to be
located on the same lot, such lot should have at least one acre. These areas may be reduced,
but not less than the minimum requirements for the zone, where the subdivider submits a
certificate of a licensed sanitary engineer stating that the facilities as planned can be safely
accommodated on each lot.) The Commission may require a report from a licensed Sanitary
Engineer demonstrating that a suitable sanitary waste system can be provided on each lot for
the proposed subdivision where lots are not to be served by public sewers.
914. Commercial pipelines
Subdivision of land upon which there exists high pressure pipelines shall show either on the
subdivision plan or on supplementary maps signed by a licensed surveyor or engineer suitable
for filing with the Town Clerk, the exact location of the pipeline as actually located by the
surveyor or engineer signing the map. This location map shall also show along the centerline of
the pipe, vertical profiles of the pipe and the existing terrain. The following requirements are
considered as minimum requirements to lessen hazards of such pipelines:
(a) Building set back lines on both sides of such pipelines and forty (40) feet distant from the
centerline of pipe shall be established;
(b) Where septic tanks are to be utilized, such septic tanks and all appurtenances and
connections shall be on the same side of the pipeline as is the building they will serve;
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
19
(c) Proposed streets shall cross such pipelines at right angles or nearly so. In such street
crossings, the pipe shall be enclosed in a casing which at least meets the requirements of the
specifications in American Petroleum Institute (API) Code No. 1102 issued by the API
entitled "Recommended Practice on Form of Agreement and Specifications For Pipe Line
Crossings Under Railroad Tracks" except that the minimum distance from the top of the
casing to the proposed road surface shall be four feet, six inches and its casing shall extend the
fall width of the right-of-way.
915. Fire hydrants
(a) Fire hydrants shall be installed at the developer's expense in all subdivisions serviced by a
public water system; (4/11/88)
(b) In residential subdivisions the hydrants shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding one
thousand (1000) feet, unless a greater space between hydrants is approved by the Fire Marshal
or his authorized representative;
(c) In no event shall the distance between a hydrant and any house location in a subdivision
exceed five hundred (500) feet;
(d) In retail business subdivisions the hydrants shall be placed at intervals not exceeding five
hundred (500) feet, unless a greater space between hydrants is approved by the Fire Marshall
or his authorized representative.
916. Monuments
All monuments shown on the final plan shall be installed. They shall be reinforced concrete, not
less than four (4) inches square and four (4) feet long with brass or copper plug or drill hole with
cross marking the center of the four (4) inch square, all set flush with proposed grades. Except
that markers indicating lot boundaries may be iron pins one (1) inch inside diameter, four (4) feet
long.
917. Passive solar design
An applicant for a residential subdivision shall demonstrate to the Commission that in
developing the plan, the uses of passive solar energy techniques were considered. The purpose
of such techniques is meant to encourage energy conservation; primarily by taking advantage of
southerly exposures to the maximum extent possible. By proper lot design and house
orientation, a wider range of choices are made available to the future owner regarding building
design alternatives which can maximize the solar access advantage. The passive solar energy
techniques considered shall as a minimum include:
(a) House orientation: In order to take maximum advantage of the winter sun for heating
purposes, a building's longest plane would be positioned no more than thirty (30) degree’s off
the east/west axis (see diagram below). For the Commission's consideration and for the
information of the future lot owner, the subdivision plan will show house orientations which
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
20
would provide the best solar access. Such information shall be included as supporting data on
a separate plan as called for under Sec. 402.;
(b) Street and lot layout: Street patterns and lot lines generally determine building orientation.
Where no topographic constraints exist, streets shall have east/west orientation to the greatest
extent possible, preferably within thirty (30) degree’s of the east/west axis. Where this
orientation is not possible or desirable, side lot lines adjacent to intercardinally positioned
streets are encouraged to be placed as close as possible to the north/south axis (see sketch
below);
(c) Vegetation trees can serve as valuable tools in conserving energy in residential, buildings.
If existing plant materials serve as wind barriers at the north or northwest of homes, they
should be retained. Street trees should be planted by type and location to avoid conflict with a
building's southern exposure;
(d) Natural and man-made topographical features: Adequate solar orientation is dependent
upon the slope of the land. When open space is part of a subdivision proposal, consideration
shall be given to placing this area on north facing slopes not conducive to good solar
orientation. Consideration shall be given to the placement of lots on south facing slopes
favorable to good solar access;
(e) Protection of solar access within the development: For the information of the future lot
owner, areas shall be shown on each lot where tree removal would be necessary to provide
solar access for the building's south facing wall. Lots with major yard areas to the south of the
building are encouraged as these are under the owner's control. Where necessary, the
placement of solar easements on lots is encouraged.
NOTE: Passive Solar Design Definitions:
1. Passive solar energy techniques: Site design techniques which maximize solar heat gain
minimize heat loss and provide thermal storage within a building during the heating season and
minimize heat gain and provide for natural ventilation during the cooling season;
2. Solar access: The access to unobstructed direct sunlight required by a solar collector for its
efficient operation, generally determined as having the south walls of a building receiving
uninterrupted sunlight between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on December 21;
3. Building orientation: The relationship of a building's longest axis to the south compass point;
n
30 30
w e
30 30
s
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
21
(4) Lot orientation on intercardinal streets: (11/9/87)
n
918. Street lighting
Streetlights shall be installed in subdivisions, at the developer's expense, unless waived by the
Commission and shall be installed in accordance with construction standards of the Connecticut
Light and Power Company (CL&P). Ornamental poles shall be used wherever underground
wiring is installed. Lighting shall be in accordance with standards of the Illuminating
Engineering Society and all proposals shall be referred to the Board of Selectmen for review.
In residential subdivisions, "half-code lighting" shall be used unless the Commission determines
otherwise following review by the Board of Selectmen. For major thoroughfares and collector
streets and, in commercial or industrial areas, * "full-code lighting" shall be installed unless the
Commission determines otherwise following review by the Board of Selectmen.
* "Full-code lighting" requires a light on every pole at spacing of 100 feet to 140 feet using 100
watt, 9500 lumen high-pressure sodium luminaries. (4/11/88)
1000. APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE
[1000.1] The Commission will receive applications for subdivision or resubdivision plan
approval at regular scheduled meetings in accordance with a schedule which is filed annually in
the office of the Town Clerk. All such applications should be submitted to the Commission
office not less than fifteen (15) days prior to a regular meeting for review as to its completeness.
All required approvals; local, State and/or Federal, as the case may be, shall be submitted with
the application. (4/11/88)
1001. The procedures of the Commission in considering subdivision or resubdivision plans and
appeals from the actions of the Commission thereon shall be in conformity to Section 8-1 of the
General Statutes as the same may be amended from time to time, provided however that the
Commission may hold a public hearing on any subdivision and shall hold a public hearing
regarding any resubdivision or regarding any subdivision of twenty-five (25) or more lots.
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
22
1002. Fees as permitted by Section 8-1c of the General Statutes and as provided by ordinance
adopted by Suffield Town Meeting of March 1, 2001.
NOTE - The schedule of fees for processing subdivision applications has been set out as
Appendix I to these regulations.
1003. The filing of all approved subdivision and resubdivision plans shall be governed by the
provisions of Section 8-2a of the General Statutes as the same may be amended from time to
time.
1004. No final plan shall be endorsed for filing until the fees provided for in Section 1002
hereof have been paid and until either improvements have been made or a bond has been
submitted and approved by the Commission as required in Section 1101.
1005. All work in connection with a subdivision shall be completed within five (5) years from
the approval date and such approval endorsed upon the plan shall state the date on which such
five (5) year period expires. Failure to complete all work within such five (5) year period shall
result in automatic expiration of the approval of such plan provided that the Commission shall
file on the land records of Suffield notice of such expiration and shall state such expiration on the
filed subdivision plan, and no further conveyances of lots shall be made without Commission
approval of a new application for subdivision of the subject land. If lots have been conveyed
during such five (5) year period, the bond on said subdivision shall be called in order to complete
the work required to serve those lots. "Work" for purposes of this section means all physical
improvements required by the approval of the plan, other than the staking out of lots, and
includes, but is not limited to the construction of roads, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer
lines, the setting aside of open space and recreation areas, installation of telephone and electric
services, planting of trees or other landscaping and installation of retaining walls or other
structures. (12/5/77)
1100. BONDING REQUIREMENTS (11/19/04)
1101. Before approval of a subdivision is granted by the Commission, an estimate of all costs
for street improvements, storm sewers, sidewalks, utilities, fire hydrants, street lights, traffic
signs, trees, monuments and pins and all improvements proposed in the subdivision construction
plan, shall be approved by the Town Engineer and submitted to the Commission. Detailed and
accurate estimates shall be prepared by the developer's Connecticut licensed professional
engineer.
Prior to the commencement of the construction of any public improvements, the developer shall
submit a bond, as described below to the Commission. The amount of all bonds shall be determined
by the Town Engineer as described above and shall include a contingency of ten percent
(10%) of the amount of the construction estimates prepared by the developer’s engineer. All
bonds shall be in a form acceptable to the Commission’s counsel. Bonds shall be in the form of:
(a) Irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution licensed to do business in the State
of Connecticut with the Town of Suffield as beneficiary. Said letters shall allow for partial
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
23
withdrawals and must be for a period of not less than one (1) year with provisions to be
automatically renewable for successive periods of one (1) year;
(b) Performance bond issued by an insurance company or other surety licensed to do
business in the State of Connecticut, together with a Power of Attorney issued by said insurer
or surety, authorizing the person signing to act on behalf of said insurer. All companies
issuing performance bonds shall have a rating of A3 or higher by Moodys Financial Rating
Services or a similar rating from an alternate rating service. The developer shall submit
evidence that the issuing company’s rating complies with the provisions of this section;
(c) Passbooks or certificate of deposit with the Town listed as co-owner of the account,
together with a written bond agreement as prepared by the Commission’s counsel. All
accounts shall use a third (3rd) party tax identification number for tax purposes. Withdrawals
from those accounts shall be limited to the Town for the duration of the bond.
1102. Following the submission of the initial bond and partial completion of public
improvements, the developer may request one (1) bond reduction. The reduced bond amount
shall be based upon estimates prepared by developer’s engineer and shall include those items
listed in Section 1101 above. All requests for bond reduction shall be reviewed by the Town
Engineer. The amount of the reduced bond shall be established by the Commission and shall
include a contingency amount of ten percent (10%) of all uncompleted work. In no event shall
any bond be reduced to less than one-third (1/3) of the amount of the original bond or ten
thousand dollars ($10,000), whichever is greater. (11/19/04)
1103. The Commission shall conduct an annual review of outstanding bonds in order to
determine the status of each project and may, at its discretion, require a developer to increase the
bond amount. Such determination shall take place after review and verification of such need by
the Town Engineer. (4/11/88)
1104. If the Commission at any time determines that the Town is in danger of not being assured
of proper completion of subdivision improvements without expense to the Town, then the
Commission may initiate action that will place the Town in an assured position to
satisfactorily complete all planned improvements. (4/11/88)
1105. At the time that a developer requests a release of bond, the developer shall also:
(a) Request acceptance of any streets, easements, or improvements that are part of a
subdivision or resubdivision;
(b) Submit deeds or other documents for streets, easements or other improvements;
(c) Submit "As Built" drawing of all improvements;
(d) Submit a Maintenance Bond in an amount equal to ten (10%) percent of the total
construction cost for all public improvements. Said bond shall be written to expire two (2)
years from the date of acceptance of streets and/or other bonded public improvements to
insure the Town against any defects which become apparent during that period. (4/11/88,
5/15/89, 11/19/04)
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
24
1106. The Town shall not release any bond until the Commission has received from the Town
Engineer, certification that all work to be performed by the developer under the bond has been
completed in substantial compliance with the final plan of subdivision or resubdivision, as
approved by the Commission and to any specifications or conditions made a part of such plan.
(4/11/88, 11/19/04)
1107. Where a bond is required and no streets or other public improvements subject to
acceptance by as Town Meeting are involved, a developer may petition the Commission for
release of such bond following verification by the Town Engineer that all bonded improvements
have been satisfactorily completed. (4/11/88)
1200. VARIANCE, AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF REGULATIONS
1201. The requirements of the foregoing regulations may be modified or varied when in the
opinion of the Commission, specific circumstances surrounding a subdivision, or conditions of
the land in such subdivision, indicate that such modification or variance will better carry out the
purposes and intent of these regulations.
1202. Revision of regulations
These regulations may be amended from time to time by the Commission in accordance with the
provisions of Section 8-1 of the General Statutes as the same may be amended from time to time.
1203. Any subdivision regulations heretofore adopted which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
Effective February 20, 1973
1300. ROAD SPECIFICATIONS
1301. Definitions
(a) UAASHTOU refers by number, letter, or both to the latest standard or tentative standard of
the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials as to material
specifications or methods of testing; (2/10/06)
(b) UASTMU refers by number, letter, or both to the latest standard or tentative standard of the
American Society for Testing and Materials as to material specifications or method of testing;
(c) UConnDOTU Specifications refers to number, letter, or both to the State of Connecticut
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways, Standard Specifications Form 814 (2004)
or as amended, as to construction;
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
25
(d) UStreets or RoadsU shall mean and include streets, avenues, boulevards, lanes, highways and
other thoroughfares which afford a principal means of access to abutting property. Streets for
purposes of these regulations shall be further classified as follows: (6/25/01)
Road Definition: Vehicle ROW Pavement
UClassificationU UTrips per Day (vtd)U UWidthU UWidth
Arterial greater than 5,000 vtd 60 feet 32 feet
Collector 1,000 to 5,000 vtd 60 feet 30 feet
Local 200 to 1,000 vtd 50 feet 26 feet
Limited Local less than 200 vtd 50 feet 24 feet
(Dead-end streets)
(e) UCommissionU shall mean the Town of Suffield Zoning and Planning Commission;
(f) UTownU shall mean the Town of Suffield.
1302. Roadway Requirements
(a) UGeneralU: Proposed streets shall be in harmony with the existing and proposed Town street
system and Town’s plan of development. As far as practicable, streets shall follow the natural
contours of the land;
(b) UGeometric Data:U The following table of geometric data shall be used designing streets:
UMinimum Street StandardsU UArterialU UCollectorU ULocalU ULimited Local
ROW Width 60’ 60’ 50’ 50’
Pavement Width 32’ 30’ 26’ 24’
Maximum Grade 5% 8% 8% 8%
Minimum Grade 1% 1% 1% 1%
Minimum Length of 100’ but not less than 30’ for each 1% algebraic difference
Vertical Curve in grade
Minimum Curb Radius 25’ 25’ 25’ 25’
at Intersection
Minimum Site Distance In accordance with AASHTO standards. * (2/10/06)
Permanent Cul-de-Sac NP NP 110’ 110’
R.O.W. Diameter
Pavement Diameter NP NP NP NP
Temporary Cul-de-Sac NP NP 110’ 110’
Diameter
Pavement Diameter NP NP 90’ 90’
NP – Not Permitted
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
26
* Applicants shall determine the eighty-fifth (85th%) percentile of operating speed on existing
streets by conducting a speed study or by determining the AASHTO site distance requirements
for the posted speed limit plus ten (10) miles per hour. (2/10/06)
(c) UStreet ClassificationsU: The developer shall be required to identify the proposed
designation of street classifications on the subdivision map at the time of applications but the
Ufinal determinationU of those classifications will be at the discretion of the Commission;
(d) UEmbankment SlopesU: No banks adjoining a street right-of-way shall have a slope greater
than two (2) to one (1), except when modified in rock formation;
(e) UWidth RequirementsU: Streets which are now or may be in the future used as minor
arterioles, or collectors may be required to have right-of-way and pavement widths greater
than the minimum widths listed in Section 1302 (b). Such determination will be made by the
Commission after study of the subdivision plan.
(f) UVertical Grades:
1. On land of difficult topography, a safe and appropriate street pattern may be approved
where short distances of streets do not exceed a ten (10) percent grade;
2. Except where allowed by the Commission, all new streets shall have a vertical grade
which averages not more than three (3) percent for a distance of fifty (50) feet from an
intersection of any other street.
(g) UCross Slopes:U All streets shall have a crown of not less than ¼ inch per foot of pavement
width.
1303. Clearing and Grubbing
(a) UArea to be ClearedU: This work shall consist of clearing the ground of trees, stumps,
brush, rubbish and all objectionable material within the roadway and to the slope limits of
roadway excavation, embankments and fill areas, except that these limits maybe reduced as
necessary to confine this work within the highway limits. This work shall also include the
clearing of the ground necessary for the construction and installation of drainage structures,
ditches, channels, fences and other highway appurtenances;
(b) UMethod of Clearing:U Within the excavation lines all trees shall be cut off and stumps
removed:
1. Within the fill lines where an embankment is to be made not more than five (5) feet in
depth, trees, stumps, roots, etc. shall be removed. Where embankments exceed five (5) feet
in depth, trees, stumps, roots, etc., shall be cut off to within six (6) inches of the ground
surface.
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
27
(c) UDisposal of MaterialU: All trees that are cut shall be removed from within the limits of the
highway before the grading is started. The contractor shall dispose of all such trees, stumps,
brush, etc., in a manner suitable to the Town;
(d) UBackfillingU: All excavations made below subgrade surface by the removal of trees,
stumps, etc., shall be filled with suitable material which shall be compacted thoroughly in
accordance with the provisions governing formation of embankments.
1304. Excavation and Backfill
(a) UExcavation:
1. All excavation shall be made in conformity with the requirements of the plans, cross
sections, or as directed by the Town;
2. When ledge rock is encountered, this material shall be excavated to a depth of not less
than two (2) feet below subgrade;
3. If blasting is required in rock excavation all possible care shall be taken to avoid injury
to persons and property. Sufficient warning shall be given to all persons in the vicinity of
the work before blasting.
(b) UEmbankments:
1. Embankments shall be constructed of earth, rock, or a mixture of earth and rock.
Stumps, trees, sod, or other organize matter shall not be incorporated in embankments. The
depth of each layer shall not exceed 12 inches before compaction;
2. Frozen material shall not be used. No embankment layer shall be deposited on surfaces
of snow or ice, nor shall it be placed on frozen or unstable surfaces:
3. No stone over five (5) inches in its greatest dimension shall be placed within twelve (12)
inches of the elevation of the subgrade;
4. The entire area of each layer shall be compacted with rollers or compactors, exerting a
pressure of not less than three hundred (300) pounds per lineal inch of compression wheel
or roller width;
5. All fill material shall be compacted at a moisture content suitable for obtaining the
required density. In no case shall the moisture content be more than three (3%) percent
drier than the optimum moisture content determined by the AASHTO Designation T-99,
Method C;
6. Loam, topsoil and unsuitable material shall be removed prior to placing embankments;
7. All loam and topsoil suitable for seeding and planting removed from cut and
embankment areas shall be stockpiled in approved locations for use in roadside seeding.
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
28
(c) UGravel Backfill:
1. This material shall be used as a foundation for structures, to replace unstable material,
backfilling around drainage structures, backfilling trenches where unsuitable material or
ledge has been encountered and elsewhere as indicated on plans, drawings or required by
specifications;
2. The material shall meet the gradation requirements of Section H.02.01 of the ConnDOT
Specification;
3. When gravel fill is used for foundation for structures, to replace rock or unsuitable
material in trenches, or backfilling around drainage structures, it shall be deposited in
layers not over six (6) inches in depth and each layer thoroughly compacted before the
addition of other layers unless other compaction methods have been approved.
1305. Subgrade and Slopes
(a) All soft and yielding material and other portions of the subgrade which will not ready
compact shall be removed and all loose rock and boulders over five (5) inches in size shall be
removed or broken off to a depth of not less than one (1) foot below subgrade. Any material
removed shall be replaced with suitable gravel and compacted;
(b) The subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted with a smooth steel wheel roller weighing
not less than ten (10) tons;
(c) Any portion of subgrade which is not accessible to a roller shall be compacted with hand
tampers or mechanical vibrators;
(d) Slopes shall have a uniform surface as shown on the plans, cross section or as directed;
(e) In no case shall earth slopes steeper than one (1) foot vertical to two (2) feet horizontal be
constructed. In erodible soils, flatter slopes will be required;
(f) All slopes, except those in rock or ledge formations, shall be seeded or turfed as soon after
construction as practicable and after all loose stone or other unsuitable material is cleared;
(g) Should the foundation material beneath the subbase become churned up and mixed with
the subbase material, the contractor shall remove and replace it with new subbase material to
the required depth. Such replaced subbase material shall be thoroughly compacted as
specified above.
1306. Subbase
(a) The roadway subbase shall meet the requirements and be installed in accordance with
Section 2.12 of ConnDOT Specifications;
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
29
(b) The foundation for the subbase shall be prepared in accordance with Section 2.09 of
ConnDOT Specifications, and shall be shaped carefully to the required cross section and
compacted thoroughly;
(c) Where underdrains and outlets are required, they shall be in place and functioning before
any subbase materials placed;
(d) The requirements for subbase shall be based upon samples taken at two hundred (200)
foot intervals by an independent laboratory employed by the developer. Test pits shall extend
to a minimum depth of five (5) feet below proposed pavement elevation or to rock and
condition of ground water and mottling shall be determined. Tests shall include mechanical
analysis, liquid limit and plasticity index;
(e) Depth of subbase shall be based upon the test data as will be the need for underdrains;
(f) Subbase course shall be compacted to a density of ninety-five (95%) when tested in
accordance with AASHTO T-100 Method D. Compaction testing by an independent
laboratory shall be required at intervals of one (1) per five hundred (500) lineal feet of
roadway, with a minimum of three (3) years;
(g) Should the foundation material beneath the subbase become churned up and mixed with
the subbase material, the contractor shall remove and replace it with new subbase material to
the required depth. Such replace subbase material shall be thoroughly compacted as specified
above.
1307. Processed Aggregate Base
(a) The roadway processed aggregate base shall meet the gradation requirements and be
installed in accordance with Section 3.04 of the ConnDOT Specifications;
(b) The developer shall supply certification from a soils laboratory satisfactory to the Town
that this material is in compliance with the specifications;
(c) Minimum thickness of processed aggregate base will be as show on Plate No. 1.;
(d) Processed aggregate base course shall be compacted to a density of 95% when tested in
accordance with AASHTO T-100, Method D. Compaction testing by an independent
laboratory shall be required at intervals of one (1) per five hundred (500) lineal feet of
roadway.
1308. Bituminous Concrete Pavement
(a) UBituminous Concrete Binder Course:
1. The materials and installation of the bituminous concrete binder shall be in conformance
with Section 4.06 of ConnDOT Specifications;
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
30
2. Depth of bituminous concrete binder course shall be as shown on Plate 1.
(b) UBituminous Concrete Surface Course:
1. The materials and installation of the bituminous concrete surface course shall be in
conformance with Section 4.06 of ConnDOT Specifications;
2. Depth of bituminous concrete surface course shall be as shown on Plate 1.
1309. Curbing (11/19/04)
(a) URequirements:
Machine formed bituminous concrete Cape Cod curbing shall be installed on each side of all
new streets except that all curved curbing at intersections from point of curvature to point of
tangency shall be of granite.
(b) UMaterials and Installation:
1. Bituminous concrete cape cod curbing shall conform to and be installed in accordance
with the applicable sections of Section 8.15 of ConnDOT Specification;
2. Granite curbing shall conform to and be installed on a six inch (6”) gravel base in
accordance with Section 8.13 of ConnDOT Specifications.
1310. Drainage
(a) UGeneral:
1. This item shall consist of the complete storm sewer installation at the locations and to
the lines and grades designated on the plans or as directed and in conformity with these
specifications;
2. All materials, labor, equipment and appurtenances necessary for a complete installation,
whether or not all such materials and appurtenances are show on the plans or described in
the specifications, shall be furnished by the subdivider.;
3. All existing pipes, drains, conduits and drainage structures which are not to be changed
in location shall be carefully supported and protected from injury by the subdivider and in
case of injury, they shall be restored by him to its original condition.
(b) UPipe:
1. Reinforced concrete pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M-170, Class
IV. Developer shall provide certification to the Town Engineer;
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
31
2. Mortar for reinforced concrete pipe joints shall be a 1:2 Portland cement-sand mixture,
with a minimum of water. No mortar shall be used after it has partially set;
3. Asphalt coated corrugated metal pipe and asphalt coated corrugated metal pipe elbows
shall conform to ConnDOT Section M.08.01-2 Specification.
(c) UConstruction Methods:
1. Pipe shall be laid in open trench two (2) feet plus the outside diameter of the pipe in
width. All rocks, cemented gravel, old masonry or other hard materials shall be excavated
to at least six (6) inches below the pipe at all points, such space and all other cuts below the
pipe grade shall be filled with compacted gravel bedding of one-half (½) stone;
2. When soft or unsuitable material is encountered, the depth of excavation below the pipe
shall be increased and such space shall be filled with thoroughly compacted gravel or
broken stone;
3. Trenches shall be maintained in a safe condition at all times and adequate sheeting and
shoring shall be installed when so required;
4. When blasting is required for rock excavation adequate provisions for safety shall be
provided and such work shall be performed in compliance with applicable local
requirements;
5. The bottom of trenches shall be sufficiently graded to insure uniform bearing for the full
length of the pipe(s);
6. All pipe(s) shall be bedded in firmly compacted gravel or stone bedding from six (6)
inches below the pipe to the centerline of the pipe. Backfill from the centerline of the pipe
to twelve (12) inches above the top of pipe shall be firmly compacted gravel or other
suitable material;
7. Commencing at the lowest point in the system, the pipe(s) shall be carefully laid true to
line and grade with the bell or groove and upgrade;
8. Joints in the reinforced concrete pipe(s) shall be filled with mortar. Joints in the
concrete pipe(s) shall be thoroughly wetted before making the mortar joint;
9. The inside of the joint shall be wiped and finished smooth;
10. The stopper shall be kept in the pipe mouth when the pipe laying is not in progress.
11. Trenches shall be backfilled only after the pipe(s) have been inspected and approved
and locations of the pipe(s) and appurtenances have been recorded;
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
32
12. Trenches located in paved or improved areas shall be backfilled with approved
granular material or gravel fill. Trenches in unimproved areas may be backfilled with
existing material;
13. Backfill material shall be free from frozen lumps, wood, and other extraneous material;
14. Rock fills or boulders shall not be placed closer than two (2) feet from the pipe at any
point;
15. The ends of the pipe(s) which enter masonry shall be neatly cut to fit the inner face of
masonry;
16. Dry conditions shall be maintained at all times and under no circumstances shall the
pipe(s) be laid or appurtenances installed in water.
(d) UUnderdrain:
1. Perforated or plain asphalt coated corrugated metal pipe for underdrains or outlets shall
conform to ConnDOT M.08.01.03 Specifications.
2. The aggregates for filling the trench shall consist of clean, tough, durable pieces of
broken stone or screened gravel meeting the following gradation requirements:
USquare Mesh SievesU UPercent
Passing 5/8” 100
Passing ½” 90-100
Passing ¾” 30-100
Passing #4 0-80
Passing #8 0-35
Passing #100 0-2
(e) UStructures:
1. All structures including manholes, catch basins, drop inlets, endwalls, etc. shall be
constructed in accordance with the standard details of the Town of Suffield or ConnDOT
Specifications;
2. Concrete shall meet the material requirements and shall be placed in accordance with
Section 6.01 of the ConnDOT Specifications.
(f) URip Rap:
Material and method of placement shall be in accordance with Section 7.03 of ConnDOT
Specifications for Modified Rip Rap. All rip rap shall be installed on bed of gravel not less
than six inches (6”) in depth.
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
33
1311. Sidewalks
(a) URequirements:
Concrete or bituminous concrete sidewalks shall be constructed where shown on the plans
and/or required by the Town of Suffield in accordance with these specifications. The depth of
the concrete sidewalks shall be five inches (5’) with a cross slope not less than ¼” per foot
towards the street. Width shall be four 4’ fee constructed on a six (6”) inch deep base of
compacted process gravel. Base shall extend six (6”) inches beyond the width of the sidewalk
on both sides. Concrete walks shall be a one-half (½”) pre-molded joint at intervals not
exceeding sixteen (16) feet. Bituminous concrete sidewalks shall have a compacted depth of
no less than two (2”) inches with other dimensions similar to the concrete sidewalk above.
(b) UMaterials and Installation:
1. Concrete sidewalks shall conform and be installed in accordance with Section 9.21 of
ConnDOT Specifications.
2. Bituminous concrete sidewalks shall conform and be installed in accordance with
Section 9.22 of ConnDOT Specifications.
1312. As-Built Maps
(a) Complete as-built maps showing all improvements shall be prepared and Certified Plans
shall be on reproducible 3 mil mylar and shall show the following:
1. North Arrow;
2. Bench Mark – Indicate elevation, datum used, with exact location and description noted;
3. Location, size and material of all underground utilities including sanitary sewers,
drainage, water, electric, telephone, gas transmission mains, shall be shown with depths
indicated at intervals of not more than five hundred feet (500’). Location of manholes,
catch basins, end walls, wyes, tees, risers, etc. shall be noted;
4. Scale shall be noted;
5. Name of subdivider or other responsible person, along with firm and project name shall
be indicated;
6. Date construction was completed (month and year only), and date of finished As-Built
map shall be indicated;
7. Revisions shall be noted and re-dated;
8. Profiles of newly constructed gravity pipelines shall be shown;
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
34
9. As-Built pipe grade in percent shall be shown as well as invert elevations at every
structure;
10. The name of the Professional Engineer or Surveyor shall be shown on said plan with
the plan scaled by the Professional;
11. Houses or other structure shall be located and noted on the plan along with
corresponding house number or lot number, if available;
12. Location, size and depth of all utilities entering homes shall be shown;
13. All drainage outfalls shall be profiled for a distance of not less than fifty feet (50’)
from the outlet structures.
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
35
APPENDIX I
SCHEDULE OF FEES FOR PROCESSING
SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS
See. 1. Purpose.
Section 8-1c of the General Statutes empowers a municipality, by passage of an ordinance to
establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the processing of subdivision applications by a
combined planning and zoning commission. The fee schedule passed by said ordinance shall
supersede any specific fees set forth in the General Statutes. (7/27/90)
Sec. 2. Subdivision schedule of fees.
The Town of Suffield hereby adopts the following schedule of fees for the processing of
applications by the Suffield Zoning and Planning Commission:
a. Subdivision/Resubdivision - New: $300.00 per each building lot over two (2)
(minimum of $600.00) plus $60.00 DEP fee.
(11/19/04)
b. Modification of prior approval per $200.00 per each building lot over two (2)
lot for Subdivision/Resubdivision: (minimum of $400.00) plus $60.00 DEP fee.
(3/1/01)
c. Application including new road construction: $1.00 per linear foot. (7/27/90)
Sec. 3. Financing Cost of Special Study
Certain applications for extraordinarily large and/or significant projects pose environment,
traffic, and/or other problems beyond the expertise of the Zoning and Planning Commission’s
staff to evaluate and make appropriate recommendations. In such instances, if the Commission,
after reviewing the matter with its staff, reasonably concludes that an outside, independent study
of consultation is necessary for the Commission to decide the issue before it, the Commission
may require an applicant, as a condition of processing its application, to pay for the cost of such
study or consultation. In such cases, the applicant will be required to place a sum of not to
Suffield Subdivision Regulations 11/19/04
36
exceed $10,000.00 into a fee account, the balance of which will returned to them after the study
and/or consultation is completed. (3/1/01)