Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted as Secs. 1-1-1 through 1-1-7 of the Code of 1972]
§ 1-1. Designation of Code.
The Charter, special acts and ordinances embraced in Parts I, II and III
hereof shall constitute and be designated the "Revised Charter and
Municipal Code of the Town of Wethersfield" and may be so cited. Parts I
and II hereof may be cited as the "Code of Ordinances."
§ 1-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
CODE — The "Revised Charter and Municipal Code" of the Town of
Wethersfield, Connecticut.
COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut.
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of
the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Extends and is applied to associations, firms, partnerships
and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Every species of property except real
property, as herein defined.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any park, cemetery, school yard or open space
adjacent thereto and any pond or stream within the jurisdiction of the
Town.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
STATE — The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean
the State of Connecticut.
STATE LAW, GENERAL LAW, GENERAL STATUTES — Refer to the
General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended, and may
be abbreviated herein as C.G.S.
STREET — Embraces streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes,
viaducts and all other public ways in the Town; and may include private
ways over which the Town exercises jurisdiction.
TENANT, OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a
part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
TOWN — The Town of Wethersfield, in the County of Hartford and State
of Connecticut.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
B. Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as
to males, except as is otherwise provided in the Code of Ordinances or
the Town Council Rules of Procedure.1
C. Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
D. Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
§ 1-3. Catchlines (section titles).
The catchlines of the several sections of Parts I and II of this Code printed in
boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of
the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor
as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended
or reenacted.
§ 1-4. Amendments to Code.
A. All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code, which may amend, repeal
or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the
case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof
by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from
the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby.
B. Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the Part and section
number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That
Section of Part of the Revised Charter and Municipal Code of the Town
of Wethersfield, Connecticut, is hereby amended to read as follows: ."
The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
C. In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be
added, the following language should be used: "That Part
of the Revised Charter and Municipal Code of the Town of Wethersfield,
Connecticut, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered ,
which said section reads as follows: ."
D. Failure to follow this procedure shall in no way affect the validity of any
ordinance.
E. All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed
should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as
the case may be.
§ 1-5. Effect of repeals.
A. The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
B. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
1. Editor's Note: See Appendix Ch. A180.
§ 1-2 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 1-5
1:4
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed
under the ordinance repealed.
§ 1-6. Severability.
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of Part I or II of this
Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or
decree of any court, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect
any of the remaining provisions of this Code.
§ 1-7. Penalties for offenses.
A. Whenever in Part I or II of this Code or in any ordinance of the Town
any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense,
misdemeanor or public nuisance or whenever in such Code or ordinance
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to
be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation
of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by
a fine not exceeding $100, unless a different penalty is prescribed by law.
Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The imposition of any punishment hereunder shall not prevent the
enforced abatement of any unlawful condition by the Town.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 6-18-1990]
§ 1-8. Adoption.
The compilation of the Town Charter and ordinances of the Town of
Wethersfield, codified and consolidated into parts, chapters and sections
in the form attached hereto and made a part hereof, is hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town of Wethersfield,
Connecticut," hereinafter called the "Code." All provisions contained in the
compilation provided for herein and known as the "Code of the Town of
Wethersfield" shall be in force and effect on and after the effective date of
this ordinance.
§ 1-9. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code
by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town Council.
§ 1-10. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Town of Wethersfield of a
general and permanent nature in force on the date of the adoption of this
ordinance which are inconsistent with any provisions of the Code are hereby
repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance. Specifically
saved from repeal, however, are the following:
A. Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the
effective date of such Code.
B. Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for
the Town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the Town or any
evidence of the Town's indebtedness.
C. Any contract or obligation assumed by the Town.
D. Any right or franchise granted by the Town.
E. Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating,
opening paving, widening, vacating, etc., any park, playground or
recreational facility.
F. Any ordinance relating to specific public improvements or assessments
therefor.
G. Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets.
H. Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levying of
taxes or for an annual budget.
I. Any ordinance in effect which regulates Town elections and voting
district boundaries.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:7
J. Any ordinance relating to the investment of municipal funds.
K. Any legislation dealing with the Special Acts of the Town.
L. Any legislation adopted subsequent to August 21, 1989.
§ 1-11. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this ordinance
or of any ordinance appearing in the Code or included in this Code through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, article or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-12. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Wethersfield and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and,
if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the
Town Clerk of the Town of Wethersfield by impressing thereon the Seal of
the Town of Wethersfield, and such certified copy shall remain on file in
the office of said Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while the said Code is in effect. The
enactment and publication of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of
a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Town
Charter or to any of the ordinances known collectively as the "Code of the
Town of Wethersfield," or any new ordinances, when enacted or adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town Council to be a
part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that
reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this ordinance
shall affect the status of the Charter or any ordinance contained herein, and
such ordinances may be amended, deleted or changed from time to time as
the Town Council deems desirable.
§ 1-14. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Town of Wethersfield required to be
§ 1-10 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 1-14
1:8
filed in the office of the Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted by the Town Council subsequent to the
enactment of this ordinance in such form as to indicate the intention of said
Council to be a part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be
included therein by temporary attachment of copies of such changes until
such changes are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-15. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Town Clerk of the Town of
Wethersfield upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Town
Council, which Council may also arrange by resolution for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-16. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of
the Town of Wethersfield, or who alters or tampers with such Code in
any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of
Wethersfield to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other
provision of this ordinance, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $90.
§ 1-17. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
A. In compiling and preparing the Charter and ordinances for publication
as the Code of the Town of Wethersfield, no changes in the meaning or
intent of such Charter or ordinances have been made, except as provided
for in Subsection B hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and
other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Town Council that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following ordinance changes, amendments or revisions
are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance: (Chapter and section number references are to the
ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)2
§ 1-18. When effective.
This ordinance shall be effective 21 days after publication.
2. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-17B, the following sections and chapters were added or
amended: §§ 10-10, 10-50, 10-83A and C, 27-3D, Ch. 31, §§ 99-3, 105-3, 143-2, 143-4,
143-6, 143-20, 143-26D, 143-41, 160-8, 160-9 and 167-1. The following original sections
were deleted: Secs. 1-3-1 and 1-3-2 of the Code of 1972. A complete description of each
change may be found in the ordinance adopted 6-18-1990, on file and available for
inspection in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Renumbered 2008 Code
[Adopted 8-25-2008]
§ 1-19. Adoption of renumbering.
The ordinances and legislation of the Town of Wethersfield of a general
and permanent nature, including the 1990 Code adopted by the Town
Council of the Town of Wethersfield on June 18, 1990, as supplemented and
republished by General Code with some chapter reassignments, as set forth
in the Derivation Table attached hereto and published in said Code, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town
of Wethersfield," hereafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-20. Nonsubstantive changes in previously adopted legislation.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances and 1990 Code for publication
as the 2008 Code of the Town of Wethersfield, no changes in the meaning
or intent of such ordinances have been made. Certain grammatical changes
and other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said
pieces of legislation. It is the intention of the Town Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-21. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made Article III of Chapter 1,
General Provisions, of the Code of the Town of Wethersfield, such ordinance
to be entitled "Article III, Adoption of Renumbered 2008 Code," and the
sections of this ordinance shall be numbered §§ 1-19 to 1-22, inclusive.
§ 1-22. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon its passage.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-22
1:11
Chapter 7
AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 11.
§ 7-1. Authorization to contract services.
The Town Council may contract for the furnishing of ambulance service
within the Town limits with any person, firm or corporation and in
connection therewith may lease any Town-owned ambulance facility to such
person, firm or corporation on such terms as the Council shall determine,
provided that the term of any such lease shall not exceed the term of any
such contract for ambulance service and shall terminate when such contract
is terminated, and each original or renewal term of such contract or lease
shall not exceed one year.
§ 7-2. Interlocal agreement.
The interlocal agreement to provide emergency medical services for the
Towns of Wethersfield, Newington and Rocky Hill, or any two of the
aforesaid towns, on file with the Town Clerk be and is hereby adopted
to create a public agency to oversee the operations of the commercial/
paramedic firm, to coordinate tri-Town or bi-Town emergency medical
services, to perform the duties spelled out in the interlocal agreement and
to perform such other tasks as may be assigned by the Town Councils.
§ 7-3. Emergency Medical Service Committee. [Added 3-20-1995]
The Town Council hereby creates an Emergency Medical Service
Committee consisting of the Wethersfield members of the Bi-Town
Emergency Medical Service Committee to oversee the operations of the
commercial/paramedic firm, to coordinate Wethersfield emergency medical
services, to perform the duties appropriate to Wethersfield spelled out
in the interlocal agreement and to perform such other tasks as may be
assigned by the Town Council. This section shall be superseded by § 7-2
whenever tri-Town or bi-Town emergency medical services are reactivated.
§ 1-22 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 7-3
1:12
Chapter 9
CENTRAL CONNECTICUT HEALTH DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ambulance and emergency services — See Ch.
7.
Committees, boards, commissions and
agencies — See Ch. 10.
Food service establishments — See Ch. 87.
Public swimming pools — See Ch. 119.
§ 9-1. Short title. [Amended 8-2-1999]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Central Connecticut
Health District Ordinance."
§ 9-2. Creation and purpose. [Amended 8-2-1999]
The Town of Wethersfield hereby unites with the Towns of Berlin and
Rocky Hill to form the Central Connecticut Health District pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 368f of the Connecticut General Statutes. It is
hereby declared that the purpose of this chapter is to protect, preserve and
improve the public health of the citizens of the municipalities of the Central
Connecticut Health District.
§ 9-3. District Board of Health.
A. The affairs of the Health District shall be managed by a Board which
shall have all the duties exercised or performed immediately prior to the
effective date of the creation of this Health District by the Directors of
Health of the constituent municipalities of the Health District.
B. The Health District Board shall exercise all the authority as to public
health required of or conferred upon the constituent municipalities by
law and shall have the power set forth in Section 19a-243 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
C. Appointment to Board. The Council for each constituent municipality
shall each appoint one person per municipality to be a member of such
Board. In addition, if the population of any municipality exceeds 10,000
inhabitants, as annually estimated by the Department of Public Health,
such municipality shall be entitled to one additional representative for
each additional 10,000 inhabitants or part thereof, provided that no such
municipality shall have more than five representatives on the Health
District Board. The Board shall initially consist of two members from the
Town of Berlin, two members from the Town of Rocky Hill, and three
members from the Town of Wethersfield. [Amended 8-2-1999]
D. Term of office. The terms of office for members to the Health District
Board shall be three years, except that, during the initial formation of
the Board, appointments shall be staggered into one- , two- or three-year
terms.
§ 7-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-4
1:13
§ 9-4. Director of Health.
A. Appointment. The Health District Board, after the approval of the
Commissioner of Health Services, shall appoint a full-time Director of
Health for the Health District pursuant to the procedure and
qualifications set forth in Section 19a-242 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended. The Board may also appoint an acting full-time
Director of Health to serve in the Director of Health's absence or if
a vacancy exists, provided that such acting Director meets the same
qualifications as the Director of Health as set forth in Section 19a-242
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, or such qualifications
as may be approved by the Commissioner of Health Services. Upon the
appointment of a Director of Health for the Health District, the term of
office of the present Director of Health of each constituent municipality
shall terminate.
B. Powers and duties. The Director of Health shall perform all such duties
as are required of Directors of Health by the Connecticut General
Statutes or the State of Connecticut Public Health Code. In addition,
the Director of Health shall enforce all ordinances of the constituent
municipalities within said municipalities as long as such ordinances
do not conflict with the Connecticut General Statutes or the State of
Connecticut Public Health Code; provided, however, that any provision
of a municipal ordinance which is more strict than the State of
Connecticut Public Health Code shall not constitute a conflict, and the
provision of the municipal ordinance shall prevail.
C. Removal. The Director of Health may be removed upon vote of a majority
of the members of the Health District Board upon a finding of
misconduct, material neglect of duty or incompetence in the conduct
of this office in accordance with Section 19a-242 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
§ 9-5. Powers and duties of Board.
A. General powers. The Health District Board may make and promulgate
reasonable rules and regulations for the promotion of general health
within the district; such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict
with the State of Connecticut Public Health Code or any municipal
ordinance of each constituent municipality; provided, however, that any
provision of such rules and regulations which is more strict than the
State of Connecticut Public Health Code shall not constitute a conflict,
and the provision of the rules and regulations shall prevail. No such
rule or regulation shall be adopted until a public hearing has been held
by the Board of the proposed rule or regulation. Notice of the time,
place and purpose of the hearing shall be by publication in a newspaper
having a substantial circulation in each constituent municipality at least
seven days prior to the hearing. The powers of the Board shall include,
but not be limited to, the following: to sue and be sued; to make and
execute contract and other instruments necessary or convenient to the
exercise of powers of the Health District; to make and from time to
time amend and repeal bylaws, rules and regulations; to acquire real
estate; and to have whatever other powers are necessary to properly
§ 9-4 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 9-5
1:14
carry out its powers as an independent entity of government; to develop
and implement a budget; and to develop and implement public health
policy for the Health District.
B. Meetings; Chairperson. The Board shall meet at least quarterly and
at other times determined by the Chairperson. At the Board's initial
meeting and thereafter at each fall meeting, the Board shall elect a
Chairperson, and the Health District shall furnish the necessary offices
and equipment to enable the Board to carry out its duties.
C. Fiscal year; budget. The fiscal year of the Health District shall be from
July 1 to June 30 and, by the 30th of April in each year, the Board shall
estimate the amount of money required to pay the costs and expenses
of the Health District during the ensuing fiscal year. Pursuant to Section
19a-243 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, such Board
shall hold a public hearing on its proposed budget, two weeks' notice
of which shall be given in a newspaper having a circulation in each
constituent municipality of such district. From time to time the Board
shall draw upon the Treasurer of each Town within the district a
proportionate share of the expenses of such district, from such funds
as may have been appropriated by each, to pay the cost of operating
the Health District, such apportionment to be made equitably on a
per capita basis as established by the most recent annual population
estimate by the Department of Health Services. The Health District shall
make timely applications to the State Department of Health Services for
reimbursements for which it is entitled, as set forth in Section 19a-245
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Health District
shall provide said Department with all budgetary and other information
necessary for the Health District to qualify for any reimbursements or
other funds allowable under state or federal law.
§ 9-6. Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or clause of this
chapter be adjudged invalid, the remainder of this chapter shall not be
affected thereby and shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 9-7. When effective.
The effective date of this chapter shall be 10 days after the legal notice of
adoption has been published.
§ 9-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-7
1:15
Chapter 10
COMMITTEES, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER
AGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency Medical Service Committee — See
Ch. 7.
Energy Improvement District Board — See
Ch. 13.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 20.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 153.
Town Council rules of procedure — See Ch.
A180.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission — See Ch. A182.
§ 9-7 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 9-7
1:16
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)3
§ 10-1. through § 10-3. (Reserved)
3. Editor’s Note: Former Art. I, Regional Council of Elected Officials, was repealed
12-19-2016.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1
1:17

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)4
§ 10-4. through § 10-7. (Reserved)
4. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Conservation Commission, was repealed 7-16-2018. See now
Art. XII, Inland Wetlands and Conservation Commission.
§ 10-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-4
1:19

ARTICLE III
Insurance Committee
[Amended 6-18-1990; 12-3-1990]
§ 10-8. Creation; duties.
An Insurance Committee of seven members is created to perform the
following duties:
A. To review the entire risk and insurance program of the Town and to
develop and approve proposals for specifications for the proper scope
and form of the insurance or risk program.
B. To establish minimum requirements for an Agent of Record to administer
the Town risk or insurance program.
C. To propose to the Town Manager the names of at least two persons
capable of being Agent of Record whenever such position shall be vacant
or at least 60 days before a term expires.
D. To propose to the Town Manager an acquisition procedure that will best
serve the Town interests in its risk or insurance program.
§ 10-9. Terms; vacancies.
A. The Insurance Committee shall consist of members whose terms shall
expire as follows: June 30, 1968; June 30, 1969; June 30, 1970; June 30,
1971; June 30, 1972; June 30, 1996; and June 30, 1997.
B. In filling vacancies, the following provisions shall be observed by the
Council:
(1) No more than four persons shall belong to the same political party.
(2) No more than two members from any party shall be licensed agents.
(3) No more than three licensed agents shall be members of the
Committee.
(4) Except when filling an unexpired term, all appointments shall be for
five-year periods.
§ 10-10. Agent of Record. [Amended 7-5-1995]
Subject to approval by the Council, the Town Manager shall appoint an
Agent of Record or Agents of Record for a term to commence July 1, 1995,
and to expire on June 30, 1998. All subsequent appointments of Agent or
Agents of Record shall be for three-year terms, the first to commence on
July 1, 1998. Should the nature of the Town risk or insurance program
require it, separate Agents of Record may be appointed for the fire-casualty
coverage and for the group insurance-pension program. The Insurance
Committee shall establish minimum requirements and prescribe the duties
of all Agents of Record. The Agent of Record or Agents of Record, as
the case may be, shall be subject to removal from office under the terms
of Section 805 of the Charter or for failure to maintain the minimum
requirements establish by the Insurance Committee for Agents of Record.
§ 10-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-11
1:21
§ 10-11. Compensation.
Members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
Compensation for the Agent of Record shall be as established by the Council
based upon a recommendation by the Committee. Such compensation shall
be reviewed annually by the Committee, with a written report to the Council
considering changes in premium levels, other paid commissions, services
performed by the Agent of Record and other changes in circumstances. As
a result of this review, the Committee shall recommend any change in the
compensation of the Agent of Record.
§ 10-11 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 10-11
1:22
ARTICLE IV
Regional Council of Governments
§ 10-12. Adoption of statutes.
The Town of Wethersfield does hereby adopt C.G.S. § 4-124i through p,
inclusive, as amended, providing for the formation of a Regional Council
of Governments within a planning region, as defined or redefined by the
Director of the Office of State Planning, and does hereby join the Regional
Council of Governments within its planning region when and as such
Council is duly established in accordance with said statutes upon the
adoption of said statutes by not less than 60% of all municipalities within
such planning region. The adoption of the aforesaid sections of the General
Statutes is intended to include the provisions of Special Act 73-79 of the
1973 Session of the General Assembly respecting additional representation
for the core city within the capitol region on a Regional Council of
Governments and a nonvoting advisory regional forum thereunder,
consistent with proposed bylaws of such Regional Council of Governments
dated January 25, 1973, and endorsed by the existing Regional Council of
Governments on May 3, 1973.
§ 10-13. Representatives.
A. The representative of this Town on said Council shall be the Mayor, and
an alternate representative, when authorized, shall be a member of the
Wethersfield Council to be chosen by such Town Council.
B. The representative of this Town on the Regional Planning Commission
as defined by C.G.S. § 4-124o, as amended, shall be a member of the
Planning and Zoning Commission to be chosen by such Commission.
§ 10-14. Purpose, powers and duties.
The Regional Council of Governments shall have such powers, purposes,
duties and responsibilities as are provided for in C.G.S. §§ 4-124i through
4-124p, inclusive, as amended.
§ 10-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-14
1:23

ARTICLE V
Flood and Erosion Control Board
[Amended 3-5-1990; 9-22-1998]
§ 10-15. Creation; powers.
A. Pursuant to Sections 25-84 through 25-94 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the Town Council of the Town of Wethersfield does hereby
create a Flood and Erosion Control Board to exercise such powers as are
granted by statute.
B. The Flood and Erosion Control Board shall be authorized to plan, layout,
acquire, construct, reconstruct, repair, maintain, supervise and manage
a flood or erosion control system.
§ 10-16. Membership; terms; alternates.
A. Such Flood and Erosion Control Board shall consist of five members
and three alternates. The terms of office shall be as follows: Three shall
be appointed for terms to expire on June 30, 1990; and two shall be
appointed for terms to expire on June 30, 1991. Of the three alternates
initially appointed, two shall be appointed for terms to expire on June
30, 1990; and one shall be appointed for a term to expire on June 30,
1991. All subsequent appointments of regular and alternate members
shall be for terms of three years, commencing on the first day of July. Any
vacancy in a membership of the Board shall be filled by Council for the
unexpired term of such member.
B. If a regular member of said Board is absent or disqualified, the Chairman
of the Board shall designate an alternate to so act. The alternates shall
be chosen in rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a number
of times as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance with
such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
C. The Town Engineer and the Town Manager shall serve as ex officio
members of the Board.
§ 10-17. (Reserved)
§ 10-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-17
1:25

ARTICLE VI
Senior Citizens Advisory Committee
§ 10-18. Creation; organization. [Amended 11-20-1995]
There is hereby created a Senior Citizens Advisory Committee, consisting
of 12 persons and two alternates who shall organize themselves in such
a manner as is deemed by such Committee to be most appropriate to
accomplish its purposes.
§ 10-19. Terms; minimum age. [Amended 11-20-1995; 2-16-1999]
The Council shall appoint four persons and two alternates 55 years or over.
Appointments shall be for two-year periods, except for the Presidents of
AARP and the Wethersfield Senior Citizens Club, which shall be for one-year
terms, and the Council shall have authority to make appointments under
this section in such manner as will provide for the expiration of two terms
on June 30 of each calendar year.
§ 10-20. Membership. [Amended 11-20-1995]
A. The Council shall appoint eight members of the Senior Citizens Advisory
Committee from the following categories:
(1) A clergyman selected by the Council from among the clergy of the
Town.
(2) The Health Director or a member of the medical profession
designated by Council.
(3) A representative of the Town Social Services Administration
designated by the Manager.
(4) The Recreation and Parks Director or such other member of the
Recreation and Parks Department as the Council may designate.
(5) The Executive Director of the Town Housing Authority or a member
of such Authority as the Council may designate.
(6) The President of the American Association of Retired Persons, Inc.,
Wethersfield Chapter 1222, or his or her designee, approved by the
Council.
(7) The President of the Wethersfield Senior Citizens Club, or his or her
designee, approved by Council. [Amended 2-16-1999]
(8) The Municipal Agent for the Elderly as appointed by the Town
Council or the Town Manager.
B. The appointments shall be for two-year periods except for the Presidents
of AARP and the Wethersfield Senior Citizens Club, which shall be for
one-year terms, and the Council shall have authority to make
appointments under this section in such manner as will provide for the
expiration of four terms on June 30 of each odd-numbered year to include
the Municipal Agent of the Elderly and for the expiration of four terms
on June 30 of each even-numbered year. [Amended 2-16-1999]
§ 10-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-21
1:27
§ 10-21. Inquiries, reports and recommendations.
The Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall conduct inquiries into the
needs of senior citizens in the Town. At least once a year, and more often
if necessary, the Committee shall report to the Council on the state and lot
of older persons in the Town, along with recommendations for programs for
consideration by the total community.
§ 10-21 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 10-21
1:28
ARTICLE VII
Capital Improvements Advisory Committee
§ 10-22. Creation; purpose.
There is hereby created a Capital Improvements Advisory Committee to
advise the Town Council prior to the Council budget sessions in developing,
planning, prioritizing and implementing capital improvement projects
within the Town.
§ 10-23. Membership; terms; vacancies.
The Capital Improvements Advisory Committee shall be composed of five
members appointed by the Council to an initial term terminating on June
30, 1983. All subsequent appointments shall be for terms of two years
commencing on the first day of July. Any vacancy in a membership of
the Committee shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired term of
such member. The Town Manager, the Deputy Director of Public Works/
Engineering and the Director of Community Development shall serve as ex
officio members of the Committee.
§ 10-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-23
1:29

ARTICLE VIII
Board of Assessment Appeals5
[Added 2-22-2011]
§ 10-24. Appointment of alternate members.
There is hereby created, pursuant to § 9-199 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, an ordinance for the appointment of three alternate members
to the Board of Assessment Appeals of the Town of Wethersfield, each of
whom shall be an elector of the Town. On or after the effective date of
this article, one alternate shall be appointed for a term expiring June 30,
2011; one alternate for a two-year term expiring on June 30, 2012, and one
alternate for a term expiring on June 30, 2013. Thereafter, alternates shall
be appointed for three-year terms upon the completion of any initial term.
Said alternate members shall, when seated as herein provided, have all the
powers and duties set forth in the General Statutes. Said alternate members
shall act in the following way:
A. If a regular member of the Board of Assessment Appeals is absent or
disqualified, the Chairperson shall designate an alternate to act in his or
her stead, choosing alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly
equal a number of times as possible. Strict rotation may be disregarded
if need be to satisfy the provisions of Subsection B.
B. An alternate who has been designated to act in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of the Board of Assessment Appeals
shall have the unqualified privilege of voting on any matter considered
by the Board during the public hearing or meeting at which the alternate
served, irrespective of when the Board may act on said matter. An
alternate so qualified to vote shall have preference to vote in place of a
regular Board member who was absent at the public hearing or meeting
but who may have become familiar with the record through post-hearing
or post-meeting review of it.
5. Editor's Note: Former Art. VIII, Tri-Town Community Cable Access Committee, was
repealed 1-18-2000.
§ 10-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-24
1:31

ARTICLE IX
Youth Advisory Board
§ 10-25. Creation; powers and duties.
There is hereby created a Youth Advisory Board, which shall inquire into the
needs of youth in the community and advise the Manager and Director of
Youth Services on and sponsor programs of benefit to youth.
§ 10-26. Composition; terms; vacancies. [Amended 1-5-2015]
The Youth Advisory Board shall consist of 13 members appointed for threeyear
terms beginning July 1 of the year of appointment. Eleven members
shall be appointed by the Council, at least two of whom shall be under
the age of 21. Two adult members shall be appointed by the Manager
from and represent the following: the school administration and Police
Department. Persons serving as members of the Youth Advisory Board prior
to its creation by the Council shall continue to serve for the balance of their
current terms. Any vacancy in a membership of the Board shall be filled by
the respective appointing authority for the unexpired term of such member.
§ 10-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-26
1:33

ARTICLE X
Alternates to Planning and Zoning Commission
§ 10-27. Appointment or election of alternates.
There is hereby created, pursuant to C.G.L. § 8-1b, an ordinance for the
appointment or election of alternate members to the Planning and Zoning
Commission of the Town of Wethersfield. Said alternate members shall,
when seated as herein provided, have all the powers and duties set forth
in the General Statutes or any special act relating to the Town of
Wethersfield's Commission and its members as provided for in said General
Statutes. Further, such alternate members shall be electors and shall not
be members of the Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Commission. Said
alternate members shall act in the following way:
A. If a regular member of the Commission is absent or disqualified, the
Chairperson shall designate an alternate to act in his or her stead,
choosing alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a
number of times as possible. Strict rotation may be disregarded if need
be to satisfy the provisions of Subsection B.
B. An alternate who has been designated to act in the absence or
disqualification of a regular Commissioner shall have the unqualified
privilege of voting on any matter considered by the Commission during
the public hearing or meeting at which the alternate served, irrespective
of when the Commission may act on said matter. An alternate so qualified
to vote shall have preference to vote in place of a regular Commissioner
who was absent at the public hearing or meeting but who may have
become familiar with the record through post-hearing or post-meeting
review of it.
§ 10-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-27
1:35

ARTICLE XI
Joint Transit Districts
§ 10-28. Joinder to form district.
The Town shall join with any one or more of the municipalities in the capital
region planning area to form a transit district pursuant to Chapter 103a of
the General Statutes.
§ 10-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-28
1:37

ARTICLE XII
Inland Wetlands and Conservation Commission
[Amended 7-16-2018]
§ 10-29. Establishment; powers and duties.
A. An Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission is hereby established
in accordance with the provisions of "An Act Concerning Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses," being Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45, inclusive, of
the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. Said Commission shall
have all the powers and responsibilities authorized under said sections
of the General Statutes, and as they may be amended from time to time.
B. The name of the Commission shall be the Inland Wetlands and
Conservation Commission.
C. In addition to the powers and duties referred to in Subsection A above,
the Commission shall also have as its purpose the development and
conservation of natural resources within the territorial limits of the
Town. It shall conduct research into the utilization and possible
utilization of land areas of the Town and may coordinate the activities
of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes and may advertise,
prepare and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets as
necessary for its purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas,
publicly or privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps, and
other wetlands, for the purpose of obtaining information on the proper
use of such areas, and may, from time to time, recommend to the
Planning and Zoning Commission plans and programs for the
development and use of such areas, which may include the acquisition
of conservation easements. Subject to the approval of the Town Council,
the Commission may receive gifts and acquire land in the name of
the Town for any of its purposes set forth in C.G.S. § 7-131a and shall
administer such gifts for such purposes subject to the terms of the gift.
The Commission may review environmental issues or questions upon
request of the Town Council.
§ 10-30. Membership.
A. The Inland Wetlands and Conservation Commission shall be composed
of nine members and two alternates, all of whom shall be appointed
by Council. Upon the expiration of the original appointment terms, all
subsequent appointments shall be for the term of three years
commencing on the first day of July. Any vacancy in a membership of
the Commission shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired term of
such member. The Council may remove any Commission member for just
cause as is provided in Chapter III of the Charter.
B. The Commission shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings
and provide a method for calling special meetings. The Commission
shall determine its own rules of procedure. The Commission may adopt
regulations, rules and procedures to carry out the purposes of this
chapter. The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and make an annual report to the Town Council. It shall make
such special reports as the Town Council may request from time to time.
§ 10-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-30
1:39

ARTICLE XIII
Wethersfield Heritage Commission
[Added 7-16-20186]
§ 10-31. Establishment; purposes.
A. There is hereby created the Wethersfield Heritage Commission.
B. The purposes of the Wethersfield Heritage Commission shall be:
(1) To develop, recommend and coordinate proposals and programs and
methods to assist, initiate, encourage and sponsor activities in all
fields of culture and the arts for Wethersfield; and
(2) To strengthen the local visitor experience, promote business
development in Wethersfield, enhance tourism opportunities, and
enhance interpretive aspects of the community.
§ 10-32. Membership; officers; vacancies.
A. The Commission shall consist of 11 regular members, appointed by the
Council, as follows:
(1) Executive Director of the Wethersfield Historical Society or
designee;
(2) Executive Director of the Webb Deane Stevens Museum or
designee;
(3) One member of the Old Wethersfield Shopkeepers Association;
(4) One member of the Wethersfield Chamber of Commerce;
(5) One resident of Wethersfield;
(6) One member of the Economic Development and Improvement
Commission;
(7) One representative of the Silas Deane business community;
(8) One resident of the Old Wethersfield Historic District;
(9) One representative of the business community, not retail;
(10) One representative of the Wethersfield Historic District
Commission; and
(11) One representative of the Town government staff (the Town
Manager or an appointee).
B. Beginning September 1, 2018, the Commission members shall be
appointed for three-year terms by the Council.
C. Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be filled by the
Council for the unexpired term of such member.
§ 10-32.1. Procedures.
The Commission shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings and
provide a method for calling special meetings. The Commission shall
determine its own rules of procedure. The Commission may adopt
regulations, rules and procedures to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and make
an annual report to the Town Council. It may make special reports as the
Town Council may request from time to time.
6. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. XIII, Committee on Culture and
Arts.
§ 10-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-32.1
1:41

ARTICLE XIV
Advisory Committee for People With Disabilities
§ 10-33. Creation; membership; duties. [Amended 11-16-2015]
There is hereby created an Advisory Committee for People with Disabilities,
which shall be comprised of eight persons and an ex officio member to be
designated by the Senior Citizens Advisory Committee, who shall inquire
into the needs of disabled persons, as may be defined by said body, in
the Town. In addition to the eight regular members, there shall be four
alternates. To the fullest extent possible, said Committee shall include
among its members those who are disabled. The Committee shall make such
reports and recommendations to the Town Council as it deems appropriate.
§ 10-34. Appointment; terms; vacancies.
The members of the Advisory Committee for People with Disabilities shall
be appointed by Council. Of the 15 persons originally appointed to the
Committee, seven shall have initial terms that shall expire on June 30,
1977, and eight shall have initial terms that shall expire on June 30, 1978.
Upon the expiration of the original appointment terms, all subsequent
appointments shall be for terms of two years, commencing on the first day
of July. Any vacancy in a membership of the Committee shall be filled by
Council for the unexpired term of such member.
§ 10-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-34
1:43

ARTICLE XV
(Reserved)7
§ 10-35. through § 10-36. (Reserved)
7. Editor’s Note: Former Art. XV, Citizens Energy Conservation Advisory Committee, as
amended 5-5-2008, was repealed 1-17-2017.
§ 10-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-35
1:45

ARTICLE XVI
(Reserved)8
§ 10-37. through § 10-38. (Reserved)
8. Editor's Note: Former Art. XVI, Solomon Welles House Committee, was repealed
7-16-2018. See Now Art. XX, Parks and Recreation Board.
§ 10-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-37
1:47

ARTICLE XVII
Cove Park Advisory Committee
§ 10-39. Creation; purpose.
There is hereby created a Cove Park Advisory Committee to assist the
Advisory Recreation and Parks Board in a thorough study and to make
recommendations regarding the use of the Wethersfield Cove area.
§ 10-40. Membership; terms; vacancies.
A. The Cove Park Advisory Committee shall be composed of seven members
appointed by the Council for terms that expire on June 30, 1989, as
follows:
(1) One member of the Historic District Commission.
(2) One member of the Solomon Welles House Committee.
(3) One member of the Conservation Commission.
(4) One member of the Advisory Recreation and Parks Board.
(5) One member of the Wethersfield Historical Society.
(6) Two residents of the Town of Wethersfield.
B. Any vacancy in the membership of the Committee shall be filled by the
Council for the unexpired term of such member.
§ 10-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-40
1:49

ARTICLE XVIII
Historic District and Historic District Commission
§ 10-41. Purpose.
It is the intent of this article to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and general welfare of the Town through the preservation and protection of
buildings, places and districts of historic interest within the Town; and to
preserve and protect the many architectural phases of a Connecticut River
Community on continual growth from the year 1964.
§ 10-42. Impairment of other powers.
All powers of the Town Zoning Commission and the Town Zoning Board of
Appeals having to do with the use of land within the historic district shall
not be impaired by this article.
§ 10-43. District created.
There is created a historic district within the Town.
§ 10-44. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the historic district shall be as follows: Commencing at
a point which is the intersection of the easterly line of the right-of-way of
the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad and the southerly line
of the Wilbur Cross Highway; thence southerly along said easterly line
of the right-of-way of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad
Company to the intersection of said line with a line parallel to and 150
feet west of the westerly line of Middletown Avenue; thence southerly along
said parallel line to its intersection with the Wethersfield-Rocky Hill Town
line; thence easterly along the Wethersfield-Rocky Hill Town line to the
intersection of said line with a line parallel to and 200 feet east of the
easterly line of Middletown Avenue; thence northerly along said parallel line
to its intersection with the northerly line of the extension of Maple Street
constituting the approach to the Putnam Memorial Bridge; thence easterly
along said northerly line of the extension of Maple Street constituting the
approach to the Putnam Memorial Bridge to the intersection of said line
with the westerly line of Interstate 91; thence northerly along the westerly
line of Interstate 91 to the Wethersfield-Hartford city line; thence westerly
along the Wethersfield-Hartford city line to the intersection of said line
with the easterly line of the Wilbur Cross Highway; thence southerly and
westerly along the Wilbur Cross Highway to the point of beginning.
§ 10-45. Comprehensive plan.
The Commission shall prepare a plan of appropriateness and protection
for the historic district as a standard by which to determine the
appropriateness of historic architectural features of any new building or
of any modification of existing buildings within the district. The plan shall
comprehend construction materials and architectural arrangements
§ 10-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-45
1:51
considered appropriate for the district, to be illustrative but not necessarily
comprehensive or extensive and to serve as a general guide for the
information of persons contemplating work involving historic architectural
features within the district.
§ 10-46. Commission created; membership; powers and duties.
There is created a Historic District Commission of five members and three
alternates who shall be electors of the Town holding no public office and
who shall be empowered to perform all functions appointed to them by
Sections 7-147a through 7-147h of the General Statutes. Members and
alternate members of the Historic District Commission shall be appointed
by the Council.
§ 10-47. Appointment; terms; officers.
The initial appointments of members of the Commission and alternate
members shall be made in such manner that the term of at least one
member shall expire each year. Within the month of July each year, the
Commission shall elect from its own number a Chairman, Vice Chairman
and Clerk.
§ 10-48. Administration.
The Historic District Commission shall administer the provisions of Sections
7-147a through 7-147h of the General Statutes as implemented by this
article within the limits of the appropriation made by the Council and
the budgetary allocation made by the Manager. The clerical, technical
and consulting services necessary to the work of the Commission shall be
provided by the Department of Public Works.
§ 10-49. Rules and regulations.
The Commission may adopt rules of procedure, regulations and orders
which it deems necessary to carry out the intent of Sections 7-147a through
7-147h of the General Statutes and the intent expressed in § 10-41 above.
§ 10-50. Filing procedure. [Amended 6-18-1990]
All work on any type of structure which would change the appearance of
any property within the Historic District when viewed from the street line
shall not be begun until the property owner has filed an application with
the Building Inspector and has received a certificate of appropriateness
from the Historic District Commission. For the purposes of this article, the
Building Inspector shall require the applicant to provide such information
on those forms devised by the Historic District Commission as may be
adopted or modified from time to time by the Commission. Prior to
considering each application for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Commission shall set a date for a public hearing to be held within 45 days of
receipt of the application. Notice of the time and place of said hearing shall
be given by publication in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in a
§ 10-45 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 10-50
1:52
newspaper having substantial circulation in the municipality at least seven
days before such hearing. Within 65 days of the filing of an application,
the Commission shall pass upon such application and shall give written
notice of its decision to the applicant. Failure to act within the 65 days shall
constitute approval of the application. All hearings and all meetings of the
Commission at which decisions are made shall be open to the public.
§ 10-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-50
1:53

ARTICLE XIX
Economic Development and Improvement Commission
§ 10-51. Establishment; acceptance of statute.
The provisions of Section 7-136 of the General Statutes are accepted and,
pursuant thereto, an Economic Development and Improvement Commission
is established for the promotion, improvement and development of the
economic resources of the Town.
§ 10-52. Commission to be development agency.
A. The Commission shall be known as the "Wethersfield Economic
Development and Improvement Commission."
B. The Town hereby designates the Wethersfield Economic Development
and Improvement Commission to be its development agency as provided
in Section 8-188 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 10-53. Membership; terms; alternates.
A. The Commission shall consist of nine members and two alternates
appointed by the Town Manager as chief executive authority of the Town.
The membership shall be composed of:
(1) One member of the Wethersfield Chamber of Commerce Board of
Directors.
(2) Three members from the Wethersfield business community.
(3) Five members from the community at large, one of whom shall have
commercial real estate background.
(4) One alternate from the business community.
(5) One alternate from the community at large.
B. Of the nine members and alternates initially appointed, three shall be
appointed for terms to expire on June 30, 1982, three shall be appointed
for terms to expire on June 30, 1983, and three shall be appointed
for terms to expire on June 30, 1984. All subsequent appointments of
members shall be for terms of three years, commencing on the first day
of July, except for the appointments of the two members added during
1984, which shall be for initial terms of two and three years, and for
three years thereafter. Any vacancy in a membership of the Commission
shall be filled by the Manager for the unexpired term of such member.
In addition, said Commission will have the following ex officio nonvoting
members:
(1) The Town Planner.
(2) A designee from the Town Planning and Zoning Commission.
(3) A designee from the Town Council.
§ 10-54. Removal of members.
Any member of the Commission may be removed by the Manager for cause
and, on request of such member, after public hearing.
§ 10-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-55
1:55
§ 10-55. Compensation.
The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their
services as such but shall be reimbursed for their necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of their official duties, subject to budgetary
limitations.
§ 10-56. Employees.
The Commission may appoint employees necessary for the discharge of its
duties, subject to budgetary limitations and relevant Charter provisions.
§ 10-57. Powers and duties.
A. The Commission shall conduct research into the economic conditions
and trends in the Town and shall seek to coordinate the activities of and
cooperate with unofficial bodies organized for the purpose of promoting
economic development in the Town.
B. The Commission shall maintain an up-to-date list of all Town-owned
land and buildings, make annual recommendations for the use and
development of the same to the Town Council, review all proposals for
new development and redevelopment submitted to any Town official,
agency, board, committee or commission and make recommendations on
such proposals based upon the impact such proposals will have on the
economic growth and development of the community. The Commission
shall encourage businesses to maintain and improve the vitality and
environment of the business community and shall recommend and report
on proposed road improvements and other considerations that relate to
business activity. The Commission shall continuously review and update
the information maintained by it concerning resources available for
prospective economic development and shall oversee the Town staff's
recordings of building and land availability. The Commission shall
implement the use of its resources to encourage compatible businesses
to move to become established in Wethersfield.
C. The Commission shall annually prepare and transmit to the Town Council
a report of its activities and of its recommendations for improving
economic conditions and development in the Town.
§ 10-58. Coordination with other Town bodies.
The Commission shall coordinate its activities with the Town Planning and
Zoning Commission and with other interested officials and agencies of
the Town, and the Commission may invite to attend and participate in its
meetings and deliberations, but without vote, any person not a member of
the Commission.
§ 10-59. Advertising.
The Commission may advertise and may prepare, print and distribute
books, maps, charts and pamphlets which, in its judgment, will further its
official purposes, subject to budgetary limitations.
§ 10-55 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 10-60
1:56
§ 10-60. Appropriations.
A. The annual appropriation by the Council for the purposes of the
Commission shall not exceed a sum amounting to 1/20 of 1% of the last
completed grand list of taxable property.
B. In the performance of its duties and in the exercise of its powers
aforesaid, the Commission shall not incur any expenses or obligate the
Town to pay any expense in excess of the funds appropriated by the
Council for such purpose.
§ 10-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-60
1:57

ARTICLE XX
Parks and Recreation Board
[Amended 7-16-2018]
§ 10-61. Creation; membership; terms.
Pursuant to Section 510 of the Charter, there shall be an Advisory Parks and
Recreation Board to consist of seven members who shall serve for terms of
three years commencing July 1 of the year of appointment. In addition to the
duties of the Board as set forth in the Sections 510 and 604 of the Charter,
it shall also advise and assist in the continuing care and furnishing of the
Solomon Welles House and grounds.
§ 10-62. Appointments; vacancies.
A. All appointments to the Parks and Recreation Board shall be made by the
Council and shall be made in such a manner that the terms of not more
than three members expire on July 1 of each year; provided, however,
that the initial appointments to the combined committee shall be for such
lengths, not to exceed three years, as the Council may deem appropriate.
B. Any vacancy on the Parks and Recreation Board shall be filled by
appointment of the Council for the unexpired portion of the term for
which such a vacancy exists.
§ 10-63. Alternates.
The Council, in addition to the appointment of seven members of the Parks
and Recreation Board, shall also appoint two alternate members to said
Board who shall each serve for three-year terms commencing July 1 of the
year of appointment. Said alternate members shall not sit on the Board
unless called upon by the Chairman to attend a meeting in the absence of
a regular member of said Board. The Parks and Recreation Board shall be
authorized to establish a procedure for the sitting of the alternate members
in a fair and reasonable manner.
§ 10-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-63
1:59

ARTICLE XXI
Code of Ethics and Board of Ethics
[Amended 5-5-2008; 6-20-2011]
§ 10-64. Policies.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officers and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people of Wethersfield; that government decisions and policy be made in the
proper channels of governmental structure; that public office not be used
for personal or private gain; that the public have confidence in the integrity
of government; that public officials carry out their duties to the best of their
abilities and with high moral and ethical standards, regardless of personal
considerations, and that their conduct should at all times avoid conflict
between public and private interests and responsibilities. In recognition of
these goals, a Code of Ethics is hereby established for governed persons
of the Town of Wethersfield, as are hereinafter defined. The purpose of
this code is to establish ethical standards of conduct by setting forth those
actions that are in conflict with the best interest of the Town and by
directing disclosure of any financial or personal beneficial interest in
matters affecting the Town.
§ 10-65. Governed persons; Appointing Authority.
The Code of Ethics of the Town of Wethersfield shall govern the Town
Council and all other elected officials, the Library Board, all other Town
employees; also all persons appointed to boards, commissions or advisory
committees by the Board of Education, the Town Council, the Mayor, the
Superintendent of Schools or the Town Manager, hereinafter referred to
collectively as "Governed Persons." With respect to such persons who are
appointed to boards, commissions or advisory committees by, or who are
employed by the Board of Education, the Town Council, the Mayor, the
Superintendent of Schools or the Town Manager, the respective appointing
authority or employer for such persons is each hereinafter individually
referred to as the "Appointing Authority." The Appointing Authority of
members of the Town Council and the Board of Education shall be deemed
to be the Town Council and the Board of Education, respectively.
§ 10-66. Special treatment.
No governed person shall grant or accept any special consideration,
treatment, favor or advantage beyond that which is generally available to
all residents and/or taxpayers of the Town; provided, however, nothing in
this code shall prohibit a governed person from accepting free admission
to any dinner, dinner dance, concert, play, sporting or other similar event
sponsored by the Town, the Board of Education, any Town board or
commission or by any recognized volunteer or charitable organization in the
Town of Wethersfield.
§ 10-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-67
1:61
§ 10-67. Political activities.
No governed person shall promise an appointment or the use of his
influence to obtain an appointment to any municipal position as a reward
for any political activity.
§ 10-68. Conflicts of interest.
A. No governed person shall act or vote as a result of having accepted
from any person or his representative anything of value whatsoever or
the promise of any future reward. Whenever any person appears before
any board or commission who has actively participated in appointing
or recommending any member of said board or commission and such
member is aware of such participation, such member must:
(1) Disclose such participation for the purpose of the record of such
board or commission;
(2) Then make a decision as to whether or not he or she can sit
impartially and so state for the purpose of the record.
B. No governed person shall accept or solicit anything of value exceeding
$50, whether in the form of a gift or promise of a gift, from any person,
firm or corporation which to his knowledge is involved in business
dealings with the Town. For purposes of this section, a gift shall not
include certificates, plaques, and ceremonial gifts and/or awards.
C. No governed person who has a financial or personal beneficial interest
in any transaction or contract with the Town or in the sale of real estate,
material, supplies or services to the Town on which he may be called to
act upon in his official capacity shall vote upon or otherwise participate
in the transaction or contract.
D. Whenever a governed person makes public comments at a meeting of the
Board of Education, the Town Council or any other board, commission
or agency other than the one with which he or she is affiliated, the
governed person shall clearly identify whether he or she is speaking as
an individual citizen or in an official capacity for the unit of government
with which he or she is affiliated.
§ 10-69. Requests for advisory opinions.
Any governed person who questions the applicability of this code to his
or her pending or potential act, vote, bid, discussion, receipt of anything
of value, exceeding $50, and the like may request an opinion from the
Board of Ethics. The request shall be submitted in the form required by the
Board's Rules of Practice. Such governed person shall be given a prompt
opportunity to explain his or her position and interpretation of the Code
of Ethics before the Board of Ethics. Opinions of the Board of Ethics shall
be advisory. This code shall be operative in all instances covered by its
provisions except when superseded by an applicable statutory or Charter
provision.
§ 10-67 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 10-70
1:62
§ 10-70. Sanctions; penalties for offenses.
Violations of any provisions of this code should raise conscientious
questions for the Governed Person concerned as to whether voluntary
resignation or other action is indicated to promote the best interest of
the Town. Violation may, upon determination by the Appointing Authority,
constitute a cause for censure, suspension, removal from office or other
appropriate legal proceedings.
§ 10-71. Creation of Board; membership; terms.
There is hereby created a Board of Ethics which shall be charged with
the administration of the Code of Ethics. The Board of Ethics shall be
composed of five resident electors and three alternates, to be appointed by
the Council. Of the five regular members no more than two shall be of the
same political party, and of the three alternates, no more than one shall be
of the same political party, provided that the members of the Board with
designated major party membership shall be recommended for appointment
by their party in accordance with the normal selection process of such
party. Of the five members initially appointed, three shall be appointed for
terms of three years and two for terms of two years. Of the three alternates
initially appointed, two shall be appointed for terms of three years and one
for a term of two years. All subsequent appointments to the Board shall
be for terms of three years. Any regular member having served for six
consecutive years shall be ineligible for reappointment to the Board. For
individuals filling a vacancy, consecutive years of service will commence
with the next appointment period.
§ 10-72. Rules of Practice.
The Board shall adopt Rules of Practice which it deems necessary to carry
out the intent of this article, and the same and any amendments thereto
shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and available for public
inspection.
§ 10-73. Complaint procedure.
A. The Board shall receive complaints from any person of any alleged
violation of the Code of Ethics. Complaints shall be filed with the Town
Clerk in accordance with the Board's Rules of Practice. Any complaint
received by the Board must be in writing and signed by the individual
making said complaint. Upon receiving a complaint of an alleged
violation of the code, the Board shall, within seven Town working days,
notify, in writing, the person about whom said complaint has been filed,
advising the concerned party of the specific nature of the complaint
made and being investigated by the Board and enclosing therewith a
copy of the complaint. Upon receipt of said notice, the party so notified
shall have the right to file a response within 10 days and may, within said
time period, demand a hearing by the Board. If a hearing is so requested,
it shall be convened within 20 days after such request. If no request
for a hearing is made, the Board, by a vote of at least three members,
§ 10-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-73
1:63
shall determine within 30 days after the mailing of the notice of such
complaint whether a hearing is required.
B. In the event that a hearing is held, the person or persons against
whom such complaint is filed and the person or persons who filed the
complaint shall be notified, in writing, of the date, time and place of
the hearing. In such hearing, the person or persons against whom such
complaint is filed and the person or persons who filed the complaint
shall have the right to counsel, to confrontation of all witnesses, to
cross-examination and to present evidence on their own behalf. No
hearing may be conducted with less than five members in attendance.
The complainant must appear at the hearing or the complaint will be
dismissed. There can be a one-time request for a delay of a hearing date,
as long as it is requested 48 hours before the hearing date.
C. All notices to the person or persons about whom such complaint was
made shall be mailed by certified mail.
D. In the event that a hearing is held, the Board shall render a decision
within 10 days of the final day of said hearing. In the event that no
hearing is held, the Board shall render a decision within 30 days of the
receipt of the complaint.
§ 10-74. Reports to Appointing Authority.
The Board shall report its findings to the Appointing Authority as to any
violations of the Code of Ethics, together with recommendations as to
disposition to be made. The Appointing Authority shall consider such
findings and shall determine within 30 days what disposition shall be made
and shall notify the Board and all interested parties.
§ 10-73 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 10-74
1:64
ARTICLE XXII
Human Rights and Relations Commission
§ 10-75. Creation; membership; terms.
There is hereby created a Human Rights and Relations Commission which
shall be composed of nine resident electors and three alternates, also
resident electors, to be appointed by the Town Council. Of the nine regular
members, three shall have initial terms that shall terminate on June 30,
1977; three shall have initial terms that shall terminate on June 30, 1978;
and three shall have initial terms that shall terminate on June 30, 1979. Of
the three alternates, one shall have an initial term that shall terminate on
June 30, 1977; one shall have an initial term that shall terminate of June
30, 1978; and one shall have an initial term that shall terminate on June 30,
1979. To the fullest extent possible, members of the Commission shall be
selected from a cross section of the community who are interested in the
aims and purposes of the Commission. Upon the expiration of the original
appointment term, all subsequent appointments shall be for a term of three
years commencing on the first day of July.
§ 10-76. Vacancies; removals; limitation on terms.
Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be filled by the
Council for the unexpired term of such member. The Council may remove
any Commission member for just cause as is provided in Chapter III of the
Charter. There shall be no limitation as to the number of consecutive terms
any regular member may serve.
§ 10-77. Bylaws; organization.
A. The Commission may adopt bylaws which it deems necessary to carry
out the intent of this article, and the same and any amendments thereto
shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and available for public
inspection.
B. At its initial meeting and at its first meeting after July first of each
year beginning in 1977, the Commission shall elect from its members a
Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary, and such other officers as
it deems appropriate.
C. The Mayor and his/her designee from the Council, the Town Manager or
his/her designee, an individual designated from the Housing Authority,
the Superintendent of Schools or his/her designee and an individual
designated from the Board of Education may, to the extent they so elect,
serve as ex officio members of said Commission without the power to
vote.
D. The Commission shall hold a minimum of six meetings each year at such
regular intervals as it may designate. Any four regular members of the
Commission may at any time request, in writing, that the Chairperson
call a special meeting. The Chairperson shall, within three days after
receipt of such a request, call a special meeting for a time within five
days after the date of the call of the meeting. A quorum at any meeting
§ 10-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-77
1:65
shall consist of five voting members. It will require five affirmative votes
for the Commission to take any action.
§ 10-78. Purpose.
The purposes of the Commission shall be as follows:
A. To promote mutual understanding and respect among all racial,
religious, ethnic and other groups.
B. To secure equality of treatment and opportunity for all human beings.
C. To cooperate with governmental and nongovernmental agencies and
organizations having like or kindred functions to those of the
Commission.
D. To make such studies in the field of human rights as, in the judgment of
the Commission, will aid in promoting its general purpose.
E. To offer its services and to cooperate with other agencies and
departments of the Town of Wethersfield in promoting a healthy
community.
§ 10-79. Powers and duties.
The commission shall have the following responsibilities:
A. To work with federal, state and Town agencies, as well as with private,
civic, religious, business, industrial, labor and other organizations,
groups and persons, and to recommend to the Town Council programs
designed to help all members of the community to enjoy equality of
opportunity in all phases of community life.
B. To engage in study and research and to publish reports designed to
increase understanding within the community and conduct other
appropriate activities in furtherance of its goals.
C. Complaints.
(1) To receive and/or examine complaints regarding inequity of
treatment or of discrimination in the Town and, when appropriate,
refer such complaints to the Connecticut Commission on Human
Rights and Opportunities or its successor agency and to other
agencies having jurisdiction in a particular matter; provided,
however, that:
(a) Such referrals shall only be with the authorization of the Town
Council.
(b) All complaints emanating from Town employees concerning their
employment shall not be within the jurisdiction of said
Commission but shall be processed through internal Town
grievance procedures to the extent they so apply.
(2) In any event, said Commission shall endeavor to resolve all
complaints at the local level.
D. To seek voluntary compliance with all state and federal laws relating to
human rights and opportunities, as the same may be amended from time
to time.
E. To advise and recommend to the Town Council such ordinances or
programs as it deems necessary to deal with problems of human
relations and rights as they exist or to prevent such problems before
§ 10-77 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 10-79
1:66
they arise in the Town of Wethersfield in situations where there is
a real and present likelihood they will arise, and such likelihood is
demonstrated by complaints or established by Council-assigned projects
and studies.
F. To submit to the Town Council annually or more frequently reports
concerning the activities of the Commission.
G. To promote activities and programs to carry out the purposes of the
Commission.
H. To pursue programs of education that further intergroup understanding,
tolerance and acceptance.
§ 10-80. Compensation; additional expenses.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Secretarial,
clerical and technical assistance as the Commission may need for the
performance of its duties shall be made available to it within the limits
of any appropriation made therefor, if any, and in accordance with Town
personnel policies. The Commission may, with the approval of the Council,
apply for and receive grants to assist it in carrying out its responsibilities.
§ 10-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-80
1:67

ARTICLE XXIII
Fair Rent Commission
§ 10-81. Creation.
There is hereby created a Fair Rent Commission in accordance with Section
7-148b of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.
Said Commission shall have all the powers and duties now or hereafter
provided for fair rent commissions by the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 10-82. Purpose.
The Commission's purpose is to afford a course of appeal to those residents
who feel that their rental charge is so excessive as to be considered harsh
and unconscionable.
§ 10-83. Powers and duties.
A. The Commission is authorized to make studies and investigations,
conduct hearings and receive complaints relative to rental charges on
housing accommodations, except those accommodations rented on a
seasonal basis, within its jurisdiction, in order to control and eliminate
excessive rental charges on such accommodations and to carry out
the provisions of Sections 7-148b to 7-148f, inclusive, Section 47a-20
and Subsection (b) of Section 47a-23c of the General Statutes. The
Commission, for such purposes, may compel the attendance of persons
at hearings, issue subpoenas and administer oaths, issue orders and
continue, review, amend, terminate or suspend any of its orders and
decisions. The Commission may retain legal counsel and other expert
advisors. [Amended 1-16-1990; 6-18-1990]
B. In determining whether a rental charge or a proposed increase in a
rental charge is so excessive, with due regard to all the circumstances,
as to be harsh and unconscionable, the Fair Rent Commission shall
consider such of the following circumstances as are applicable to the
type of accommodation. The Commission shall also consider such
additional or amended circumstances as may be hereafter provided by
the General Statutes.
(1) The rents charged for the same number of rooms in other housing
accommodations in the same and in other areas of the municipality.
(2) The sanitary conditions existing in the housing accommodations in
question.
(3) The number of bathtubs or showers, flush water closets, kitchen
sinks and lavatory basins available to the occupants thereof.
(4) Services, furniture, furnishings and equipment supplied therein.
(5) The size and number of bedrooms contained therein.
(6) Repairs necessary to make such accommodations reasonably
livable for the occupants accommodated therein.
(7) The amount of taxes and overhead expenses, including debt service
thereof.
§ 10-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-83
1:69
(8) Whether the accommodations are in compliance with the
ordinances of the Town and the General Statutes relating to health
and safety.
(9) The availability of utilities.
(10) Damages done to the premises by the tenant, caused by other than
ordinary wear and tear.
(11) The amount and frequency of increases in rental charges.
(12) Whether, and the extent to which, the income from a increase in
rental charges has been or will be reinvested in improvements to
the accommodations.
(13) The income of the petitioner and the availability of
accommodations.
C. If the Commission determines, after a hearing, that the rental charge or
proposed increase in the rental charge for any housing accommodation
is so excessive, based on the standards and criteria set forth in this
article, as to be harsh and unconscionable, it may order that the rent
be limited to such an amount as it determines to be fair and equitable.
If the Commission determines, after a hearing, that the housing
accommodation in question fails to comply with any Town ordinance or
state statute or regulation relating to health and safety, it may order
the suspension of further payment of rent by the tenant until such time
as the landlord makes the necessary changes, repairs or installations
so as to bring such housing accommodation into compliance with such
ordinance, statute or regulation. The rent during said period shall be
paid to the Commission, to be held in escrow. [Amended 6-18-1990]
D. If the Commission determines, after a hearing, that a landlord has
retaliated in any manner against a tenant because the tenant has
complained to the Commission, the Commission may order the landlord
to cease and desist from such conduct.
§ 10-84. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any order of the Commission may appeal to
the Superior Court for the County of Hartford. Any such appeal shall be
considered a privileged matter with respect to the order of trial.
§ 10-85. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any order of rent reduction or rent suspension by
demanding, accepting or receiving an amount in excess thereof while such
order remains in effect and no appeal pursuant to this order is pending
or violates any other provisions of this article or Section 47a-20 of the
Connecticut General Statutes or who refuses to obey any subpoena, order
or decision of the Commission pursuant thereto shall be fined not less than
$25 nor more than $100 for each offense. If such offense continues for more
than five days, it shall constitute a new offense for each day it continues to
exist thereafter.
§ 10-86. Membership and alternates.
§ 10-83 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 10-86
1:70
A. The Fair Rent Commission shall consist of three members and one
alternate who shall be appointed by the Town Council for terms of
two years. One member shall be a tenant of an eligible dwelling unit,
one member shall be a landlord or a landlord representative and one
member, and the alternate member, shall be a neutral member who
shall be neither a landlord nor a tenant. If, during the member's term,
the status of a Commissioner changes with respect to whether he or
she is a tenant or a landlord or neither, he or she shall be disqualified
from office and the position shall be deemed vacant. Any vacancy on
said Commission from whatever cause arising shall be filled, within a
reasonable time, by appointment by the Town Council for the unexpired
portion of the term. [Amended 7-16-2018]
B. The Town Chief Building and Zoning Official and Town Director of Health
shall serve as ex officio members of said Commission, without voting
rights.
§ 10-87. Organization.
At its initial meeting and on an annual basis thereafter, the Commission
shall elect from its membership a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson and
a Secretary. In addition to any schedule for regular meetings which such
Commission may establish, any member of the Commission may at any time
request, in writing, that the Chairperson call a special meeting, whereupon
the Chairperson shall, within three days after receipt of such request, call
a special meeting for a time within seven days after the date of the receipt
of request of such meeting. A quorum at any meeting shall consist of four
members, and the affirmative vote of four members shall be required for
any action to be taken.
§ 10-88. Jurisdiction.
The Fair Rent Commission has jurisdiction over and this article applies to
only those housing accommodations which consist of two or more housing
units or dwellings.
§ 10-89. Reports to Council.
The Commission shall provide to the Town Council, on an annual basis, a
summary report on its activities for the prior year.
§ 10-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-89
1:71

ARTICLE XXIV
Fair Housing Officer and Fair Housing Plan
§ 10-90. Affirmative action; purpose.
It is the policy of the Town of Wethersfield to affirmatively promote
maximum choice in the selection of sale or rental housing regardless of
color, religion, sex or national origin; to promote the lessening of racial,
ethnic and economic concentration; and to protect citizens under the
following state and federal statutes:
A. Civil Rights Act of 1866: prohibits racial discrimination in the sale or
rental of all housing [as upheld in Jones vs. Mayer 392US409 (1968)].
B. Executive Order 11063 (1962): prohibits discrimination based on race,
color, creed or national origin in housing and related facilities which are
owned or operated by the federal government or which are provided by
federal financial assistance, including mortgage insurance and guaranty
program.
C. Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964: provides that no person in the
United States shall, on the grounds of race, color, or national origin, be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of or be otherwise
subjected to discrimination under any program or activity for which the
applicant receives federal financial assistance.
D. Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Community
Development Act of 1974: provides for fair housing by prohibiting
discrimination in sale or rental based on race, color, religion, sex or
national origin through and of the following acts: refusal to deal;
discrimination in terms, conditions or privileges; discriminatory
advertising; false representation; blockbusting; discrimination in
financing; discrimination in use of or membership in multiple listing
services and real estate brokers' organizations. Housing covered under
these provisions includes multifamily dwellings of five or more units,
multifamily dwellings containing four or fewer units if the owner is not in
residence; single-family houses not owned by private individuals; singlefamily
dwellings owned by private individuals who own more than three
such houses or who in any two-year period sell more than one in which
the owner was not the most recent resident.
E. Section 109 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974:
provides that no person in the United States shall, on the grounds of
race, color, national origin or sex, be excluded under any program or
activity funded in whole or in part with funds provided under Title I of
this Act.
F. Public Accommodations and Credit Discrimination Section of the
General Statutes of Connecticut: extends coverage under federal
legislation by also including protection against discrimination based on
creed, ancestry, marital status or physical disability and defines housing
to include property offered for residential construction or use and mobile
home parks. Under Connecticut law, all housing accommodations are
included except for two-family houses and rooming facilities if the owner
is in residence. Additional exemptions with regard to sex only include
associations or organizations traditionally providing accommodations to
§ 10-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-90
1:73
one sex and not requiring rental or sale of housing to persons of a
different sex who are not related by blood or marriage. Also exempted
with regard to age only is the sale or rental of housing accommodations
set up specifically for certain age groups.
§ 10-91. Appointment of Officer; powers and duties.
A Fair Housing Officer shall be appointed by the Town Manager. Said Officer
shall have the responsibility and authority to administer and implement the
Fair Housing Plan and shall perform duties which include the following:
A. Keeping current on all pertinent state and federal legislation relating to
fair housing.
B. Disseminating information, in accord with the Human Rights and
Relations Commission, concerning the Town's commitment to fair
housing to community groups, local real estate brokers, local lending
institutions, landlords, developers, Town officials and the general public.
C. Participating in accord with the Human Rights and Relations
Commission, in educational workshops or seminars concerning the
ramifications of fair housing legislation and the Town's commitment to
fair housing.
D. Developing and distributing the forms needed to properly file a fair
housing grievance.
E. Assisting persons who feel they have been discriminated against, by
trying to affect voluntary compliance on the part of the landlord or seller
or by assisting them in filing a complaint with the proper state and
federal agencies.
F. Providing assistance to the Town's Human Rights and Relations
Commission and keeping the Commission informed of all grievances and
other related fair housing activities.
G. Requesting the Chairman of the Human Rights and Relations
Commission to call special meeting of the Human Rights and Relations
Commission when a particular fair housing issue must be considered
prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting.
H. Maintaining a separate fair housing file which documents all actions
taken to affirmatively further fair housing opportunities in Wethersfield.
Said file shall be open for inspection to the public within the bounds of
confidentiality guaranteed by law.
§ 10-92. Grievance procedure.
A. Any person who feels that he or she has been discriminated against in
an attempt to secure housing within the Town of Wethersfield may file
a complaint with the Fair Housing Officer of the Town of Wethersfield
at the Town Hall or directly with the Human Rights and Relations
Commission. To facilitate and standardize the complaint filing
procedure, forms provided by the Department of Housing and Urban
Development shall be used, and additional forms or background
information will be developed as required.
B. The Fair Housing Officer shall review the complaint and, if the Fair
Housing Officer cannot effect voluntary compliance with the law on the
local level, the complaint shall be referred to the Human Rights and
§ 10-90 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 10-92
1:74
Relations Commission which will assist the person in channeling the
complaint to the Department of Housing and Urban Development and
the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities. The
Fair Housing Officer shall be responsible for keeping tract of all referrals
and providing whatever assistance is needed by the agencies involved.
C. All complaints and follow-ups shall be recorded and kept in the fair
housing file (see § 10-91H).
§ 10-93. Nature of plan.
This article shall constitute the Fair Housing Plan for the Town of
Wethersfield.
§ 10-94. Evaluation.
The Human Rights and Relations Commission, with the assistance of the
Fair Housing Officer, shall review the Fair Housing Plan on a semiannual
basis and make recommendations to revise the Plan when necessary to
improve its effectiveness. The documentation of actions taken and results
achieved in the furtherance of fair housing opportunities in the Town of
Wethersfield, as contained in the fair housing file, shall be utilized to aid in
the evaluation process.
§ 10-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-94
1:75

ARTICLE XXV
Fire Chief Emeritus
[Added 10-7-1991]
§ 10-95. Office established.
In accordance with Section 607 of the Town Charter, the Wethersfield Town
Council hereby establishes the volunteer office of Fire Chief Emeritus. This
office shall be filled by the most recently retired Fire Chief. The duties and
responsibilities of Fire Chief Emeritus shall be determined by the Town
Manager, who shall consult with both the Fire Chief Emeritus and the Fire
Chief before prescribing the duties and responsibilities of this office.
§ 10-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-95
1:77

ARTICLE XXVI
(Reserved)9
[Added 3-1-1999]
§ 10-96. through § 10-97. (Reserved)
9. Editor’s Note: Former Art. XXVI, Tourism Commission, was repealed 7-16-2018. See now
Art. XIII, Wethersfield Heritage Commission.
§ 10-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-96
1:79

ARTICLE XXVII
(Reserved)10
§ 10-98. (Reserved)
§ 10-99. (Reserved)
10.Editor's Note: Former Art. XXVII, Silas Deane Highway Advisory Committee, added
11-15-2004, was repealed 6-19-2006, as such Committee was dissolved.
§ 10-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-99
1:81

ARTICLE XXVIII
Design Review Advisory Committee
[Added 11-1-2004]
§ 10-100. Establishment.
A. A Design Review Advisory Committee is established to advise and help
the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council promote and
encourage public and private actions to:
(1) Encourage the highest quality standard of design and development;
(2) Protect the value of all real property within the community;
(3) Promote aesthetically pleasing development;
(4) Promote the development of a harmonious character in newly
developing or redeveloped areas;
(5) Preserve the special character of existing neighborhoods; and
(6) Thus to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience
and welfare of the community.
B. The advice of the Design Review Advisory Committee is intended to
encourage higher quality building and site design and result in
development that is compatible with the character of the community.
§ 10-101. Membership; terms; alternates.
A. The Design Review Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Town
Council upon an advisory recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. The Design Review Advisory Committee shall consist of five members,
plus one alternate.
C. To the extent available, at least one regular member shall be an architect
and at least two regular members shall be specifically qualified by
reason of education, training or experience in landscape architecture,
historic preservation, community planning, civil engineering, building
trades, graphic arts, the Americans with Disability Act, State Building
Codes or other related fields.
D. Members must be residents of the Town of Wethersfield.
E. Of the five members and one alternate initially appointed, two regular
members and one alternate shall be appointed for an initial two-year
term to expire January 1, 2007, and three regular members shall be
appointed for an initial three-year term to expire January 1, 2008. All
subsequent appointments of members and alternates shall be for terms
of three years.
F. The Design Review Advisory Committee shall adopt its own rules and
procedures, the method of selection of its officers and the establishment
of meeting schedules.
G. A quorum shall consist of three members.
§ 10-102. Removal of members.
Any member of the Design Review Advisory Committee may be removed by
the Town Council for cause and, on request of such member, after public
hearing.
§ 10-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-103
1:83
§ 10-103. Compensation.
The members of the Design Review Advisory Committee shall receive no
compensation for their services as such but shall be reimbursed for their
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties,
subject to budgetary limitations.
§ 10-104. Employees.
The Design Review Advisory Committee may appoint employees necessary
for the discharge of its duties, subject to budgetary limitations and relevant
Charter provisions.
§ 10-105. Powers and duties.
A. The Design Review Advisory Committee shall review all applications
or project plans referred and shall consider the Design Guidelines
contained within Appendix C to the Wethersfield Zoning Regulations11
when reviewing projects.
B. Reports from the Design Review Advisory Committee shall be advisory
and not compulsory to the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Town
Council, which has final approval authority for the applications.
§ 10-106. Procedures.
A. The Design Review Advisory Committee shall meet at regularly
scheduled meetings to consider applications referred to it.
B. Applicants are encouraged to submit preliminary or conceptual plans to
the Design Review Advisory Committee for review and comment prior
to a formal submission to the Planning and Zoning Commission. In such
instance, the Design Review Advisory Committee shall submit a report,
together with its recommendations and suggestions, to the applicant no
later than 20 days after receipt thereof.
C. The Design Review Advisory Committee shall submit its advisory
recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission in writing
at least five days prior to a meeting by the Planning and Zoning
Commission on any application.
D. The written report shall, to the extent feasible, include specific
recommendations regarding plan modifications which the Committee
finds desirable based on the standards and criteria outlined in the
Zoning Regulations and the Design Guidelines found in Appendix C to
the Wethersfield Zoning Regulations.12
E. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be required to delay its
action on an application due to the failure of the Design Review Advisory
Committee to act in a timely manner.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 167, Zoning.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 167, Zoning.
§ 10-103 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 10-107
1:84
§ 10-107. Coordination with other Town bodies.
The Design Review Advisory Committee shall coordinate its activities with
the Planning and Zoning Commission and with other interested officials and
agencies of the Town. The Design Review Advisory Committee may invite
any person not a member of the Committee to attend and participate in its
meetings and deliberations. Such invited person or persons shall have no
vote on the actions of the Design Review Advisory Committee.
§ 10-108. Advertising.
The Design Review Advisory Committee may advertise and may prepare,
print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets which, in its
judgment, will further its official purposes, subject to budgetary limitations.
These materials shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and Town Council prior to distribution.
§ 10-109. Appropriations.
In the performance of its duties and in the exercise of its powers aforesaid,
the Design Review Advisory Committee shall not incur any expenses or
obligate the Town to pay any expense in excess of the funds appropriated
by the Town Council for such purpose.
§ 10-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-109
1:85

ARTICLE XXIX
Redevelopment Agency
[Added 7-17-2006]
§ 10-110. Creation; powers and duties.
There is hereby created a redevelopment agency for the Town in
accordance with Section 8-126 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
Revision of 1958, as amended, said agency to be known as the "Wethersfield
Redevelopment Agency." The Agency shall have all the powers and duties
now or hereafter provided for redevelopment agencies by the Connecticut
General Statutes, subject to the limitations on the exercise of the power
of eminent domain established by § 12-1 of the Code of the Town of
Wethersfield, as the same may be amended from time to time.
§ 10-111. Membership; terms of office; removal of members.
[Amended 7-16-2018]
A. The Agency shall be composed of seven residents in the Town, appointed
by the Town Manager as the chief executive officer of the Town and
approved by the Town Council.
B. Of the members of the Agency first appointed, each one shall be
appointed to serve for one, two, three, four and five years respectively,
terminating on June 30 of the respective year. All subsequent
appointments of members shall be for terms of five years, commencing
on July 1 of the respective year. Each member shall serve until such
member's successor is appointed and qualified. Any vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the manner of the original appointment.
C. Any member of the Agency may be removed for cause and, on request
of such member, after public hearing. [NOTE: See Town Charter § 313
regarding removal powers of Town Council]
§ 10-112. Officers.
Annually at its first meeting on or after July 1, the Agency shall select from
among its members a Chairman and a Vice Chairman.
§ 10-113. Meetings; rules of procedure; majority vote required to
act.
A. Meetings of the Agency shall be held at such times and places as the
Agency may determine.
B. The Agency shall adopt rules of procedure for the governance of its
meetings.
C. Action by the Agency shall be taken only on a majority vote of all of the
members of the Agency.
§ 10-114. Records; reports.
A. The Agency shall keep records of its meetings and other activities.
B. The Agency shall annually on or before July 1 submit to the Town
Council a report of its activities for the prior fiscal year and its projected
§ 10-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-114
1:87
activities for the fiscal year then commencing. The Agency shall make
such special reports as the Town Council may request from time to time.
§ 10-115. Compensation.
The members of the Agency shall receive no compensation for their services
as such but shall be reimbursed for their necessary expenses incurred in
the performance of their official duties, subject to budgetary limitations.
§ 10-116. Coordination with other Town bodies.
The Agency shall coordinate its activities with the Town Planning and
Zoning Commission, the Wethersfield Economic Development and
Improvement Commission and other interested officials and agencies of the
Town, and the Agency may invite to attend and participate in its meetings
and deliberations, but without vote, any person not a member of the Agency.
§ 10-117. Employees.
The Agency may employ a secretary and such other officers, agents,
technical consultants, legal counsel and employees as it may require,
subject to budgetary limitations and relevant Charter provisions.
§ 10-118. Appropriations.
In the performance of its duties and in the exercise of its powers aforesaid,
the Agency shall not incur any expenses or obligate the Town to pay any
expense in excess of the funds appropriated by the Town Council for such
purpose.
§ 10-114 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 10-118
1:88
ARTICLE XXX
Veterans Commission13
[Added 7-16-2018]
§ 10-119. Creation and purpose.
There is hereby created a Veterans Commission to assist and advise the
Town and its residents on veterans' issues and to coordinate and assist in
the planning organization and conduct of the Memorial Day Parade and
the Veterans Day Ceremony. In addition, the Commission shall advise the
Town Council on matters of concern to veterans and their families and on
measures the Council can undertake to better serve the needs of veterans
and their families.
§ 10-120. Membership.
The Veterans Commission shall be composed of seven members appointed
by the Council for a term of two years commencing on the first day of July.
Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be filled by the
Council for the unexpired term of such member. All members shall serve
without compensation. The Council may remove any Commission member
for just cause as provided in Chapter III of the Charter.
§ 10-121. Organization.
The Commission shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings and
provide a method for calling special meetings. The Commission shall
determine its own rules of procedure. The Commission may adopt rules and
procedures to carry out the purposes of this chapter. The Commission shall
keep records of its meetings and activities and make an annual report to the
Town Council. It may make special reports as the Town Council may request
from time to time.
13.Editor’s Note: Former Art. XXX, Advisory Committee for Information and Technology,
added 11-20-2006, was repealed 1-17-2017.
§ 10-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-121
1:89

ARTICLE XXXI
Harbor Management Commission
[Added 8-1-2011; amended 8-20-2018]
§ 10-122. Creation and purpose.
The Town of Wethersfield hereby designates the Advisory Parks and
Recreation Board as the Harbor Management Commission under the
Connecticut Harbor Management Act (Sections 22a-113k et seq. of the
Connecticut General Statutes), the "Act," for the purpose of ensuring the
safe, proper and responsible use of the navigable waters comprising the
area located in or contiguous to the waters of the Town. The Town of
Wethersfield wishes to protect its marine-historic resources and sensitive
natural resource areas found along its harbor and in near shore coastal
waters; to provide greater public opportunities for water-based recreational
activities; to allocate water resources in an equitable and environmentally
sound manner and to maintain and enhance navigational facilities for the
benefit of all harbor users.
§ 10-123. Membership.
The membership of the Advisory Parks and Recreation Board which will
serve as the Harbor Management Commission consists of seven members
and two alternates who shall serve for terms of three years commencing
July 1 of the year of appointment. All appointments to the Advisory Parks
and Recreation Board shall be made by the Council and shall be made in
such a manner that the terms of two members expire on July 1 of each year.
Any vacancy on the Advisory Parks and Recreation Board shall be filled by
appointment of the Council for the unexpired portion of the term for which
a vacancy exists. (Wethersfield Code §§ 10-61 and 10-62.)
§ 10-124. Jurisdiction.
The Harbor Management Commission shall have jurisdiction within the
area located in or contiguous to the waters of the Town as delimited by
the jurisdiction of the Town Council and bounded by the projection of the
boundary line of neighboring towns. This area includes the Wethersfield
Cove, the channel to the Connecticut River and the Connecticut River within
Town boundaries.
§ 10-125. Duties and responsibilities.
The Harbor Management Commission:
A. Directs the development of a municipal Harbor Management Plan
pursuant to the Act.
B. Provides an annual review of the Harbor Management Plan and makes
changes as appropriate.
C. Recommends ordinances for adoption by the Town Council which
implement the Harbor Management Plan.
§ 10-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-125
1:91
D. Provides input to the Harbormaster and Town staff in the assignment
of the moorings and slips, the management of the boat launch, dock,
mooring, and anchorage areas and the collection of the boat launch, slip
and mooring fees in compliance with the local user fee system.
E. Assists staff in the coordination of all public and private agencies,
commissions and other organizations which have interest or jurisdiction
within the harbor area.
F. Conducts or causes to be conducted studies of the conditions and
operations in and adjacent to Wethersfield Cove and presents proposals
to the Town Council.
G. Requests, when appropriate, a general permit from the United States
Army Corps of Engineers and/or delegation of state inspection and
enforcement authority pursuant to Section 221-21 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ 10-125 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 10-125
1:92
Chapter 11
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency services — See Ch. 7. Town-wide radio coverage — See Ch. 127.
§ 11-1. Authority.
The chief executive officer of a municipality is authorized to declare a local
disaster emergency in accordance with the terms of Connecticut General
Statutes, Sections 28-8a(a) and 28-1(8).
§ 11-2. Effect.
Upon declaration of a local disaster emergency by the Town Manager, the
Town Manager and the Emergency Management Director shall exercise all
powers and authority granted to the Town of Wethersfield and/or its chief
executive officer (Town Manager) under Title 28 of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
§ 11-3. Activation.
In times of serious disaster or civil emergency, the Town Manager is
authorized to activate the Emergency Operations Center. The Police Chief,
the Fire Chief, the Health Director and the Emergency Management
Director, or their designated representatives, shall assist the Town Manager
in evaluating the need for the declaration of a local disaster emergency.
§ 11-4. Coordination with Area Coordinator.
In times of serious disaster or civil emergency, the Town Manager will
coordinate his or her response activities with the appropriate Area
Coordinator from the Connecticut Department of Emergency Management
and Homeland Security.
Chapter 12
EMINENT DOMAIN
§ 12-1. Powers limited.
Within the territorial limits of the Town of Wethersfield, no owner-occupied
residential real property consisting of four or fewer dwelling units may be
acquired by eminent domain for economic development purposes pursuant
to Connecticut General Statutes, §§ 8-128 to 8-133 inclusive, if the resulting
project will be privately owned or controlled. Nothing contained herein
shall be construed to limit the use of eminent domain powers for public
§ 10-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1
1:93
purposes including but not limited to the construction of sewers, highways,
sidewalks, rights-of-way, flood and erosion control purposes or for any other
transaction where the property rights acquired will be held or controlled
by the Town of Wethersfield. This chapter shall not conflict with any
subsequently enacted state law on this subject matter.
Chapter 13
ENERGY IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 167.
§ 13-1. Purpose and intent.
A. In accordance with Public Act 07-242, the Town of Wethersfield hereby
establishes the Wethersfield Energy Improvement District, within the
area defined as the municipal boundaries of the Town of Wethersfield, to
be created and operated according to the procedures set forth in Public
Act 07-242.
B. Public Act 07-242 provides municipalities with the authority to establish
Energy Improvement District(s) through the formation of a municipal
board and the development of a comprehensive plan. An Energy
Improvement District allows energy users to aggregate electric and
thermal loads on a voluntary basis.
C. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the planning, development,
funding, acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction,
improvement, extension, or operation of one or more energy
improvement districts with a view to increase efficiency, reliability, and
the furtherance of commerce and industry in the energy improvement
district. It is further to coordinate district activities with regard to
such resources with relevant state, regional, and federal agencies.
Participation in the Energy Improvement District is on a voluntary basis
and participation can be rescinded by a District member at any time.
§ 13-2. Definitions.
In the interpretation hereof, the following words and terms shall be taken
to include the following meanings when context shall require or permit:
BOARD — The Energy Improvement District Board created by this chapter
and as more particularly set forth in Connecticut Public Act 07-242.
CONNECTICUT GENERAL STATUTES — The revision of 1958, as revised
and amended.
DISTRICT — The Energy Improvement District which shall be a zone within
the Town of Wethersfield whose boundaries shall be determined, by
ordinance and in accordance with Public Act 07-242, by the Town Council
after receipt of a feasibility report and recommendations of the Board.
§ 12-1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 13-2
1:94
ENERGY IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT DISTRIBUTED RESOURCES — One or
more of the following:
EX OFFICIO — Nonvoting member.
FEDERAL AGENCY — The United States of America, and any department
of or corporation, agency, or instrumentality thereof or hereafter created,
designated or established by the United States of America.
MICROGRID — Small, locally controlled electric systems interconnected
with electric distribution company facilities.
PROJECT — The acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction,
improvement or extension of one or more energy improvement district
distributed resources.
STATE AGENCY — The State of Connecticut, any department of, or
corporation, agency, or instrumentality thereof, or hereafter created,
designated, or established by the State of Connecticut.
§ 13-3. Energy Improvement District Board.
The Board of the District shall consist of five voting members. The voting
members shall be electors or representatives of businesses located in the
district, who shall be nominated by the Mayor and approved by the Town
Council for a one-year term. The terms of the five designated members shall
expire on June 30, 2009. Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as
the original appointment. The Mayor shall be an ex officio member of the
Board. The Board members shall serve without compensation, except for
reasonable and necessary expenses.
§ 13-4. Powers and duties of Board.
A. The Energy Improvement District and Energy Improvement District
Board shall have all the powers and duties conferred or imposed on it by
the Connecticut General Statutes. Additionally the Board shall issue an
annual report of its yearly activities and financial statements.
B. Any project acquired and/or constructed by the Board shall be acquired
and/or constructed subject to the approval of the Town Council of
Wethersfield.
Customer-side distributed resources, as defined in Section 16-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes;
A.
B. Grid-side distributed resources, as defined in said Section 16-1;
C. Combined heat and power systems, as defined in said Section 16-1;
D. Class III renewable energy sources, as defined in said Section 16-1 and;
E. Microgrids, as defined below in this section.
§ 13-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-5
1:95
§ 13-5. Bonding.
The Board in addition to the powers set forth in § 13-4 above shall have the
power to issue and secure bonds as more particularly set forth in Public
Act 07-242. Any bonds proposed to be issued by the Energy Improvement
District Board are subject to the approval of the Town Council. Unless the
bonds are guaranteed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 33 of
Public Act 07-242, such bonds will be the obligation of the Board and not
the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 13-6. District properties.
The properties included in the District shall be determined, by ordinance
and in accordance with Public Act 07-242, by the Town Council after receipt
of a feasibility report and recommendations of the Board.
§ 13-7. Regulations by Board.
The Board may make and enforce any reasonable regulation which it may
determine to be necessary relating to the facilities owned or leased by any
individual or corporation, limited liability company, partnership, etc., within
the District consistent with the laws of the State of Connecticut and the
Charter and the Code of the Town of Wethersfield.
Chapter 14
FUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Purchasing procedure — See Ch. 27. Sale of Town property — See Ch. 37.
§ 13-5 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 13-7
1:96
ARTICLE I
Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
[Adopted as Secs. 4-3-1 through 4-3-4 of the Code of 1972 (Ch. 4 of
the 1990 Code)]
§ 14-1. Establishment; deposits.
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, § 7-131q, the Town of
Wethersfield shall hereby establish an Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
hereinafter referred to as the "fund." There shall be deposited in said fund:
A. All moneys received by the Town of Wethersfield, from whatever source
and by whatever means, as gifts for agricultural land preservation
purposes.
B. All moneys received by the Town of Wethersfield, from whatever source
and by whatever means, as grants or loans for agricultural land
preservation purposes.
C. All moneys appropriated to said fund by the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 14-2. Custody and investment of funds.
The fund shall be in the custody of the Finance Director of the Town of
Wethersfield. All or any part of the moneys in said fund may, from time to
time, be invested in any investments in which public funds may be lawfully
invested. All income derived from such investments shall be paid into the
fund and become a part thereof. The moneys so invested shall at all times be
subject to withdrawal from such investments for use as provided in § 14-4
below.
§ 14-3. Annual report.
Annually, the Finance Director, as custodian of the fund, shall submit to the
Council a complete and detailed report of the condition of said fund, which
report shall be made a part of the annual municipal report.
§ 14-4. Purchase of land development rights.
Upon authorization of the Town Council, the moneys in said fund may be
used by the Town for the acquisition in its name of the development rights
of agricultural land and for any expenditure incurred for the preservation
of agricultural land, provided that the development rights have been
voluntarily offered for sale to the Town by the owner and the land has been
designated for preservation purposes by the Town in an open space plan,
plan of development or farmland preservation plan.
§ 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-4
1:97

ARTICLE II
Blue Cross and Blue Shield Reserve Fund
[Adopted as Sec. 4-1-17 of the Code of 1972; amended in its entirety
6-16-1997 (Ch. 9 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 14-5. Establishment.
A reserve fund for the purpose of an administrative services only program
with Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Connecticut shall be established, and
revenue to this fund shall include the contributions recommended by Blue
Cross and Blue Shield, together with interest from investments made from
the reserve fund. The Town and the Board of Education shall make the
contributions as recommended by Blue Cross and Blue Shield of
Connecticut into this reserve fund.
§ 14-6. Expenditures and transfers.
Expenditures from this reserve fund will include charges from Blue Cross
and Blue Shield to pay hospital and medical claims and for claims
administration fees for Town and school employees. Transfers from this
reserve fund will require seven affirmative votes by the Town Council.
§ 14-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-6
1:99

ARTICLE III
Land Acquisition Fund
[Adopted6-20-1994 (Ch. 15 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 14-7. Establishments; deposits.
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 7-131r, the Town of Wethersfield
shall hereby establish a Land Acquisition Fund, hereinafter referred to as
the "fund." There shall be deposited in said fund, annually, an amount not to
exceed the amount which would be generated by the imposition of a tax of
two mills against the property subject to tax in such municipality pursuant
to Chapter 203 (§ 12-40 et seq.) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as may
be appropriated by the municipality.
§ 14-8. Custody and investment of funds.
The fund shall be in the custody of the Finance Director of the Town of
Wethersfield. All or any part of the moneys in said fund may, from time to
time, be invested in any investments in which public funds may be lawfully
invested. All income derived from such investments shall be paid into the
fund and become a part thereof. The moneys so invested shall at all times be
subject to withdrawal from such investments for use as provided in § 14-10
below.
§ 14-9. Annual report.
Annually, the Finance Director, as custodian of the fund, shall submit to the
Council a complete and detailed report of the condition of said fund, which
report shall be made a part of the annual municipal report.
§ 14-10. Acquisition of land.
Such fund shall be used by the municipality for the acquisition of land to be
used for open space, recreation or housing.
§ 14-11. Duration of fund.
Such fund shall not lapse at the close of the municipal fiscal year.
§ 14-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-11
1:101

ARTICLE IV
Wethersfield Cove Park Restoration/Preservation Fund
[Adopted 8-17-199814 (Ch. 44 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 14-12. Establishment; deposits.
A. The Town of Wethersfield shall hereby establish a Wethersfield Cove
Park Restoration/Preservation Fund (the "fund").
B. There shall be deposited in said fund:
(1) All monies received by the Town of Wethersfield, from whatever
source, for the recreational use of the Wethersfield Cove Park,
including but not limited to boat ramp launch fees and fees for dock
rings.
(2) All monies received by the Town of Wethersfield, from whatever
source and by whatever means, including but not limited to grants,
loans and gifts provided to said fund.
(3) All monies appropriated to said fund by the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 14-13. Custody and investment of funds.
The fund shall be in the custody of the Finance Director of the Town of
Wethersfield. All or any part of the monies in the fund may, from time to
time, be invested in any investment in which public funds may be lawfully
invested. All income derived from such investments shall be credited to the
fund and become a part thereof. The monies so invested shall at all times be
subject to withdrawal from such investments for use as provided in § 14-15
below.
§ 14-14. Annual report.
Annually, the Finance Director, as custodian of the fund, shall submit to the
Council a complete and detailed report of the financial condition of said
fund, which report shall be made a part of the Annual Municipal Report.
§ 14-15. Use of fund.
Upon authorization of the Town Council, the monies in the fund may be used
by the Town for purposes relating to the study, improvement and benefit of
the water quality and natural habitat of the Wethersfield Cove Park and also
relating to the construction, repair and replacement of physical structures
used for recreational purposes at the Wethersfield Cove Park.
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it would take effect 7-1-1999.
§ 14-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-15
1:103

ARTICLE V
Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust Fund
[Adopted 9-17-2012]
§ 14-16. Administration resolution approved.
A. Whereas, the Town of Wethersfield (the "Town") and its Board of
Education (the "Board") have provided post-employment benefits to
their retired employees; and
B. Whereas, the Governmental Accounting Standards Board ("GASB") has
issued Statement No. 45 requiring municipal governments to account
for their obligations in respect of non-pension "other post-employment
benefits" ("OPEB") as such benefits accrue; and
C. Whereas, in accordance with the GASB requirements, the Town has
commissioned actuarial evaluations (the "actuarial reports") of the
Town's and Board's obligations to provide OPEB; and
D. Whereas, under the laws of the State of Connecticut (Public Acts 05-202
and 06-79), the Town is authorized to promulgate an ordinance
establishing or amending a municipal OPEB system, including a related
OPEB reserve or trust; and
E. Whereas, the Town Council intends to establish a system for providing
OPEB (the "OPEB System") that will include a trust to receive
contributions by the Town and the Board toward OPEB funding.
F. Now, therefore be it resolved, that the actuarial reports attached hereto
as Exhibit A15 are approved by this Council, and the Town's Director of
Finance is directed to file such reports with the Town Clerk in the public
records and to make such other disclosures as may be required by GASB
standards;
G. Be it further resolved, that the Director of Finance is directed hereafter
to obtain such new actuarial valuations and to make such disclosures
thereof as may be required from time to time by applicable law or GASB
standards;
H. Be it further resolved, that that the Town hereby adopts the article
establishing an OPEB System attached hereto as Exhibit B;16
I. Be it further resolved, that the Town and Board shall enter into an OPEB
Trust Agreement substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit
C;17
J. Be it further resolved, that the Trustees under the Trust Agreement shall
be the persons from time to time holding the positions of Mayor, Chair
of the Budget and Finance Committee, Superintendent of Schools or
designee, Town Manager, Director of Finance, plus two residents of the
Town who are not Town officials, who shall serve while they hold such
offices or until they sooner resign or are removed as provided in the
Trust Agreement.
§ 14-17. Actuarial valuations.18
15.Editor's Note: See § 14-17, Actuarial valuations.
16.Editor's Note: See § 14-18, System established.
17.Editor's Note: See § 14-20, Agreement established.
§ 14-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-18
1:105
§ 14-18. System established. [Amended 3-17-2014]
A. The Town of Wethersfield (the "Town") has established a system (the
"OPEB System") for providing non-pension benefits known as "other
post-employment benefits" ("OPEB") to retired employees of the Town
and the Board of Education (the "Board"). The OPEB System shall be
administered in accordance with this article,
B. The OPEB System shall provide for the administration of all OPEB in
effect as of the effective date and which may become effective in the
future.
C. The OPEB System shall provide for accounting for such benefits and
disclosure of such accounting in accordance with applicable law and
GASB standards.
D. The Town shall engage one or more actuarial consulting firms to perform
and report upon such valuations of the OPEB obligations of the Town
and the Board as may be necessary or appropriate for the maintenance
of the OPEB System, including the compliance of the OPEB System with
all applicable laws and accounting standards.
E. The Town and Board shall enter into an agreement (the "Trust
Agreement") establishing a trust (the "OPEB Trust") to receive
contributions toward the funding of OPEB. The initial Trustees and their
successors shall be the persons holding the offices of Mayor, Chair
of the Budget and Finance Committee, Superintendent of Schools or
designee, Town Manager and Director of Finance, together with such
other persons, if any as may be appointed by the Town Council.
F. The Town and the Board shall contribute to the OPEB Trust such
amounts of cash as may be determined as part of their annual budget
processes and approved by the Town Council or the Board, as the case
may be.
G. The Trustees of the OPEB Trust shall invest and reinvest the Town's
and the Board's contributions in separate accounts in the name of each
entity within the OPEB Trust. The Trustees shall further segregate funds
within each such portion of the OPEB Trust according to the present
or former union affiliation, or other relevant employee grouping, of
retired employees in respect of whom the contributions were made.
The Trustees shall disburse funds from the Trust to provide or assist in
providing OPEB to the corresponding groups of retired employees, all in
accordance with Connecticut law, this article, and the provisions of the
Trust Agreement.
H. The Town Manager shall be empowered to execute such documents and
agreements as may be required to maintain the OPEB System.
I. This article shall be effective immediately upon its passage and adoption
and shall remain in full force and effect until supplemented, amended,
repealed or otherwise altered.
J. This article shall be published as required by law.
K. This article hereby repeals all ordinances to the extent in conflict
herewith.
18.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Town offices.
§ 14-18 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 14-19
1:106
§ 14-19. Trust Agreement.19
§ 14-20. Agreement established.
This Trust Agreement is made and entered into by and between (a) the
Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut (the "Town"), and the Board of Education
of the Town of Wethersfield (the "Board") (the Town and Board being
sometimes herein jointly called the "Employers") and (b) the Trustees who
are signatories to this Agreement and are further defined herein.
A. Whereas, the Town is a municipal entity created under the laws of
the State of Connecticut and is a political subdivision of the State of
Connecticut; and
B. Whereas, the Board is an entity established under the laws of the
State of Connecticut as a separate governmental unit within the Town
charged with operating the Town's public school system; and
C. Whereas, the Employers have duly established, adopted and maintained
one or more medical benefit (health and welfare) plans for certain
groups of their employees named in Exhibit A20 [collectively, the "plans"
as defined in Subsection O(1)]; and
D. Whereas, the Plans include certain post-employment health and welfare
benefits [the "benefits" as defined in Subsection O(1)] for retired
employees of the Employers ["retirees" as defined in Subsection O(1)]
and their eligible dependents as such terms are defined in the Plans;
and
E. Whereas, the authority to conduct the general operation and
administration of the Plans is vested in the Employers; and
F. Whereas, as one of their essential functions and in the ordinary course
of their operation and administration of the Plans, the Employers intend
to make contributions and to accumulate assets toward the provision of
the benefits under the Plans, through self-funding of such benefits or the
purchase of insurance for the provision of such benefits; and
G. Whereas, the Employers are subject to certain Governmental
Accounting Standards Board ("GASB") standards specified in GASB
Statement 45 in respect of accounting for non-pension benefits known
as "other post-employment benefits" ("OPEB benefits"); and
H. Whereas, the Employers wish to set aside fluids toward the funding of
OPEB benefits by contributing to a trust [the "Trust" or "OPEB Trust"
as defined in Subsection O(1)] established by an ordinance adopted
pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-450(b), and the
Town has adopted such an ordinance; and
I. Whereas, the OPEB Trust shall be subject to GASB Statement 45,
pertaining to accounting for OPEB benefits provided in whole or in
part from such a trust, and the Employers will be entitled to reduce or
eliminate their net OPEB obligations as defined by the GASB by reason
of making irrevocable contributions to the OPEB Trust; and
J. Whereas, the Employers anticipate making contributions from time to
time (but nothing herein shall mandate any such contribution, which
19.Editor's Note: See § 14-20, Agreement established.
20.Editor's Note: See § 14-21, Groups covered by Plan.
§ 14-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-20
1:107
shall be solely in the discretion of the Employers) in such amounts as
may be determined by the Employers from time to time as part of their
annual budget processes, to the OPEB Trust for the sole and exclusive
purpose of funding or assisting in the funding of the benefits to the
extent the benefits are not otherwise provided for and paid from the
Employers' general assets, from any other fund or trust established
under the Plans, from insurance provided under the Plans, or from any
combination thereof; and
K. Whereas, this OPEB Trust shall be irrevocable, and the Trust Fund
shall be used solely for the purpose of providing funds for (i) the
benefits pursuant to and in accordance with the Plans, and (ii) the
cost of operating and administering this OPEB Trust, including the cost
of such financial consultants, auditors, attorneys, actuaries, Trustees,
custodians, investment advisers, broken and other consultants,
advisers, and agents as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of
this OPEB Trust, all as provided herein; and
L. Whereas, this OPEB Trust is intended to comply with all applicable
GASB standards governing an irrevocable trust established for the
exclusive purpose of funding OPEB benefits; and
M. Whereas, consistent with the provisions of GASB Statements 43 and 45,
the Trust assets will be legally protected from the claims of creditors of
the Employers; and
N. Whereas, it is intended that the OPEB Trust hereby created shall be
exempt from federal tax as an entity operating pursuant to the exercise
by the Employers of an essential governmental function, and shall meet
the requirements of Section 115 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended, and Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-450.
O. Now, therefore, by execution hereof, the Employers hereby establish
this OPEB Trust as follows:
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ACT — The Connecticut Uniform Prudent Investor Act, Connecticut
General Statutes Section 45a-541 et seq.
ASSET MANAGER or ASSET MANAGERS — Shall have the
meaning set forth in Subsection O(5)(c).
BENEFIT or BENEFITS — The post-employment health or welfare
benefits provided retirees under the Plans.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date of initial funding of the OPEB Trust.
EMPLOYEE or EMPLOYEE or EMPLOYEES — The meaning
provided under the Plans and where the context requires shall
include eligible dependents of the employee entitled to benefits
under the Plans.
EMPLOYERS — The Town and the Board.
FINANCIAL DIRECTOR — The Director of Finance of the Town.
§ 14-20 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 14-20
1:108
GASB STANDARDS — Shall mean, collectively, the standards set
forth in GASB Statements 45 and 43.
INVESTMENT POLICY — Shall have the meaning set forth in
Subsection O(5)(b).
OPEB — Post-employment benefits other than pension benefits,
commonly known as "other post-employment benefits."
OPEB TRUST or TRUST — The trust established pursuant to this
Agreement.
ORDINANCE — The Town's ordinance enabling the establishment
of this Trust.
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The administrator or administrators of
the Plans, and in the absence of any contrary specific designation
under the Plans shall be the Town.
PLANS — The Employers' medical and health care benefits plan
or plans and any other plan or combination of plans (such as any
disability, life insurance or other plan maintained by either or both
of the Employers) which provides benefits, the liability for which
GASB requires an accrual on the financial books and records of the
Employers.
RETIREES — The retired employees who are eligible for benefits
under the Plans, including the retired employees' eligible
dependents to the extent provided under the Plans.
TOWN — The Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut.
TOWN MANAGER — The Town Manager of the Town.
TRUSTEES — The individuals responsible for the administration
and operation of this Trust. The Trustees shall include (i) the
individuals holding, from time to time, the Town offices of Mayor,
Chair of the Budget and Finance Committee, Superintendent of
Schools or designee, Town Manager, and Director of Finance, plus
(ii) two residents of the Town who are not Town officials. The
Trustees shall include the initial Trustees signatory to this Trust
Agreement and any successor Trustees appointed pursuant to
Subsection O(14) hereof.
TRUST FUND — All contributions to the Trust, including any
deposits, contributions, and payments made pursuant to
Subsection O(3)(d), together with the income, gains and all other
increments thereon, and all funds held in and administered under
this Trust.
(2) Construction.
(a) Governing law. This Trust shall be governed by and construed
in accordance with this article and the laws of the State of
Connecticut.
(b) Incorporation of plans and ordinance. The provisions of the
Plans and the ordinance shall be read as an integral part of
§ 14-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-20
1:109
this Agreement and are specifically incorporated herein by
reference. Any term used in this Trust Agreement which is not
otherwise defined herein shall have the meaning set forth in
the Plans or the ordinance where the context requires.
(c) Severability. If any part of this Trust Agreement shall be
determined to be illegal or unenforceable for any reason, such
determination shall not affect the remaining provisions of the
Trust Agreement, which shall be interpreted to effectuate the
purpose of this Trust.
(3) Establishment and acceptance of Trust.
(a) Name. The name of this Trust shall be the Town of Wethersfield
OPEB Trust.
(b) Effective date. This Trust shall be effective as of the date of its
initial funding.
(c) Purpose of Trust. This Trust is established for the exclusive
purpose of receiving any deposits, contributions and payments
made to it for addition to the Trust Fund, and investing,
administering, and using such amounts for funding and
providing funds for (i) the benefits pursuant to and in
accordance with the Plans, and (ii) the cost of operating and
administering the Trust, including the cost of such financial
consultants, auditors, attorneys, actuaries, Trustees,
custodians, investment advisers, brokers and other
consultants, advisers, and agents as necessary to carry out the
provisions of the Trust, all as provided herein.
(d) Acceptance of Trust. The Trust Fund shall be held, managed,
and administered in trust pursuant to the terms of this Trust
Agreement. The Trustees accept the Trust created by this Trust
Agreement and agree to perform the duties, responsibilities,
and obligations of Trustees under this Trust Agreement.
(e) Determination of benefits. The Plans shall govern the benefits.
Nothing in this Trust shall, nor shall be construed to, supplant
or substitute for the Employers' authority to conduct the
general operation and administration of the Plans or to amend,
supplement, restate, or otherwise operate and determine the
operation, provisions, and administration of the Plans. Nothing
in this Trust shall abrogate or affect the right of the Employers
to change the Plans, to adopt new medical and welfare benefit
plans, including any post-employment benefit plan, or to make
any changes in the terms of any medical and welfare benefit
plans. Nothing herein shall require the Employers to provide or
maintain a medical, welfare, or post-employment benefit plan.
(4) Contributions to the Trust; separate accounts.
(a) To the extent determined in their annual budget processes,
the Employers may at any time and from time to time make
deposits, contributions, and payments of cash or other
property to this Trust to be held and administered in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this Trust. In
addition, the Town, or the Trustees or custodian of any trust
§ 14-20 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 14-20
1:110
or fund existing to pay benefits, may, if the Town in its sole
discretion approves such transfer, transfer to the Trust any
funds from any other trust or account available for the payment
of benefits. Any and all deposits, contributions, and payments
made to this Trust shall be held in this Trust as a Trust asset
and part of the Trust Fund, and shall be separate and apart
from any other funds of the Employers. Such deposits,
contributions, and payments to this Trust shall be irrevocable,
shall be used solely in accordance with the terms and
provisions of this Trust and shall be subject to all applicable
terms and provisions of this Trust. Nothing herein shall, nor
shall be construed to, mandate or require contributions,
deposits, or payments to be made to the Trust, all of which
contributions, deposits and payments shall be at the sole
discretion and determination of the Employers.
(b) The Trustees shall maintain separate accounts within the Trust
Fund for the purpose of receiving contributions by the Town
and contributions by the Board, respectively, and shall allocate
the earnings, gains and losses of the Trust Fund between
the separate accounts. The Trustees shall further maintain
separate sub-accounts within the Town and Board portions of
the Trust Fund to reflect the present or former union affiliation,
or other group classification, of the retired employees in
respect of whom the contributions were made.
(5) Investments.
(a) Investment of Trust Fund. The Trustees shall have the duty and
responsibility to invest or direct the investment of the Trust
Fund, and shall have such other duties and responsibilities
as designated by the Employers. The Trustees shall have the
authority to invest or direct the investment of the Trust Fund
in each and every kind of property, whether real, personal or
mixed, tangible or intangible, whether income- or non-incomeproducing
or wherever situated as authorized in the
Investment Policy and as permissible by law for investment
of trust funds under the Act. Except as expressly set forth
in this Trust Agreement or as precluded by applicable law,
nothing herein shall limit a duly revised Investment Policy from
expanding or contracting the list of investments initially set
forth therein and authorizing the Trustees to invest assets in
such investments in accordance with such revised Investment
Policy. The Trustees shall have the power to register
investments in the name of the Trust or in the name of a
nominee, or to hold any investment in bearer form or through
or by a central clearing corporation maintained by institutions
active in the national securities markets, or keep such
investments unregistered, provided, the books and records of
the Trustees shall at all times show that all of the investments
are part of the Trust.
§ 14-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-20
1:111
(b) Investment Policy. The Trustees may adopt, in writing, an
investment policy (the "Investment Policy") delineating how
assets of the Trust may be invested. The Trustees may amend
the Investment Policy, in writing, from time to time.
(c) Appointment of Investment Advisers and Asset Managers. The
Trustees may appoint one or more investment advisers and/
or asset managers (an "Asset Manager" or "Asset Managers")
to supervise and direct the investment and reinvestment of a
portion or all of the Trust Fund and may confer discretionary
authority upon such Asset Managers. If no Asset Manager is
appointed, then the Trustees shall act as Asset Manager.
(6) Trustees' duties and responsibilities.
(a) Title to Trust Fund. Title to the Trust Fund shall be vested
in the Trustees, or their duly designated nominees, for the
purposes of this Trust. Neither the Town (except solely and
exclusively in its fiduciary capacity if at any time it serves
as a Trustee for the Trust), nor the Board, nor the Plan
Administrator, nor any retiree shall have any right, title or
interest in the Trust Fund.
(b) Management of the Trust. Except as otherwise provided
herein, the Trustees shall have exclusive authority and
responsibility with respect to the management of the Trust.
The Trustees are authorized to and may delegate custodial
responsibilities of all or any portion of the Trust Fund to one
or more qualified financial institutions with experience in
providing custodial services to institutional investors and
contracted to provide custodial services for the Trust Fund.
Such custodian shall hold the Trust Fund as directed, in
writing, by the Trustees and consistently with the terms and
provisions of this Trust Agreement, and such custodian shall
be subject to the investment guidelines and provisions with
respect to investment of the Trust Fund, including the
Investment Policy, as provided herein. To the extent custody
or possession of the assets of the Trust are delegated to a
custodian, investment asset manager, or other person or entity
in accordance with the standards and provisions set forth in
this Trust Agreement, title to the assets of the Trust shall be
held by the Trustees as title holder only and the Trustees shall
not be liable for the acts of any such custodian, investment
asset manager, or other person or entity.
(c) Compensation. The trustees must serve without compensation
from any source for service rendered to the Town.
(d) Disbursements of Trust Fund.
[1] Payment of benefits. As directed by the Employers, the
Trustees may make or provide for the making of payments
toward the provision of benefits under the Plans. The
Trustees may pay benefits either directly to the Plan
Administrator for payment or reimbursement of benefits
under the Plans or directly to separate funds established
§ 14-20 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 14-20
1:112
for the benefit of retirees for the payment of benefits.
The Employers shall provide (or cause to be provided) the
Trustees from time to time with a schedule of benefits to be
paid from the Trust Fund, which schedule shall include the
person or entity to whom such payment shall be made and
the amount of such payment, in a form acceptable to the
Trustees for determining the amount of such payment and
the time for such payment. The phrase "benefits to be paid
from the Trust Fund" shall include payments to the Plan
Administrator to pay or reimburse the Plan Administrator
for the payment of benefits or payments to a separate fund
which provides payment of Benefits directly or through
insurance. In the event the Trust Fund is insufficient to
make the payment designated, the Trustees shall promptly
notify the appropriate employer of that fact.
[2] Payment of administrative expenses. The Trustees may
incur reasonable expenses for administration of the Trust.
As directed by the Town, the Trustees may make or provide
for the making of payment from the Trust Fund of the cost
of operating and administering the Trust and the payment
of benefits hereunder, including the cost of such financial
consultants, auditors, attorneys, actuaries, Trustees,
custodians, investment advisers, brokers and other
consultants, advisers and agents as necessary to carry out
the provisions of the Trust, all as provided herein,
including, without limitation, expenses for services of Asset
Managers, services of one or more duly qualified banks or
trust companies for the safe custody of the investments and
banking services, and any other service that the Trustees
deem reasonable and necessary in connection with the
investments and administration of the Trust Fund. The
Trustees shall cause records to be maintained with respect
to any and all expenses incurred payable from the Trust.
(7) Nonreversion daring term of Trust. All disbursements from the
Trust Fund shall be made for the sole and exclusive benefit of
providing for payment of the benefits and costs of operating and
administering the Trust in accordance with the Plans and the terms
and provisions of this Trust. Prior to satisfaction of all liabilities of
the Trust, no part of the Trust Fund, either during the existence of
or upon discontinuance of the Plans, shall be used for any purposes
other than the payment or provision for payment of benefits and
expenses as provided in the Plans and this Trust.
(8) Termination of Trust. The Employers expect to continue this OPEB
Trust indefinitely but reserve the right to terminate the Trust at
any time. In the event of termination of the Trust, the Trust Fund
shall continue as directed by the Employers to make payments
toward claims or premiums in respect of the benefits of retirees
receiving benefits prior to termination and to pay expenses of the
§ 14-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-20
1:113
Trust. Any assets remaining in the Trust after satisfaction of all its
liabilities shall be distributed to the Town.
(9) Administration of the Trust. In addition to the powers, rights, and
duties above, the Trustees may:
(a) Act upon any instrument, written communication or paper they
reasonably believe to be genuine and to be signed or presented
by the proper person or persons;
(b) Do such acts and exercise all such rights and privileges,
although not specifically mentioned herein, as they reasonably
deem necessary to invest and administer the Trust Fund in
accordance with this Trust Agreement and to carry out the
purposes of this Trust;
(c) Delegate to one or more of its members the right to sign
documents for and on behalf of the Trust;
(d) Continue to have and to exercise, after any termination of the
Plans or the Trust, and until final distribution of the Trust
Fund as provided herein, all of the title, powers, discretion,
rights, duties and responsibilities conferred or imposed upon
the Trustees hereunder, or by applicable law;
(e) In the event any question or dispute shall arise concerning
the proper disbursement from the Trust Fund, withhold such
disbursement until an adjudication of such question or dispute,
satisfactory to the Trustees, shall have been made, or the
Trustees shall have been adequately indemnified to the extent
permitted by applicable law against loss to the Trustees's
satisfaction; and
(f) File an interpleader with any court of competent jurisdiction
with respect to any disputed disbursement from the Trust
Fund, and upon deposit of the disbursement pursuant to the
interpleader action, to be held harmless with respect to such
disbursement.
(10) Limitations on powers of Trustees. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary herein, the Trustees shall have no power prior to
dissolution of the Trust and satisfaction of all its liabilities:
(a) To divert any part of the Trust to any purposes other than the
exclusive benefit of Retirees and the purposes designated in
this Trust Agreement;
(b) To make any part of the Trust available on a preferential basis
or to engage in any other transaction which results in a
diversion of any part of the Trust to the Employers (other than
for payment of or reimbursement of payment of benefits and
costs of operating and administering the Trust as provided
herein) or to any person or entity with whom or which such
a transaction is prohibited by the Act or applicable GASB
Standards, as such provisions may be amended from time to
time; or
(c) To take any action that would cause the Trust not to comply
with applicable provisions of the GASB Standards or the Act,
as such provisions may be amended from time to time.
§ 14-20 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 14-20
1:114
(11) Recordkeeping. The Trustees shall maintain or cause to be
maintained accurate records of the deposits, contributions,
transfers, and payments to the Trust and of the distributions and
payments from the Trust Fund. The Trustees shall cause accounts
of all investment, receipts, disbursements and all other
transactions affecting all or any portion of the Trust to be
maintained. The Trustees shall render to the Employers periodic
accountings of the Trustees' acts and transactions hereunder. If
any part of the Trust Fund shall be invested through the medium
of any common, collective or commingled trust funds, the most
recent annual report of such trust funds shall be submitted with
and incorporated in the accounting. The Trustees acknowledge and
understand that all books and financial records of the Trust may
be subject to audit and agree to cooperate with the Employers, the
state and any auditor to the extent reasonably necessary.
(12) Actions of Co-Trustees. The Town may authorize any one or more
of the individual Trustees to sign papers and instruments on behalf
of the Trust and the Trustees.
(13) Other provisions concerning the Trustees.
(a) Reliance on Town or Board officials. The Trustees may rely on
any certificate, notice or direction signed on behalf of Town or
the Board that the Trustees reasonably believe to be signed by
a duly authorized official.
(b) Reliance on advice of counsel. The Trustees may consult with
legal counsel engaged by it with respect to the construction of
this Trust and the rights, duties, and obligations of the Trustees
hereunder and may act in good faith based on such advice of
legal counsel.
(c) Trustees' refusal to accept directions. The Trustees may refuse
to comply with any direction from any Town or Board official
or entity in the event the Trustees, in their sole and absolute
discretion, deem such direction improper by virtue of
applicable law; provided, however, that in any such event the
Trustees shall give prompt written notice to the official or
entity making such direction of the fact and legal basis for such
refusal.
(d) Plan administration. The Plan Administrator shall operate and
administer the Plans, and the Trustees, in their capacity as
Trustees, shall have no responsibility for such administration,
nor shall the Trustees be responsible for the adequacy of the
contributions to the Trust to meet or discharge any payments
or liabilities under the Plans. With respect to the Plans, the
Trustees shall be entitled conclusively to rely upon any notice,
instruction, direction or other communication of the Plan
Administrator or authorized official as provided herein.
(e) Individual Trustees. Each and every individual Trustee shall
have all rights and immunities with respect to its actions as
an individual Trustees provided by applicable law, including,
without limitation, any applicable immunity provided under
§ 14-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-20
1:115
Connecticut law to members of boards, commissions, agencies,
authorities, and other governing bodies of any governmental
entity.
(f) Bond. No Trustee shall be required to give any bond or to
qualify before, be appointed by, or account to any court of law
in the exercise of its rights and powers hereunder.
(g) Contracts. Notwithstanding anything in this Trust Agreement
to the contrary, this Trust Agreement, any and all amendments
thereto, and all contacts entered into with respect to the Trust
shall be signed by the Town Manager.
(14) Successor Trustees. The Trustees shall include the initial Trustees
signatory to this Agreement and their successors designated as
provided in this subsection. In the event any individual holding
a Town office specified in Subsection (i) of the definition of
"Trustees" leaves that office for any reason, then the individual
succeeding to that office shall immediately assume the position of
Trustee by virtue of holding the office without any further act of
appointment. In the event a Town resident described in Subsection
(ii) of the definition of "Trustees" resigns or is removed from
trusteeship, the Town shall designate a successor who shall be a
Town resident who is not a Town official and who agrees to accept
the successor trusteeship. In selecting such an individual, the Town
shall give preference to persons with backgrounds in professional
money management. All of the provisions set forth herein shall
relate to successor Trustees with the same force and effect as to
the original Trustees.
(15) Anti-alienation. No portion of the Trust Fund shall be subject to
the claims of any creditor of the Town or Board, any Town or
Board official, any retiree, the Trustees, any individual member of
Trustees, or any other person whatsoever, and no portion of the
Trust Fund shall be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment,
anticipation, pledge, encumbrance or charge by any persons, the
operation of bankruptcy, the insolvency laws, or other process
whatsoever, whether at law or in equity, nor shall any assignment
of any portion of the Trust Fund be enforceable in any court.
(16) Amendment.
(a) Conforming amendments. Without the consent of any person,
the Employers, with the approval of the Town Council, shall
have the right to amend this Trust, from time to time, for the
purposes of:
[1] Conforming the provisions of this Trust with the GASB
Standards, as they may be amended from time to time;
[2] Conforming the provisions of this Trust with the Act, as it
may be amended from time to time;
[3] Providing for the effective administration and management
of the Trust;
[4] Providing for the effective investment of the Trust Fund;
[5] Clarifying or specifying the rights, duties, and
responsibilities of the Trustees, or of the Plan
§ 14-20 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 14-20
1:116
Administrator or any Town or Board official or entity with
respect to this Trust;
[6] Providing for any successor or additional Trustees; or
[7] Effectuating the purpose of the Trust.
(b) Limitations on rights of amendment. Notwithstanding anything
herein to the contrary, the Employers shall not have the right
to amend this Trust.
[1] To provide that the assets of the Trust shall be used for any
purposes other than the purposes of (x) funding, providing
for, and making payments of the benefits pursuant to and
in accordance with the Plans, (y) investing Trust assets in
the interest of the retired employees and for their exclusive
benefit, and (z) paying the costs of operating and
administering the Trust, including the cost of such financial
consultants, auditors, attorneys, actuaries, Trustees, or
other consultants and agents as necessary to carry out the
provisions of the Trust, all as provided herein;
[2] To cause any portion of the Trust Fund to revert to the
Employers (other than for payment of or reimbursement
of payment of benefits and the payment of all costs and
expenses as provided herein) or divert any portion of the
Trust Fund to others except in accordance with the terms
and provisions of this Trust Agreement, as it may be duly
amended from time to time, or of the Act;
[3] To conflict with any investment limitations imposed upon
the Trust Fund by the Act; or
[4] To change the rights and obligations of the Trustees
without their prior written consent.
(c) Form for amendment. Any amendment to this Trust Agreement
shall be made in writing, executed by duly authorized Town and
Board officials and, to the extent the consent of the Trustees
is required thereto, by the Trustees. Any amendment required
to bring this Trust Agreement into compliance with the GASB
Standards or the Act may be made retroactively unless
otherwise prohibited by applicable law.
§ 14-20.1. Miscellaneous provisions.
A. Third parties. No person transferring title or receiving a transfer of title
from the Trustees shall be obligated to look to the propriety of the acts of
the Trustees in connection therewith.
B. Protections. Neither the Employers, nor any Town or Board official, nor the
Plans Administrator, nor the Trustees shall be responsible for the validity
of any insurance contract or any action of any insurer or other service
provider that offers or provides services pursuant to the Plans or this Trust
Agreement.
C. Limited effect of Trust. Neither the establishment of this Trust nor any
modification thereof, nor the creation of any fund or account nor the
payment of any benefits shall be construed as giving to any person any
legal or equitable right against the Trustees, the Plan Administrator, the
§ 14-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-20.1
1:117
Town, the Board, or any Town or Board official, except as may otherwise
be expressly provided in the Plans, this Trust Agreement, or applicable law.
The creation of this Trust shall not be deemed to create rights beyond the
assets of the Trust.
Employers: THE TOWN OF WETHERSFIELD
By:
THE BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE
TOWN OF WETHERSFIELD
By:
Trustees:
Date:
Mayor and Trustee
Date:
Superintendent of Schools and Trustee
Date:
Chair, Budget and Finance Committee,
and Trustee
Date:
Town Manager and Trustee
Date:
Finance Director and Trustee
Date:
Town resident and Trustee
Date:
Town resident and Trustee
§ 14-21. Groups covered by Plan.
Per union contract or personnel rules:
A. Town employees.
(1) Local AFSCME 1303-40: Public Works.
(2) Local AFSCME 1303-408: Town Hall and Police Dispatch.
(3) Local 391: Police.
(4) Local 222: Library CTLU Nos. 81-4081 and 81-4082.
(5) Local AFSCME 818: Management.
(6) Town Administrative Group.
B. Board of Education employees.
(1) Administrators.
(2) Other.
§ 14-20.1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 14-21
1:118
ARTICLE VI
Capital and Nonrecurring Expenses Trust Fund
[Adopted 1-22-2013]
§ 14-22. Establishment; deposits.
A. The Town of Wethersfield shall hereby establish a Capital and
Nonrecurring Expenses Trust Fund (the "Trust").
B. There shall be deposited in said Trust:
(1) All monies received by the Town of Wethersfield as a contribution
from Wethersfield, LLC, in connection with the sale of the property
at 176 Cumberland Avenue on August 20, 2012.
(2) All additional monies received by the Town of Wethersfield, from
whatever source and by whatever means, including but not limited
to grants, loans and gifts provided to said Trust.
(3) Any funds from any source designated by the Town of Wethersfield
to be added to this Trust.
§ 14-23. Custody and investment of Trust.
The Trust shall be in the custody of the Treasurer of the Town of
Wethersfield. All or any part of the monies in the Trust may, from time
to time, be invested in any investment in which public trust funds may
be lawfully invested. All incomes derived from such investments shall be
credited to the Trust and become a part thereof. The monies so invested
shall at all times be subject to withdrawal from such investments for use as
provided in § 14-24 below.
§ 14-24. Use of trust.
A. Upon authorization of the Town Council, the monies in the Trust which
would be considered interest earnings may be used by the Town for
the exclusive purpose of funding capital improvements and nonrecurring
expenses in the Town of Wethersfield.
B. Upon authorization by an affirmative vote of no less than seven members
of the Town Council, the monies in the Trust which would be considered
principal, gifts, grants or other noninterest earnings may be used by
the Town for the exclusive purpose of funding capital improvements and
nonrecurring expenses in the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 14-25. Annual report.
Annually, the Treasurer, as custodian of the Trust, shall submit to the
Council a complete and detailed report of the financial condition of said
Trust, which report shall be made part of the Annual Municipal Report.
§ 14-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-25
1:119

ARTICLE VII
CNEF Fund for Board of Education Surplus
[Adopted 6-17-2013]
§ 14-26. Establishment; deposits; purposes.
A. Pursuant to Section 10-248a of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
Town of Wethersfield shall hereby establish a Board of Education Capital
and Nonrecurring Expenses Non-Lapsing Account (the "account").
B. There shall be deposited in said account:
(1) Such monies returned to the general fund by the Board of Education
at the end of a fiscal year as the Town Council shall deem
appropriate.
(2) Any additional funds from any source designated by the Town of
Wethersfield to be added to this account.
C. Upon authorization of the Town Council, the monies in the account
may be used by the Town for the exclusive purpose of funding capital
improvements, acquisition of capital assets, including technological
resources and products, and other nonrecurring expenses pertaining to
the public schools of the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 14-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-26
1:121
Chapter 15
GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM (GIS)
§ 14-26 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 14-26
1:122
ARTICLE I
Fees
[Adopted 8-17-1998 (Ch. 77, Art. I, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 15-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish fees for geographic information
system (GIS) information and services in accordance with C.G.S. § 7-148s.
§ 15-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CD — Compact disc; optical media used to store digital data.
EXPORT FORMAT — A form of an original digital data set generally used
to transfer data to different computer operating systems or computer
applications.
FLOPPY DISK — Magnetic media used to store digital data.
FULL DATA SET — All GIS Town-wide data sets, excluding topography and
ortho-photos.
PREMADE MAP — A map available in paper or digital form in advance of a
request.
PROGRAMMING TIME — Time spent developing a map, filling a GIS data
request, changing a data format, developing a GIS computer application, or
similar requests.
§ 15-3. Assessment of fees.
The fees for geographic information system (GIS) information and services
are as follows:
A. GIS digital data: $100 per megabyte rounded to the next highest $25;
$25 minimum. Cost of data is calculated from data in its original format.
GIS topography or ortho-photo complete Town-wide data sets: $50 per
megabyte when purchased with a full data set.
B. Programming time: $15 per quarter-hour; $15 minimum. This fee does
not apply to a Town-wide data set (or sets in any combination) or to
Wethersfield's GIS software's native export format or .DXF export
formats for GIS property data or to premade maps.
C. Media: $10 per CD; $2 per 3 1/2-inch floppy disk.
D. Maps.
(1) Small maps (up to 11 inches by 17 inches): $4 plus programming
time.
(2) Large maps (up to E-size): $10 plus programming time.
§ 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-3
1:123
Chapter 16
LOCAL HOUSING PARTNERSHIP
§ 16-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Local Housing Partnership
in the Town of Wethersfield to assist in addressing the issue of affordable
housing in accordance with Public Act 88-305.
§ 16-2. Partnership established.
The Town of Wethersfield hereby establishes a Local Housing Partnership
to address and develop ways to increase the supply and availability of
affordable housing.
§ 16-3. Appointments; membership; terms.
A. Appointment to the Local Housing Partnership will be made by the chief
elected official of Wethersfield.
B. The partnership shall consist of the following members:
(1) Chief elected official.
(2) Chairperson of the Council Subcommittee on Housing.
(3) Representatives of the Planning and Zoning Commission, Inland
Wetlands Commission and Housing Authority and Economic
Development Commission, not to exceed six in number.
(4) Representatives of the local business community, to include a local
banker, realtor and developer, not to exceed six in number.
(5) Representatives of public interest groups, may include housing
advocates, clergy members, local civic groups and local nonprofit
corporations, not to exceed eight in number.
(6) Local urban planning, land use and housing professionals, not to
exceed four in number.
C. The terms of the members will be for periods of three years.
§ 16-4. Powers and duties.
The Local Housing Partnership, in accordance with Public Act 88-305,
will work with the State Department of Housing to ensure the following
designations in the process of addressing affordable housing:
A. Initial designation. The Town of Wethersfield will submit this chapter
as evidence that the Local Housing Partnership has been formed in
accordance with Public Act 88-305 and will submit evidence to the
Commissioner of Housing that sufficient local resources have been
committed to the Local Housing Partnership.
B. Development designation. The Local Housing Partnership will identify
housing needs and opportunities in the community; explore availability
of any state, municipal or other land that is suitable for the development
of affordable housing; review applicable zoning regulations; establish
priorities and develop long-range plans to meet identified housing needs;
§ 15-3 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 16-4
1:124
develop a written proposal for achievement of these plans; and start a
project to create affordable housing in Wethersfield.
C. Maintenance of development designation. On April 12, 1991, the
Wethersfield Housing Partnership received development designation. In
accordance with Section 8-336f of the Connecticut General Statutes,
the Wethersfield Housing Partnership shall work to maintain the
development designation status through the affordable housing activities
it has identified. [Added 9-16-1991]
§ 16-5. Expenditures.
The Local Housing Partnership shall not have the right to expend any public
funds of the Town of Wethersfield in carrying out any of the activities
authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the Town Council nor
shall the Local Housing Partnership have the right to bind the Town of
Wethersfield by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific
approval of the Town Council.
§ 16-6. Term of partnership. [Added 9-16-1991; amended
1-17-1995]
Unless amended by the Town Council, this chapter shall be effective until
October 1, 1997.
Chapter 20
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Committees, boards, etc. — See Ch. 10.
Purchasing procedure — See Ch. 27.
Special meetings — See Ch. 34.
Town Council rules of procedure — See Ch.
A180.
§ 16-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-6
1:125

ARTICLE I
Classification Plan and Numbers of Employees
[Adopted as Sec. 1-5-1 of the Code of 1972]
§ 20-1. Schedule of employees. [Amended 10-16-1989; 9-3-1991]
In addition to those employees specified in the Charter, there shall be the
following numbers and classes of other employees:
Department,
Office or Agency Class
Employees
Authorized
Manager Assistant Town Manager 1
Executive Secretary 1
Director of Information Systems 1
Information Specialist II 1
Human Services Assistant Director of Human
Services
1
Secretary I 1
Elderly Services Coordinator 1
Human Services Aide (part-time) 1
Special Activity Driver 2
Special Activity Driver (part-time) 2
Clerk I (part-time) 1
Youth Services Youth Services Director 1
Youth Services Program
Coordinator
1
Youth Services Clinical
Coordinator
1
Youth Services Counselor 1
Youth Services Program Assistant
(part-time)
1
Secretary I 1
Home/School Liaison (part-time) 1
Special Program Instructors
(part-time)
11
Registrars Clerk II (part-time) 2
Town Clerk Records Manager/Assistant Town
Clerk III
1
Assistant Town Clerk II 1
Assistant Registrar of Vital
Statistics/Clerk III (part-time)
1
§ 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1
1:127
Department,
Office or Agency Class
Employees
Authorized
Clerk III (part-time) 1
Planning and
Zoning
Commission Clerk (part-time) 1
Finance Assistant Director of Finance 1
Assistant Assessor 1
Accountant 1
Compensation Specialist 1
Accounts Payable Clerk 1
Technical Assistant 2
Secretary I 1
Clerk III 2
Clerk II 1
Clerk I (temporary) 2
Treasurer Deputy Treasurer (part-time) 1
Safety Police Lieutenant 4
Police Sergeant 6
Police Patrol Officer 31
Administrative Analyst/Police 1
Animal Control Officer 1
Animal Control Officer (parttime)
2
Dispatcher 6
Secretary II 1
Clerk II 3
School Crossing Guard Posts 18
Gate Tender (part-time) 1
Fire Marshal 1
Deputy Fire Marshal (part-time) 1
Clerk (part-time) 1
Public Works Community Development
Director
1
Assistant Building Official 2
Assistant Director of Engineering 1
Crew Leader/Transit Worker 1
Engineer 1
Engineering Aide II 1
§ 20-1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 20-1
1:128
Department,
Office or Agency Class
Employees
Authorized
Engineering Aide I 1
Public Works Inspector/Party 1
Chief
Director of Physical Services 1
Administrative Analyst/Physical 1
Services
Highway Maintenance Supervisor 1
Parks and Grounds Supervisor 1
Fleet Maintenance Supervisor 1
Tree Maintenance Supervisor 1
Tree Climber 1
Maintainer III 3
Assistant Director of Physical
Services/Highway and Building
Maintenance
1
Maintainer III/Tradesworker 4
Maintainer II 11
Maintainer I 9
Custodian II 1
Custodian I 2
Automotive Mechanic 6
Secretary II 4
Clerk II 2
Clerk II (part-time) 2
Clerk I (temporary) 1
Painter 1
Seasonal Worker 18
Pool Workers 3
Housekeeper (part-time) 1
Health Director of Health 1
Secretary I 1
Recreation and
Parks
Community Center Director 1
Nature Center Director 1
Secretary II 1
Clerk II (part-time) 2
§ 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1
1:129
Department,
Office or Agency Class
Employees
Authorized
Clerk I (part-time) 2
Part-time or temporary
employees
112
Custodian (live-in) 1
Recreation Supervisor 1
Recreation Supervisor/
Administrator (part-time)
1
Custodian I 2
Therapeutic Recreation
Supervisor
1
Youth Sports Coordinator 1
§ 20-1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 20-1
1:130
ARTICLE II
Regulations for Certain Employees
[Adopted as Secs. 1-1-9 through 1-1-14; 1-3-3 through 1-3-10; and
1-3-14 and 1-3-15 of the Code of 1972]
§ 20-2. Justices of the Peace. [Amended 6-17-1996]
A. Pursuant to § 9-183a(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, the number of Justices of the Peace to be selected in 1996 and
quadrennially thereafter shall be no more than 60.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of § 9-183b of the Connecticut General
Statutes, each major political party as defined by § 9-372(5) of the
Connecticut General Statutes shall be entitled to nominate 2/3 of the
total number of candidates for selection pursuant to Subsection A.
C. Pursuant to § 9-183c, a minor political party as defined by Connecticut
General Statutes § 9-372(6) shall be entitled to nominate 20% of the total
number of Justices of the Peace to be selected pursuant to Subsection A.
D. Pursuant to § 9-184c of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town
Clerk shall appoint in the manner provided in said section as Justices of
the Peace a number of electors who are not members of major parties
as defined in § 9-372(5), which number shall not exceed 1/3 of the total
number of Justices to be selected pursuant to Subsection A, less the
number of Justices of the Peace in Town selected pursuant to § 9-183c.
§ 20-3. Registrar of Voters.
Pursuant to Section 9-189a of the Connecticut General Statutes and
commencing with the next succeeding regular election for such office,
Registrars of Voters shall be elected for four-year terms.
§ 20-4. Town Manager.21
A. In accordance with Section 301 of the Charter, the Manager is
authorized to sign and attend to the filing of lien certificates for public
improvements, which is one of the administrative powers of the
Selectmen not otherwise assigned by the Charter.
B. The Town Manager is authorized and directed to exercise and discharge
the powers and duties concerning elections which are conferred by the
General Statutes upon Selectmen, except for those powers and duties of
Selectmen concerning the qualifications and admission of electors.
§ 20-5. Assistant Town Clerks.
A. Pursuant to Section 7-19 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, and Section 501 of the Charter, there are established in the
office of the Town Clerk three positions of Assistant Town Clerk.
B. In the absence or inability of the Town Clerk, such Assistant Town Clerk
shall have all the powers and all the duties as may be required of him by
action of the Town Council.
21.Editor's Note: Former Secs. 1-3-1 and 1-3-2, which immediately preceded this section and
which dealt with additional powers of the Manager, were deleted 6-18-1990.
§ 20-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-5
1:131
C. The employment classifications for the three positions of Assistant Town
Clerk shall be those set forth in the current employment classification
regulations adopted by Council.
§ 20-6. Director of Finance.
As provided in Section 601 of the Charter, a Director of Finance shall be
appointed by the Manager, and the Manager shall cease be the Director of
Finance.
§ 20-7. Director of Recreation and Parks.
The Manager is authorized to appoint a Director of Recreation and Parks
in accordance with Sections 404 and 604 of the Charter, and the Manager
shall cease to be the Director of Recreation and Parks upon the effective
date of such appointment.
§ 20-8. Deputy Director of Public Works.
In accordance with Section 603 of the Charter, there shall be the office of
the Deputy Director of Public Works. The duties and responsibilities of such
office shall be prescribed by the Director of Public Works.
§ 20-9. Official bonds.
The following Town officials and employees shall file with the Town Clerk
surety bonds in the following amounts, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of their respective duties, and the premium shall be paid by
the Town:
A. Treasurer and Tax Collector: $150,000.
B. All others through blanket bond: $100,000.
§ 20-10. Purchasing Agent.
The Manager is authorized to appoint a Purchasing Agent in accordance
with Section 712 of the Charter, and the Manager shall cease to be
Purchasing Agent upon the effective date of such appointment.
§ 20-5 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 20-10
1:132
Chapter 24
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Committees, Boards, etc. — See Ch. 10. Officers and employees — See Ch. 20.
§ 24-1. Community Development Division.
A Community Development Division is created in the Department of Public
Works. The purposes of such Division are to further public and industrial
development, to provide staff assistance to Town boards and commissions
concerned with community development and to coordinate the work of the
various officers, boards and commissions of Town government.
§ 24-2. Duties and responsibilities.
The duties and responsibilities of such Division shall be prescribed by the
Manager.
Chapter 27
PURCHASING PROCEDURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sale of Town property — See Ch. 37. Town Council rules of procedures — See Ch.
A180.
§ 27-1. General procedure.
The provisions of Charter Sections 712, 713, 714 and 715 shall control the
purchasing procedure of the Town. The procedures and personnel involved
in the purchasing process shall be subject to the supervision of and within
the jurisdiction of the Manager.
§ 27-2. Authorization.
The inclusion of any item or project within the approved budget shall be
deemed to be authorization for the Purchasing Agent to advertise for bids
or negotiate for the acquisition of supplies, materials, equipment, goods,
services, commodities or for the construction of streets, sewers, buildings
and other public works.
§ 20-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-3
1:133
§ 27-3. Exemptions from bid requirements.
It shall not be necessary to call for sealed bids for the following supplies,
materials, equipment, goods, services, commodities or construction:
A. That furnished by a monopoly utility.
B. That providing an output more creative than quantitative or requiring
special skill and knowledge or a profession, such as the following
services:
(1) Legal.
(2) Accounting.
(3) Auditing.
(4) Medical.
(5) Architectural.
(6) Engineering.
(7) Design.
(8) Systems analysis.
(9) Computer programming.
(10) Planning.
(11) Technical advice.
(12) Management assistance.
C. That having a single source of supply.
D. That needed to cope with an emergency situation reported as such to the
Council or declared as such by a competent authority. However, awards
for items in Subsections B and C above shall be made by the Council if
the amount of the contract exceeds $5,000. [Amended 6-18-1990]
§ 27-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SAME COMMODITY OVER A PERIOD OF TIME — In Charter Section 713,
shall be interpreted to mean an item or items that can be exactly described
in its essential form or performance by the same specification and that the
Purchasing Agent should have known from the approved budget would be
acquired within the same fiscal year. A class of items used for the same
function shall not be considered to be the "same commodity."
TRANSACTION ESSENTIALLY A UNIT — In Charter Section 713, shall be
interpreted to mean the effort involved in performing a class of work which
is often performed by one contractor alone. Such effort may be involved in
a specific project or on a miscellaneous basis in any construction season.
If the same contractor performs more than one class of work on a specific
project, then all the work he performs on the project shall be considered a
"unit."
§ 27-5. Changes in bids.
Changes in the proposed scope of the bid may be made after opening bids,
provided that the basic bid is still in its essential form and provided further
§ 27-3 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 27-5
1:134
that all bidders have the same opportunity to submit new prices, in writing,
at the same time, for the changes being considered.
§ 27-6. Failure to perform.
Should a contractor who is operating under a contract awarded by Council
fail to perform an essential act at the time needed, the Purchasing Agent
may immediately turn to other bidders in the order of their bids to find a
substitute. The Manager shall report this action to the Council at their next
meeting.
§ 27-7. Use of other bids.
Wherever it would appear to be to the advantage of the Town, in the
judgment of the Purchasing Agent, the Town may use bids called for by
another governmental agency in exactly the same way as bids called for by
the Town, provided that the processing of the bids has met the requirements
of Charter Section 713 or 715.
§ 27-8. Town-based business. [Added 1-17-1995]
The term "Town-based business" shall mean a business with a principal
business located within the Town of Wethersfield. A business shall not be
considered to be a Town-based business, unless evidence to establish that
said business has a bona fide principal place of business in Wethersfield
is submitted with each bid submitted by said business. Such evidence may
include evidence of ownership of or a long-term lease of the real estate from
which the principal place of business is operated or payment of property
taxes on the personal property of the business to be used in performance of
the bid.
§ 27-9. Lowest responsible bidder. [Added 1-17-1995]
On any item or project advertised for bid pursuant to § 27-2 the lowest
responsible bidder shall be determined in the following order:
A. Provided that such Town-based resident bidder shall have met all other
requirements set forth in §§ 27-8 through 27-11, any Town-based
resident bidder which has submitted a bid not more than 10% higher
than the lowest most responsible bid may be awarded the bid provided
such Town-based bidder agrees to accept the award of the bid at the
amount of the lowest most responsible bid.
B. If more than one Town-based resident bidder has submitted a bid not
more than 10% higher than the lowest responsible bid, the lowest
responsible bidder shall be that one of the Town-based resident bidders
which had submitted the lowest bid.
§ 27-10. Implementation of local bidder preference. [Added
1-17-1995]
Any local vendor meeting the requirements of a Town-based resident bidder,
as defined above, responding to the solicitation shall be required to submit a
§ 27-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-10
1:135
signed Local Bidder Affidavit Form with the bid submittal. Failure to submit
an affidavit form approved by the Town of Wethersfield may, at the option
of the Town, result in disqualification as a local vendor and ineligibility for
contract award.
§ 27-11. Restrictions on use of local bidder preference. [Added
1-17-1995]
Sections 27-8, 27-9 and 27-10 shall not apply in those instances where the
bid requested involves a cooperative purchasing arrangement between the
Town and other municipalities or the State of Connecticut.
Chapter 31
SEAL
§ 31-1. Official seal adopted.
The Seal depicted below is hereby established and declared to be the
Official Corporate Seal of the Town of Wethersfield and replaces and
supersedes any and all corporate seals which may heretofore have existed
and been used by said town.
Chapter 34
SPECIAL MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Council rules of procedures — See Ch.
A180.
§ 27-10 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 34-1
1:136
§ 34-1. Calling of meetings.
Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Chairperson or by not
less than three members of the Council. If called by three members, each
shall advise the Town Clerk, in writing, by telephone or in person to that
effect.
§ 34-2. Notice.
Notice of a special meeting shall be prepared by the Town Clerk, and a copy
shall be served personally upon each member of the Council and the Town
Manager or Acting Town Manager or left at their usual places of abode not
less than 24 hours before the time of the meeting. The notice shall state
the time and place of the meeting and the purpose for which the meeting
is called. A copy of said notice shall also be posted on the Town signpost at
least 24 hours prior to the meeting.
§ 34-3. Matters of consideration.
At a special meeting, no matter not included in the notice shall be
considered.
§ 34-4. Certification.
The Town Clerk shall certify, upon the original copy of the notice filed with
the records of the Council, by whom the meeting was called and the manner
in which the notice was given to the members of the Council, the Town
Manager or Acting Town Manager and the posting on the Town sign-post.
§ 34-5. Waivers.
The written notice required hereinabove may be waived or dispensed with
as is provided by the Connecticut General Statutes, as may be amended
from time to time.
Chapter 35
SPECIAL POLICE
§ 34-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-5
1:137

ARTICLE I
Duty Surcharges
[Adopted 5-20-1991 (Ch. 77, Art. I, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 35-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to allow the Finance Department to assess
a surcharge to recover expenses in addition to the actual cost of services
performed by various Town departments.
§ 35-2. Assessment of surcharges.
The Town provides patrol officers for special duty jobs, for which the Town
is reimbursed by some other party, agency or division. The special duty
jobs by patrol officers are outside of their regular work schedule. The Town
shall assess surcharges to all special police duty jobs to recover such direct
costs as pension, workers' compensation and administrative overhead. The
Director of Finance shall review such surcharges annually and shall make
any necessary adjustments to the billings of special police duty charges.
§ 35-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-2
1:139
Chapter 37
TOWN PROPERTY, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Council rules of procedures — See Ch.
A180.
§ 37-1. Sale procedure.
Any real or personal property of the Town which the Council shall determine
to offer for sale shall be so offered by resolution, and a full description of
such property shall be included in the notice of passage of the resolution.
Such resolution shall invite sealed bids for such property to be opened
publicly by the Town Manager and shall fix a minimum price therefor
which shall be established by the Council after consultation with the Town
Manager and the Assessor. Such property shall not be sold for less than the
minimum price. All sales shall be to the highest qualified bidder unless the
Council, within 30 days after the opening of the bids, votes to reject all bids.
No bid shall qualify unless it is submitted together with cash or a certified
check for at least 10% of the amount bid. The cash or certified check of the
highest qualified bidder shall be applied toward the purchase price, and in
the event that said bidder defaults, said sum shall be forfeited to the Town
as liquidated damages. All sales of real property shall be by quitclaim deed.
The Manager is authorized to sign on behalf of the Town all documents
necessary to effect the sale of any property made pursuant to this section.
§ 37-2. Form of resolution.
The form of the resolution mentioned in § 37-1 shall be as follows:
"RESOLVED: That the following described properties of the Town of
Wethersfield be offered for sale at not less than the minimum price stated
for each such property; that sealed bids for any such properties be
submitted to the Town Manager at his office not later than 12:00 noon on
(at least 10 days after notice of passage
of resolution is published); that cash or a certified check for at least 10% of
the amount bid be submitted with each bid; that said sum submitted by the
highest qualified bidder be forfeited to the Town as liquidated damages if
said highest qualified bidder defaults; that such bids be opened publicly by
the Town Manager at said time; that each of said properties be sold to the
highest bidder therefor, provided that such bid is not less than the minimum
price established for such property and provided that within 30 days from
the date of the opening of said bids, the Council does not reject all bids:
Description of property Minimum price"
§ 35-2 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 37-3
1:140
§ 37-3. Exemptions.
The provisions of §§ 37-1 and 37-2 concerning the sale of the property shall
not apply to sales of personal property having a value of less than $100,
as determined by the Manager, nor shall such provisions apply to the sale
of any items of personal property where the Manager recommends the
disposal of such personal property by trade-in on other equipment, public
auction or negotiation for the sale of the same, provided that the Council
approves such recommendation prior to the transfer of the title to such
personal property.
§ 37-4. Disposition of found goods.
The provisions of Sections 50-10 through 50-14 of the General Statutes
are adopted, establishing a procedure for the disposition of goods lost and
found.
Chapter 40
VOTING DISTRICTS
§ 40-1. Designation of districts.
A. There shall be six voting districts in the Town of Wethersfield, and the
boundaries of said districts shall be those that are defined on a map entitled
the "2010 Voting Districts for the Town of Wethersfield - Assembly and
Senate Districting Shown," which map is incorporated by reference as part
of this section and which map shall be kept on file in the office of the Town
Clerk of the Town of Wethersfield.
B. The boundaries of said voting districts as set forth on said map are more
particularly bounded and described as follows:
§ 37-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1
1:141
District No. I Wethersfield Voting District
Beginning at the Newington, Rocky Hill and Wethersfield Town Line; then
north along the Newington Town Line; then east along the Newington
Town Line; then north along the Newington Town Line to the center
line of Whippoorwill Way extended; then east along the center line of
Whippoorwill Way to the center line of Old Reservoir Road; then north
along the center line of Old Reservoir Road to the center line of Prospect
Street; then east along the center line of Prospect Street to the center line
of Ridge Road; then north along the center line of Ridge Road to the center
line of Clearfield Road; then east along the center line of Clearfield Road to
the center line of Linden Street; then south along the center line of Linden
Street to the center line of Brimfield Road; then east along the center line
of Brimfield Road to the center line of Longvue Drive; then southeast along
the center line of Longvue Drive to the center line of Prospect Street; then
west along the center line of Prospect Street to the center line of Griswold
Road; then southwest along the center line of Griswold Road to the center
line of Highland Street; then west along the center line of Highland Street
to the center line of Coppermill Road; then south along the center line of
Coppermill Road to the center line of Fox Hill Road; then east along the
center line of Fox Hill Road to Fairlane Brook; then south along Fairlane
Brook to the center line of Cloverdale Circle; then west along the center
line of Cloverdale Circle to the center line of Meadow View Drive; then
southwesterly along the center line of Meadow View Drive to the center
line of Cross Hill Road; then southeast along the center line of Cross Hill
Road across Hang Dog Lane in an extension of Cross Hill Road to the Rocky
Hill Town Line; then westerly along the Wethersfield-Rocky Hill Town Line
to the point of beginning.
District No. II Wethersfield Voting District
Beginning at the center line of the Silas Deane Highway at the Rocky Hill
Town line; then north along the center line of the Silas Deane Highway to
the center line of Church Street; then east along the center line of Church
Street to the center line of Marsh Street; then east to the center line of the
Route 3 off ramp; then northeasterly along the center line of the Route 3
off ramp and the Putman Bridge to the center line of the Connecticut River;
then southerly along the center line of the Connecticut River to the Rocky
Hill Town Line; then westerly along the Rocky Hill Town Line to the point
of beginning.
§ 40-1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 40-1
1:142
District No. III Wethersfield Voting District
Beginning at the point at which the extension of the center line of Cross
Hill Road meets the Rocky Hill Town Line; then southeasterly along the
Rocky Hill Town Line; then easterly, northerly, and northeasterly along
the Rocky Hill Town Line to the center line of the Silas Deane Highway;
then northerly along the center line of the Silas Deane Highway to the
center line of Wells Road; then west along the center line of Wells Road
to the center line of Wolcott Hill Road; then south along the center line
of Wolcott Hill Road to the center line of Brimfield Road; then east along
the center line of Brimfield Road to the center line of Longvue Drive; then
southeasterly and Southerly along the center line of Longvue Drive to the
center line of Prospect Street; then west along the center line of Prospect
Street to the center line of Griswold Road; then south along the center line
of Griswold Road to the center line of Highland Street; then west along the
center line of Highland Street to the center line of Coppermill Road; then
south along the center line of Coppermill Road to the center line of Fox Hill
Road; then east along the center line of Fox Hill Road to Fairlane Brook;
then south along Fairlane Brook to the center line of Cloverdale Circle;
then west along the center line of Cloverdale Circle to the center line of
Meadow View Drive; then south along the center line of Meadow View
Drive to the center line of Cross Hill Road; then south along the center line
of Cross Hill Road, as extended to the point of beginning on the Rocky Hill
Town Line.
District No. IV Wethersfield Voting District
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Ridge Road and the
Hartford City Line; then southerly along the center line of Ridge Road
to the center line of Prospect Street; then west along the center line of
Prospect Street to the center line of Old Reservoir Road; then south along
the center line of Old Reservoir Road to the center line of Whippoorwill
Way; then west along the center line of Whippoorwill Way, as extended, to
the Newington Town Line; then north along the Newington Town Line to
the Town Line of the City of Hartford; then east along the Town Line of the
City of Hartford to the intersection with the center line of Ridge Road and
the place of beginning.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1
1:143
District No. V Wethersfield Voting District
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Ridge Road and the
Hartford City Line; then southerly along the center line of Ridge Road
to the center line of Clearfield Road; then east along the center line of
Clearfield Road to the center line of Linden Road; then south along the
center line of Linden Road to the center line of Brimfield Road; then
east along the center line of Brimfield Road to the center line of Wolcott
Hill Road; then north along the center line of Wolcott Hill Road to the
center line of Wells Road; then west along the center line of Wells Road
to the center line of Folly Brook Boulevard; then north along the center
line of Folly Brook Boulevard to the Hartford City Line; then west along
the Hartford City Line to the center line of Ridge Road and the point of
beginning.
District No. VI Wethersfield Voting District
Boundary beginning at the intersection of Folly Brook Boulevard and the
Hartford City Line; then easterly and southerly along the Hartford City
Line and the Town Line of East Hartford to a point in the Glastonbury Town
Line; then west along the Glastonbury Town Line to the center line of the
Connecticut River; then southerly along the center line of the Connecticut
River to the center line of the Putnam Bridge; then southwesterly along
the center line of the Putnam Bridge; then northwesterly on the Route 3
off ramp; then westerly along the Route 3 off ramp to the center line of
Marsh Street; then northwesterly along the center line of Marsh Street to
the center line of Church Street; then west along the center line of Church
Street to the center line of the Silas Deane Highway; then south along the
center line of the Silas Deane Highway to the center line of Wells Road;
then west along the center line of Wells Road to the center line of Folly
Brook Boulevard; then north along the center line of Folly Brook Boulevard
to its intersection with the Hartford City Line and the point of beginning.
Chapter 43
YOUTH SERVICES, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Committees, boards, etc. — See Ch. 10.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 20.
Town Council rules of procedures — See Ch.
A180.
§ 43-1. Creation; membership; purpose.
A Department of Youth Services is created, consisting of a Director and
such other employees as the Council may determine by ordinance. The
Department shall provide opportunities for youth to develop positively and
to function as responsible members of the community. The Department shall
§ 40-1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 43-1
1:144
plan, coordinate, implement and evaluate preventive and treatment services
for the community and delinquent and troubled youth.
§ 43-2. Powers and duties.
The Department shall have all the powers and duties related to youth and
families provided in the General Statutes and shall perform such additional
duties as prescribed by the Manager.
§ 43-3. Donations for counseling; disposition of funds. [Added
8-19-1991; amended 4-15-1996]
A. A mandatory donation of $6 shall be levied per visit per session for
counseling services by the Youth Services Department. Donations above
the mandatory level will be accepted. Persons may be exempt from a
mandatory donation upon approval of the Director of Youth Services. In
certain instances, counseling programs may be designed which would
require a special mandatory donation for a person's participation in
these programs. Effective July 1, 1996, all donations for counseling
and all donations for Crossroads will be deposited in the general fund,
partially to offset the cost of providing these services.
B. Effective July 1, 1996, $15,000 of existing contributions in the various
Youth Services Escrow Accounts shall be permanently transferred in
trust to the Steven Salter's Fund, a donor-advised fund at the Hartford
Foundation for Public Giving. Such trust fund shall be used solely for the
benefit of the youth of Wethersfield. The Director of Youth Services, or
his nominee, as is appropriate, and the Youth Advisory Board shall act as
advisors as to grants from such donor-advised fund. Grants shall not be
used to supplant general fund expenditures.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 46
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 51.
Massage parlors — See Ch. 102.
Nuisances — See Ch. 108.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 113.
Zoning — See Ch. 167.
§ 46-1. Intent; findings.
The statement of intent of this chapter shall be to regulate adult-oriented
establishments.
A. The Town Council of the Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut, finds that
adult-oriented establishments in the Town of Wethersfield require
§ 43-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-1
1:145
special supervision from the Town's public safety agencies in order
to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the Town's
citizens.
B. The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments is
and would be detrimental to the general welfare, health and safety of the
citizens of Wethersfield and especially its youth.
C. The Constitution and laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the
Town powers, especially police power, to enact reasonable legislation
and measures to regulate and supervise adult-oriented establishments
as hereinafter defined in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
D. It is not the intent of the Town Council in enacting this chapter to
deny to any person rights to speech protected by the United States
and Connecticut Constitutions, nor is it the intent of the Council to
impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes,
books and/or other materials. Further, by enacting this chapter, the
Town Council does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any
adult to obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials protected by
the United States and Connecticut Constitutions, nor does it intend to
restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or
exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute
or exhibit such materials.
§ 46-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall
have the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the
context:
ADULT AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any amusement machine that
is regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by
patrons therein.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes or magazines
and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below, and including
adult-oriented films, movies or live entertainment, for observation by
patrons therein.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Includes any exhibition of any adult-oriented
motion pictures, videos, live performance, display or dance of any type
which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance any
actual or simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition
and viewing of specified anatomical areas, removal of articles of clothing or
appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling or any other personal services
offered customers.
§ 46-1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 46-2
1:146
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes, without limitation, adult
bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult video galleries, adult minimotion-
picture theaters, and further means any premises to which the
public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and wherein an
entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a
patron or a member, when such adult entertainment is held, conducted,
operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect, or which premises
are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios,
compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises
for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures. An adult-oriented
establishment further includes, without limitation, any adult entertainment
studio or any premises that are physically arranged and used as such,
whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap
studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling
studio or any other term of like import.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any machine which, upon the payment
of a charge or upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may
be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score and whether or not electronically
operated, and shall include but not be limited to such devices as pinball
machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, electronic baseball,
football, hockey or basketball machines, any and all air-propelled machines
or games, pool tables, shooting games, any and all video games and all
other games, operations similar thereto under whatever name they may
be indicated, including video-monitoring machines. This definition shall not
apply to those items generally described as jukeboxes or billiard tables
or pool tables in billiard or pool parlors solely designated as such and
permitted under the Zoning Ordinance.22
COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an
adult-oriented establishment.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an adultoriented
establishment as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 167, Zoning.
§ 46-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-2
1:147
charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is
provided as an employee or independent contractor.
INSPECTOR — An employee of the Town of Wethersfield authorized and
designated by the Director of Health or the Zoning Enforcement Officer,
or an employee of the Wethersfield Building Division or a member of the
Wethersfield Police Division, or the Fire Marshal of the Town of
Wethersfield, or an agent of any or all of such persons who is designated
to inspect premises regulated under this chapter or any other ordinances,
state or federal laws in case of violations being found on such premises, and
to require corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on said premises.
MINOR — Refers to a person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership or corporation operating,
conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — As used in this chapter, is not intended to include
any medical publications or films or bona fide educational publication or
films, nor does it include any art or photography publications which devote
25% of the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with
subjects of art or photography. Nor does this definition apply to any news
periodical which reports or describes current events and which, from time
to time, publishes photographs or nude or seminude persons in connection
with the dissemination of the news. Nor does this definition apply to
publications or films which describe and report different cultures and
which, from time to time, publish or show photographs or depictions of
nude or seminude persons when describing cultures in which nudity or
seminudity is indigenous to the population.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
§ 46-3. Operating requirements.
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals, pubic regions.
(2) Buttocks.
Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
(3)
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breasts.
C.
§ 46-2 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 46-3
1:148
A. No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow
or permit any minor to loiter in any part of such establishment, including
parking lots immediately adjacent to such establishment used by patrons
of such adult-oriented establishment.
B. Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the Town, on the
effective date of this chapter, shall be well lighted at all times and be
physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion
of the booths, cubicles, studios, rooms or stalls, wherein adult
entertainment is provided, shall be clearly visible from the common
areas of the premises. Visibility into such booths, cubicles, studios,
rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains,
partitions, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever. It shall be
unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles, studios, rooms or stalls
within adult-oriented establishments for whatever purpose but
especially for the purpose of providing for the secluded viewing of adultoriented
motion pictures or other types of adult-oriented entertainment.
C. The operator of each adult-oriented establishment shall be responsible
for and shall provide that any room or other area used for the purpose
of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, videos or other types of live
adult entertainment shall be well lighted and readily accessible at all
times and shall be continuously open to view in its entirety. The premises
shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity
to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access in an
illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor
level. It shall be the duty of the operator and its agents to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times when any patron
is present in the premises.
D. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, including any
act or omission, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or
omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or
caused the omission.
E. An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while
on the licensed premises, and any act or omission of any employee
constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether
the operator shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter.
F. All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by the Wethersfield Police Division, inspectors
employed by the Town and/or the Health District or such other persons
as the Town Council may designate.
G. No adult-oriented establishments shall be permitted on any site that
is less than 1,000 feet from any school, church or any area zoned
residential.
H. No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is less
than 1,000 feet from an existing adult-oriented establishment.
§ 46-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-3
1:149
I. Said one-thousand-foot distance shall be measured by taking the nearest
straight line between the respective lot boundaries of said sites.
J. Any future adult-oriented establishments will be prohibited from having
any on-premises cubicles, booths or segregated areas for the private
viewing of adult-oriented entertainment, and no existing adult-oriented
establishment may create or increase the number of such on-premises
cubicles, booths or segregated areas for the private viewing of adultoriented
entertainment.
§ 46-4. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which is found to have
violated this chapter shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding $100 for
each such violation.
B. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, and
any violation continuing more than one hour of time shall be considered
a separate offense for each hour of violation.
§ 46-5. Severability.
Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section, clause or
provision of this chapter to be unconstitutional, such decision shall affect
only such section, clause or provision so declared unconstitutional and shall
not affect any other section, clause or provision of this chapter.
§ 46-6. Applicability and when effective.
A. Subsections G, H and I of § 46-3 shall take effect immediately upon
adoption but shall not be applicable to existing adult-oriented
establishments.
B. The remainder of this chapter shall take effect immediately; provided,
however, that operators of existing adult-oriented establishments shall
have until October 1, 1996, to comply with the provisions of Subsections
B and C of § 46-3.
Chapter 48
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Code — See Ch. 75. Nuisances — See Ch. 108.
§ 48-1. Declaration of violation.
It is declared that pollution of the air is a public nuisance. Any pollution
of the air creating or contributing to the creation of a hazard to health or
comfort shall be in violation of this section.
§ 46-3 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 48-2
1:150
§ 48-2. Regulations; particulate matter.
No contractor or property owner or his agent shall permit the creation of
particulate matter on any property if such particulate matter is allowed to
be carried beyond the boundaries of the property where created. Material
carried out onto any public street shall be removed by the contractor, owner
or agent before such material becomes airborne.
Chapter 50
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ambulance and emergency services — See Ch.
7.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 83.
Noise — See Ch. 105.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 122.
§ 48-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-2
1:151

ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 4-6-1992; amended in its entirety 9-18-2006 (Ch. 78 of the
1990 Code)]
§ 50-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to reduce needless alarms to which the
Wethersfield Police Department and the Wethersfield Volunteer Fire
Department respond to as a result of the activation of burglar, holdup,
panic and fire alarms that automatically summon the Police Department or
the Fire Department either via a central station, the Wethersfield Police
Department or automatic dialers.
§ 50-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices arranged to
signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which
the Police or Fire Department is expected to respond. In this chapter, the
term "alarm system" shall include but not be limited to the terms "automatic
holdup alarm systems," "burglar alarm systems," "holdup alarm systems,"
"manual holdup alarm systems," "audible alarm systems" and "fire alarm
systems." Alarm systems which monitor temperature, humidity or any other
condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion
into a premises or any attempted robbery or a fire or smoke condition at a
premises are specifically excluded from the provision of this chapter, as are
alternative alarm systems designed to notify of medical emergencies.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of any alarm system to which the Police
and/or Fire Department responds which is not caused by:
SUBSCRIBER — A person who buys and/or leases or otherwise obtains
an alarm system and thereafter installs it or has it installed. The term
"subscriber" shall also mean a person who has control of premises in which
an operable alarm system exists, with the ultimate responsibility for the
alarm system being with the property owner.
§ 50-3. Permits required; term; liability of Town; penalties for
offenses.
A. Fire, a criminal act or other emergency.
B. An act of nature, such as an earthquake, tornado or hurricane.
Circumstances occurring off the protected property and within the
control of the subscriber, his alarm business or his answering service.
C.
D. A person motivated solely by criminal, malicious or mischievous intent.
§ 50-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-3
1:153
A. No person shall possess or use an alarm system within the Town of
Wethersfield without first applying for and receiving an alarm user
permit.
B. Any permit issued hereunder shall be valid for one year from the date of
issuance.
C. Any permit issued hereunder shall be predicated upon the express
condition that the permittee shall indemnify and hold the Town of
Wethersfield harmless from any and all damages arising out of the
activities of any permittee.
D. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a penalty of $250.
§ 50-4. Permit applications.
A. All applications for alarm user permits shall be accompanied by an
application fee of $25 and filed with the Police Department. The
application must state where the alarm device or alarm system will be
located, the name of the installer, the type of device or system, a list of
persons to be contacted in the event of an alarm, and other information
as may be required for the public's health and safety.
B. All alarm devices and alarm systems are subject to approval by the Chief
of Police prior to installation, with the exception of any fire alarm system,
which shall be subject to approval by the Fire Marshal.
C. Existing alarm systems must be registered and a permit issued within 90
days of the date of adoption of this amended article.
§ 50-5. Alarm registration renewal.
Permits for all alarm systems shall require an annual renewal one year from
the date of permit or registration issuance. Renewals shall be accompanied
by a renewal fee of $25 and filed with the Police Department. Except that
permits for alarm systems servicing solely residential property shall require
a renewal every three years from the date of permit or registration issuance
and shall be accompanied by a renewal fee of $25.
§ 50-6. Imposition of fines.
A. Effective July 1, 2005, the Town of Wethersfield will charge the
subscriber of an alarm system a fine for each emergency police and/or
fire response to a false alarm as follows:
(1) For the first two false alarms in any one calendar year, a warning;
(2) For the third false alarm in any one calendar year, a $50 penalty with
such penalty increasing in $25 increments for each false alarm in any
one calendar year thereafter.
B. If the subscriber is not the owner of the property in which the alarm
system is located, the Town shall give the property owner notice of the
occurrence of the first false alarm generated by the alarm system of the
property.
§ 50-3 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 50-7
1:154
§ 50-7. Right to appeal.
The subscriber in receipt of a violation ticket may appeal the fine at anytime
within five days of the receipt of said notice by filing an appeals notice at
police headquarters. After review of said appeal, the Police Chief or Fire
Chief, in the event of fire alarm systems, will make a determination as to
whether or not the circumstances surrounding the false alarm justify the
waiver of the fine. The subscriber will be notified in writing as to the results
of the appeal.
§ 50-8. Payment of fines.
All fines payable under this article will be made to the Tax Collector and will
be due and payable within 30 days of the day of notice or, if appealed, within
30 days of the date of decision on the appeal. Payments not received within
this period will result in the automatic doubling of the fine. In addition, if the
subscriber subject to the fine is not the property owner, the Tax Collector
shall give the property owner notice of the subscriber's failure to pay the
fine in the allowable period. The property owner shall have a fifteen-day
period from the date of such notice in which to pay the original fine at the
original amount. If not paid within such fifteen-day period, the amount of
the fine which the property owner may pay shall be doubled.
§ 50-9. Administration and enforcement.
The Police Chief will enforce and administer this article and any rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder, except that the Fire Chief shall have
jurisdiction over the fire alarm systems.
§ 50-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-9
1:155

ARTICLE II
Fire Alarms
[Adopted 9-4-1990; amended in its entirety 8-15-2005 (Ch. 79 of the
1990 Code)]
§ 50-10. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to reduce needless alarms to which the
Wethersfield Volunteer Fire Department responds and to provide standards
and regulations for the installation of fire alarm systems that automatically
summon the Fire Department either via a central station, the Wethersfield
Police Department or automatic dialers.
§ 50-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A system of electrical devices and circuits
installed, arranged and maintained to form, transmit and send signals
indicating an emergency requiring immediate action to safeguard life and
property from fire, whether or not required by Town ordinance or by the
State of Connecticut Fire Safety Code.
§ 50-12. Permit required; application.
A. Before any new alarm system or system modification shall be installed
or performed in any commercial or residential building or structure, a
permit shall be obtained from the Building Department.
B. Upon application for a permit, the following information shall be
supplied:
(1) Complete information regarding the system, including specifications,
wiring diagrams and floor plans, shall be submitted for review and
approval by the Fire Marshal of the Town of Wethersfield prior to
the installation of the equipment and wiring. Such plans shall be
stamped with the approval of the Fire Marshal and such approval
shall be valid for one year from the date of approval, after which time
said plans shall be subject to an additional review. The Fire Marshal
shall approve only one fire alarm system design per building.
(2) All devices, combination of devices and equipment constructed and
installed in conformity with the standard shall be approved for the
purpose for which they are to be used and shall be shown on
appropriate drawings. The submitted drawing shall show all detector
placement on dedicated fire alarm system drawings (No other
system shall be shown).
(3) All components shall be listed for fire alarm use by a testing
organization acceptable to the Fire Marshal of the Town of
Wethersfield.
(4) All central station equipment connections shall comply with NFPA
71.
§ 50-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-12
1:157
(5) All wiring and devices shall meet the requirement of the NFPA 70,
NFPA 71, NFPA 72, NFPA 72E and NFPA 74.
(6) Systems shall be under the supervision of a responsible qualified
person or organization satisfactory to the Fire Marshal, who shall,
under contractual agreement, make all inspections, tests and repairs
within seven working days. Qualified persons shall be licensed by the
State of Connecticut and shall hold a minimum L-5 license.
(7) Prior to the Fire Marshal's and Building Inspector's making the final
inspection, a contract must be in evidence between the building
owner and an approved fire alarm testing company for the testing
and maintenance (in accordance with NFPA 72H) of the building
alarm system.
§ 50-13. Administration and enforcement.
The administration of this article shall be by the Division of Fire, and the
enforcement shall be by the Fire Marshal of the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 50-14. Penalties for offenses; effect on existing systems.
A. Any fire alarm system installed after the effective date of this article shall
conform to the requirements of this article. If such fire alarm system
does not so conform, then the property owner shall have a thirty-day
period from receipt of notice that the fire alarm system is nonconforming
to bring the system into conformance. Failure to do so shall result in the
imposition of a fine of $100.
B. Any fire alarm system installed prior to the effective date of this article
shall be registered with the Fire Marshal of the Town of Wethersfield
within 60 days of the effective date of this article. If any property owner
fails to register a fire alarm system within the registration period and
within 30 days after receipt of notice that he has failed to register such
system, then the property owner shall be fined the sum of $250.
C. The registration or approval of a fire alarm system pursuant to the
provisions of any prior ordinance shall constitute compliance with the
approval and registration requirements of this article.
§ 50-12 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 50-14
1:158
Chapter 51
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 113.
§ 50-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-14
1:159

ARTICLE I
Possession on Town Property
[Adopted as Sec. 2-1-1 of the Code of 1972 (Ch. 51 of the 1990
Code)]
§ 51-1. Prohibitions.
The possession of intoxicating liquors on any property owned, leased or
controlled by the Town of Wethersfield (excluding Town-owned rights-ofway
on developed streets) is hereby prohibited except in and around certain
Town-owned buildings as is provided by rules and regulations adopted by
the Wethersfield Town Council.
§ 51-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates this article shall be subject to the following fines:
A. First offense: not more than $25.
B. Second offense: not more than $50.
C. Third and each subsequent offense: not more than $100.
§ 51-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-2
1:161

ARTICLE II
Underage Drinking
[Adopted 2-17-2004]
§ 51-3. Findings and intent.
A. The possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor by minors is a matter
of growing local, regional, and national concern.
B. Consumption of alcoholic liquor by minors unsupervised by parental
authority creates a health and safety risk not only to children, but also
the general public.
C. The Town Council of Wethersfield seeks to protect, preserve and
promote the health, safety, welfare and quality of life of its residents by
regulating the possession of alcohol by minors on both public and private
property.
§ 51-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — The same meaning as the term as defined in
Section 30-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
HOST — A gathering of two or more persons, or to allow the premises under
one's control to be used with one's knowledge for a gathering of two or more
persons, for personal, social, or business interaction.
MINOR — The same meaning as the term as defined in Section 30-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, limited-liability company, municipality, agency,
or political or administrative subdivision of the state or other legal entity of
any kind.
§ 51-5. Possession of alcoholic liquor restricted.
No person under the age of 21 shall possess any container of alcoholic
liquor, whether opened or unopened, within the Town of Wethersfield except
when accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent, guardian, or
spouse who has attained the age of 21 years. This restriction shall apply to
both public and private property.
§ 51-6. Hosting event or gathering restricted.
No person or persons shall host an event or gathering at which alcoholic
liquor is consumed by or dispensed to any person who has not attained
the age of 21 unless such person who has not attained the age of 21 is
accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent, guardian, or spouse
who has attained the age of 21. This prohibition shall apply to any event or
gathering within the Town of Wethersfield, whether conducted on public or
private property.
§ 51-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-7
1:163
§ 51-7. Possession otherwise prohibited by law.
Notwithstanding the above, nothing herein shall prohibit the serving or
selling of alcoholic liquor by a minor if otherwise permitted by the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 51-8. Enforcement.
A. The Chief of Police or any other sworn member of the Wethersfield Police
Department is charged with enforcing the provision of this article.
B. In enforcing this article, the police shall be required to have probable
cause before entering private property.
§ 51-9. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person violating § 51-5 of this article shall be subject to a fine of
$100 for each such violation.
B. Any person violating § 51-6 of this article shall be subject to a fine of
$100.
C. All fines paid pursuant to this article shall be payable to the Treasurer of
the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 51-10. Appeals.
Any person fined pursuant to this article may appeal such fine to the
Wethersfield Citation Board or his or her designee within 30 days.
§ 51-7 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 51-10
1:164
Chapter 53
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 90. Peace and good order — See Ch. 113.
§ 53-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who owns or distributes any such machine.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug or token or upon payment of a charge, releases balls
which are propelled by a plunger across a board and which registers scores
by striking pins, levers or bumpers or by falling into holes or slots or which,
upon insertion of a coin or slug or the payment of a charge, is operated to
register a score or tally of any kind. It shall include such devices as pinball
or pin-game machines.
OPERATOR — Any person in whose place of business any such machine is
placed for use by the public.
§ 53-2. License required; application.
A. Every distributor shall obtain a license from the Chief of Police for each
mechanical amusement device placed in operation by him.
B. Every operator shall obtain a license from the Chief of Police for each
mechanical amusement device in operation in his place of business.
C. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Chief of Police upon
forms to be supplied by him for that purpose.
D. The application for such a license shall contain the following
information, under oath:
(1) The name of the applicant; if a partnership, the names of all
partners; if a corporation, club or association, the names of the
officers.
(2) The residence of the applicant.
(3) The age of the applicant; if a corporation, club or association, the
date organized and under the laws of what state.
(4) The type of business or activity.
(5) Whether the applicant or, if a corporation, club or association, the
officers have ever been convicted of a crime.
(6) The place where the machine or device is to be displayed or operated
and the business or activity conducted at that place. This shall apply
only to the operator.
(7) The description of the type of machine to be covered by the license.
§ 51-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-3
1:165
§ 53-3. Investigation of applicant.
The Chief of Police shall investigate the character and record of the
applicant and the location wherein it is proposed to operate the machines
described in the application and shall not approve said application or issue
a license unless he finds that the applicant is over 21 years of age and is
a person of good moral character and that the business or activity in such
location is a bona fide and lawful one. In any case of the denial or refusal
to grant or renew a license, the Chief of Police shall notify the applicant of
his proposed action and set a day and place for a hearing thereon, giving
the applicant reasonable notice in advance thereof and an opportunity to be
represented by counsel at such hearing.
§ 53-4. License fees.
A. A license shall be issued by the Chief of Police in the name of each
applicant. Annual license fees shall be paid for each machine licensed
under this chapter as follows: [Amended 6-18-1990]
(1) Distributor: mechanical amusement devices, $24 per machine.
(2) Operator: mechanical amusement devices, $24 per machine.
B. The license fees shall become due on the first day of July in each year
or on the date on which each machine is first placed in operation. In
the former case, the license fee shall be reckoned for the year; in the
latter case, proportionately from the first day of the month in which the
machine is placed in operation to and including the 30th day of June
following.
§ 53-5. Display of license.
The licenses herein provided for shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine or device in the premises
wherein the machine or device is to be operated or maintained.
§ 53-6. Change of address.
A. Such license may be transferred from one machine or device to another
similar machine or device without the necessity of making application
therefor. Not more than one machine or device shall be distributed,
displayed or operated under one license, and a separate license shall
be required for each machine or device so displayed, distributed or
operated; provided, however, that the maximum fee for all such
machines or devices placed in any one establishment or place of business
for the use of the public shall be $100 per annum, irrespective of the
number of such machines or devices so placed and operated therein.
B. Each applicant shall notify the Chief of Police promptly of any change
in the ownership of his place of business or any other change in the
information set forth in the original application. In the event of a sale or
transfer of the business of the operator, a new license must be obtained.
Any distributor may be permitted, at the discretion of the Chief of
Police, to file with him the information required under § 53-2D and may
thereafter not be required to furnish such information upon the signing
§ 53-3 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 53-6
1:166
of each separate application, but such distributor shall notify the Chief
of Police promptly of any change in such information.
§ 53-7. Revocation of license.
The Chief of Police shall have the power to revoke any license issued
hereunder for cause, after due notice, in writing, to the licensee and a
hearing to be held not less than 10 days after the date of such notice. Cause
shall be deemed to include, but shall not be limited to, conviction of a crime
involving moral turpitude subsequent to the issuance of the license, false
information in the application for a license knowingly given or any violation
of this chapter.
§ 53-8. Gambling not permitted.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize or permit
any gambling device whatsoever or any mechanism that has been judicially
determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to law.
§ 53-9. Good order; parental accompaniment. [Amended 3-20-1995]
Each operator and each servant, agent and employee of each operator
shall maintain good order in his place of business and not permit any such
mechanical amusement device to be used for gambling. No operator of any
mechanical amusement device and no servant, agent or employee of any
such operator shall harbor in his place of business persons under 18 years
of age or allow them to congregate therein or play any such machines or
devices unless accompanied by their parents or guardians. The provision
herein stated related to parental accompaniment may be waived for any
operator having been granted a special permit as defined under Article
XXXII of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 53-10. Enforcement. [Added 8-15-2005]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 73, Article I, of the Code of the
Town of Wethersfield shall be followed.
Chapter 56
BARBERSHOPS AND BEAUTY SALONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Massage parlors — See Ch. 102.
§ 53-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-1
1:167
§ 56-1. Declaration as business.
It hereby is declared that the operation of barbershops and beauty salons,
as defined herein, is a business affecting the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 56-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
BARBERSHOP AND BEAUTY SALON — An establishment where human
hair is cut or styled; where beards are shaved or trimmed; where human
hair is waved, straightened, singed, set, bleached, removed, colored or
tinted; and/or where facials, manicuring or cosmetic hand or fingernail care
is provided.
OPERATOR — A person who carries out any of the procedures listed in the
definition of barbershop and beauty salon.
§ 56-3. License required; application; fees.
A. All operators in a barbershop or a beauty salon shall have and display
an appropriate current license or registration from the State of
Connecticut.
B. Any place where barbering or hairdressing is carried out shall have and
display a current license as a barbershop or beauty salon.
C. Application for a license to operate a barbershop or beauty salon shall be
made to the Director of Health on a form to be supplied by the Director,
who shall inspect the establishment for compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
D. The applicant shall provide a detailed sketch or drawing of the layout of
the shop or salon.
E. The initial licensing fee for a barbershop or beauty salon with one to
three stations shall be $30; for four to seven stations, $40; for eight to
12 stations, $50; and for 13 or more stations, $60. Initial licenses shall
be in effect for one year from the date issued. Annual renewal fees shall
be $30 for establishments with one to seven stations and $40 for those
with eight or more stations.
§ 56-4. Inspections.
The Director of Health or his authorized agent shall make inspections and
reinspections as necessary to enforce this chapter and shall be permitted
to enter any establishment licensed or applying for a license under this
chapter at any reasonable time.
§ 56-5. Denial, suspension or revocation of license.
The Director of Health may deny an application for a license or may revoke
or suspend a license for failure to comply with the requirements of this
chapter or for any unsanitary condition which, in his judgment, may
§ 56-1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 56-5
1:168
constitute a hazard to health. No license may be revoked or suspended
without due notice and hearing by the Director of Health.
§ 56-6. Locations and equipment.
A. No barbershop or beauty salon shall have any means of entrance to a
dwelling place or residence.
B. All establishments shall be properly equipped to conduct the business
of barbering, hairdressing or cosmetology. Washbowls shall be used
for barbering, hairdressing and cosmetology work only. A utility sink
shall be provided for proper cleansing of instruments. Shampoo bowls,
cabinets, combs, brushes and towels shall be provided by the shop owner
and be in good working condition and clean. Booths or working areas
shall provide a minimum of 36 square feet for each operator employed
in the shop. This area shall not include any space devoted to offices,
waiting rooms or other purposes not directly related to provision of
service to patrons. Passageways shall have a minimum width of three
feet throughout the establishment. No dryers shall be placed in any
waiting room or passageway.
§ 56-7. Sanitation.
A. No operator who is infected with any infectious disease in communicable
form shall attend any person. No person infected with any infectious
disease in communicable form shall be attended. Operators shall wash
their hands thoroughly with soap and hot water before attending any
person. Operators shall wear clean, washable clothing at all times. No
animals or pets shall be kept in any establishment.
B. All brushes, combs, instruments and applicators shall be cleansed and
disinfected after each use. Individual headrest coverings or neck
protectors shall be supplied for each person. In manicuring, a clean
paper lining for the finger bowl shall be used for each person. Brushes,
scissors, clippers, razors, combs, rubber discs, parts of vibrators and
other utensils and appliances shall be disinfected after use upon any
person. No tools shall be left exposed on workstands but, after each
use, shall be cleansed, disinfected and kept in a clean closed drawer
or cabinet. No towel shall be used for more than one person without
being laundered. Clean towels shall be kept in a clean, closed cabinet
or closet. Suitable containers for soiled towels, brushes and combs shall
be provided. No powder puff, sponge, neck duster or brush roller shall
be used. Solid soap shall not be used in common or for more than one
person. All hair droppings upon the floor shall be removed therefrom as
soon as possible and in such manner as not to cause nuisance.
C. Proper ventilation shall be provided for excess heat and odors. Floors
shall have hard washable surfaces in areas where tinting or shampooing
is done or where chemicals such as sodium hydroxide, peroxide or
thioglycolate are used. Floors shall be maintained in a clean state at all
times. Toilets shall meet the requirements of the regulations governing
plumbing in the Public Health Code.
D. Any of the following methods of disinfection may be used in a container
sufficiently large to disinfect all tools:
§ 56-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-7
1:169
(1) Immersion in boiling water or oil for at least five minutes.
(2) Immersion in seventy-percent grain or denatured alcohol or in tenpercent
formalin for at least 10 minutes.
(3) Immersion in one-percent cresol or five-percent carbolic acid
solution for at least 10 minutes.
E. Solutions of other chemicals may be used in the same manner, provided
that the disinfecting ingredient shall be equal in potency to a fivepercent
carbolic acid solution as determined by the phenol coefficient
method. All instruments and accessories so disinfected shall be rinsed
thoroughly in clean flowing tap water before use.
§ 56-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $100 for each
day such violation continues.
Chapter 59
BOATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
A181.
§ 59-1. Wethersfield Cove speed restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a boat in Wethersfield Cove,
including the channel from the cove to the Connecticut River, at a rate of
speed exceeding six miles per hour.
Chapter 63
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 83.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 122.
Construction requirements for radio
coverage — See Ch. 127.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 143.
Zoning — See Ch. 167.
§ 63-1. Payment of fees and delinquent taxes required for permit
issuance. [Amended 2-3-1997]
§ 56-7 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 63-1
1:170
A. No permit to begin work for new construction, alteration, removal,
demolition or other building operation shall be issued until the fees
prescribed in this chapter shall have been paid to the Department of
Public Works, nor shall an amendment to a permit necessitating an
additional fee because of an increase in the estimated cost of the work
involved be approved until the additional fee shall have been paid.
B. The issuance of building permits, certificates of occupancy or other
related building applications filed therewith shall be withheld when
there is a tax delinquency with respect to the subject property (pursuant
to C.G.S. § 7-148, as amended by Public Act 95-320.) Only in cases where
extreme hardship or potential safety risks exist may the Town Manager,
or his designee, authorize the approval of said building application,
following agreement upon an acceptable payment plan. The requisite
procedural guidelines for implementing this statutory change shall be
executed in accordance with that established and defined in § 167-165.
§ 63-2. Payment of other fees.
The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or
demolition and for all work done in connection with or concurrently with
the work contemplated by the building permit shall not relieve the applicant
for or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that may be
prescribed by law or ordinance for water taps, sewer connections, electrical
permits, erection of signs and display structures, marquees or other
appurtenant structures or fees for inspections, certificates of use and
occupancy or other privileges or requirements both within and without the
jurisdiction of the Department of Building Inspection.
§ 63-3. Schedule of fees. [Amended 6-7-1993]
A. Fees for permits for construction, alteration, removal, demolition,
moving, erection of signs and any other work done in connection with or
concurrently with the work contemplated by the building permit shall be
$30 for the first $1,000 or less of estimated value of work for which the
permit is issued and $16 for each additional $1,000 of estimated value of
work or any fraction thereof. [Amended 6-6-2005]
B. Any work performed without obtaining the necessary permits as
prescribed in §§ 63-1 and 63-2 shall result in a doubling of the fees as
contained within this section.
§ 63-4. Refunds.
In the case of a revocation of a permit or abandonment or discontinuance
of a building project, the volume of the work actually completed shall be
computed, and any excess fee for the incompleted work shall be returned
to the permit holder, except that all penalties that may have been imposed
on the permit holder under the requirements of the Building Code shall
first be collected. The Town may withhold from any refund any cost and
administrative expense incurred in connection with the application.
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-5
1:171
§ 63-5. Exceptions.
All buildings constructed by the Town or any agency thereof shall be exempt
from the provisions of §§ 63-2, 63-3 and 63-4.
§ 63-6. Encroachments along waterways.
Pursuant to Section 7-147 of the General Statutes, 1958 Revision, as
amended, encroachment lines are hereby established along all brooks,
streams, waterways, watercourses and floodplains in the Town of
Wethersfield, beyond which lines in the direction of such brooks, streams,
waterways, watercourses and floodplains no encroachment, building,
structure, obstruction or any other encroachment shall be placed by any
private person or any firm or corporation unless permission is granted, in
writing, after public hearing, by the Wethersfield Town Council.
§ 63-7. Establishment of encroachment lines.
Said encroachment lines are established along those points of all brooks,
streams, waterways, watercourses and floodplains within which any
encroachment would reduce the discharge capacity of any such brook,
stream, waterway, watercourse and floodplain below that required by the
criteria set forth by the designated one-hundred-year flood limit, as
established by the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) Numbered H and I-01
through 04 and 01F through 04F in the Town of Wethersfield, to be dated
May 2, 1977, and the Flood Insurance Study Report dated November 1976,
as the same may be amended from time to time, a copy of which maps and
report are on file with the Town Clerk of the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 63-8. Folly Brook encroachments.
The provisions of § 63-7 to the contrary notwithstanding, encroachment
lines are established along that portion of Folly Brook south and east of
the Hartford By-Pass, the Wethersfield Cove and the Wethersfield Cove
Channel as shown on a map entitled "Town of Wethersfield Department of
Public Works Engineering Division Wethersfield Cove Encroachment Line
Alternate A Drawn: Lemire Checked: Ricci March, 1971 Scale 1" - 200',"
which map is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 63-9. Plans and proposals.
The encroachment lines established by §§ 63-6 through 63-8 shall hereafter
be shown on all plans and proposals wherein the land involved includes,
is adjacent to or is traversed by any brooks, streams, waterways,
watercourses and floodplains in the Town of Wethersfield whether such plan
is submitted to the Town Council or to any board, commission, department,
division or office of the Town of Wethersfield for the purpose of obtaining
any municipal approval or permit.
§ 63-10. Exemptions.
§ 63-5 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 63-10
1:172
A. Exemptions to the provisions of §§ 63-6, 63-7 and 63-8 are hereby made
in the following situations:
(1) Any structure substantially destroyed by fire, flood or natural causes
may be rebuilt on a foundation of the same size and shape as that of
the original structure if such rebuilding commences within one year
of its destruction.
(2) In the backwater portion of any floodplain where the rate of flow of
water will be less than 1/4 foot per second, any parcel of land with
a residence building may be further improved by landscaping or by
the construction of outbuildings or fences.
B. The exemptions hereinabove set forth apply to the provisions of §§ 63-6
through 63-11 only and do not contravene the provisions of any other
applicable ordinance, regulation or statute.
§ 63-11. Engineering analysis.
At least once in each decade the Council shall cause to be made an
engineering analysis of the available data on rainfall intensity, flood
protection devices and waterflow to determine whether the lines
established in §§ 63-7 and 63-8 should be modified in any particular.
Chapter 65
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ambulance and emergency services — See Ch.
7.
Building construction — See Ch. 63.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 122.
§ 65-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and convenience
through the provisions of a uniform system of numbering buildings,
properties and houses in the Town of Wethersfield in order to ease the speed
in which the public and emergency services such as firefighting, police and
emergency medical care are able to efficiently locate properties.
§ 65-2. Assigning numbers; notification.
The Engineering Division shall assign street address numbers to all
properties in the Town and shall direct the owner to affix to his or her
premises figures indicating the building/house numbers assigned. The
Engineering Division shall mail a copy of the assigned street number to
the property owner who shall be responsible for affixing the building/house
number within 30 days after the sending of the notice.
§ 63-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-3
1:173
§ 65-3. Building/house number specifications.
In affixing building/house numbers, the property owner shall conform to the
following specifications:
A. Building/house numbers shall be plain block script or written numbers
made of durable materials such as metal, glass, wood or plastic, or they
may be painted.
B. All building/house numbers shall be at least three inches in height.
C. Building/house numbers shall be of a color contrasting with the color
of the background to which they are affixed. Owners are encouraged,
but not required, to use numbers made of reflective material and to
illuminate building numbers so as to be easily visible at night.
D. If a building is less than 100 feet from the center line of the street on
which it fronts, the building numbers shall be located on the front of the
building or on a signpost or mailbox located between the building and
street on which it fronts, so that the number shall be visible and readable
from both left and right approaches.
E. If a building is set back more than 100 feet from the center line of
the street on which it fronts, or if the numerals cannot be read from
the center line because of obstructions, an additional building/house
number shall be affixed to a signpost, mailbox, or fence which shall be
located along the street line and within 10 feet of the principal driveway
or principal walkway entrance to the premises in a manner so as to be
visible from either direction of travel on the street.
F. In general, when affixed, all building/house numbers shall be positioned
not less than four feet nor more than 12 feet from the surface of
the ground directly below them. Exception to this provision of this
chapter may be granted by the Engineering Division in cases where it is
determined visibility is adequate.
G. On a corner lot, the building/house number shall face the street named
in the address.
H. When the Engineering Division and/or the Fire Marshal determines
the need for multiple building numbers to be displayed in the best
interest of safety, or in the case of commercial properties or multitenant
apartments or condominiums, an owner/occupant may be required to
affix building numbers at both front and rear entrances or locations
otherwise determined by the Engineering Division and/or Fire Marshal.
I. Building/house numbers shall be displayed on approved building lots
prior to the commencement of any site work or construction.
J. Property owners shall ensure that street address numbers are
maintained in good repair and readable.
§ 65-4. Enforcement.
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 16823 of the Code of the Town of
Wethersfield shall be followed.
23.See Ch. 73, Enforcement, Art. I, Citation Hearing Procedure.
§ 65-3 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 65-4
1:174
A. All new construction shall have a building/house number affixed in
compliance with the guidelines set forth herein prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
B. Owners of existing buildings must comply with this ordinance within 30
days from the date of enacting this chapter.
§ 65-5. Penalties for offenses.
In the event that a property owner is cited for a violation of this chapter the
property owner shall have 10 days from date of notice, to comply and meet
these requirements. If the owner does not comply, he or she shall be subject
to a fine of $25 for each day of neglect or refusal.
§ 65-6. Appeals.
Any person who is aggrieved by the enforcement of this chapter may submit
an appeal to the Citation Hearing Board as set forth by that chapter.
§ 65-7. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on May 1, 2011, and shall apply to all
buildings within the Town of Wethersfield.
Chapter 70
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dog and horse racing — See Ch. 90, Art. II. Nuisances — See Ch. 108.
§ 65-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-7
1:175

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 70-1. Purpose and intent.
The purposes of this chapter are to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the Town by addressing the public
nuisance caused by vicious and dangerous animals and to ensure that all
animals receive adequate care. This chapter is intended to supplement
and not supplant the provisions contained in Connecticut General Statutes,
§ 22-339 et seq. regarding domestic animals. The Animal Control Officer
shall have the discretion as to whether to proceed pursuant to state or local
law.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADULT — Any individual 18 years of age or older.
ANIMAL — Any nonhuman animate being which is endowed with the power
of voluntary motion, including fish and fowl.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — An employee or agent of the Town to
enforce the licensing, inspection and enforcement requirements contained
within this chapter and state statutes.
ANIMAL NUISANCE — Any nuisance arising out of the keeping,
maintaining or owning of, or failure to exercise sufficient control of, an
animal.
ANIMAL SHELTER — Any facility operated by the Town and shall also
include any facility authorized by the Animal Control Officer or his designee
to impound, confine, detain, care for or destroy any animal.
AT LARGE — That an animal is off the premises of the owner and not on
a leash or otherwise under the immediate control of a person capable of
restraining the animal.
DISPOSITION — Adoption, sale, quarantine, voluntary or involuntary
placement or euthanasia humanely administered to the animal.
FARM — A tract of land containing two acres or more, used in part or
wholly for agricultural purposes for profit, which may include the raising
and keeping of domestic or other animals.
GUARD OR ATTACK DOG — A dog trained to attack or apprehend on
command to protect persons or property.
IMPOUNDMENT — The taking into custody of an animal by an Animal
Control Officer, or any authorized representative thereof.
§ 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2
1:177
MUZZLE — A device constructed of strong, soft material designed to fasten
over the mouth of an animal to prevent it from biting any person or other
animal.
OWNER or KEEPER — Any person having temporary or permanent custody
of, sheltering or having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or
keeping or having property rights to, any animal covered by this chapter.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any animal that endangers the life or health of
persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of
citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term
"public nuisance" shall include, but not be limited to, any animal that:
UNDER RESTRAINT — An animal is secured by a leash or is otherwise
under the control of an individual who is mentally and physically capable of
restraining the animal and obedient to that person's commands, or securely
enclosed (e.g., appropriate fence) within the real property limits of the
owner's premises.
VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL — An animal that has attacked, bitten,
or physically injured human beings without adequate provocation. Any
animal that without provocation has bitten or attacked a human being
or has behaved so as to impose a threat of imminent bodily harm to a
person conducting himself peacefully and lawfully shall be prima facie
A. Is repeatedly found running at large;
Is in any section of any park or open space land where animals are not
permitted, except at Town-designated dog parks, or where permitted,
is not on a leash or otherwise under the control of its owner or keeper;
B.
Damages or defiles any property other than that of the owner, unless
the owner or keeper immediately picks up after the animal;
C.
Barks, whines, howls or makes any noise natural to its species in an
excessive or continuous fashion so as to disturb the peace, except
where such activity occurs on a farm;
D.
Is in heat and is not confined or under the owner's or keeper's control
so as to prevent attraction or contact with other animals;
E.
Whether or not on the property of its owner, that without provocation
molests, attacks, or otherwise unreasonably interferes with the
freedom of movement of persons in a public right-of-way or on private
property other than that of the animal's owner;
F.
G. Chases motor vehicles in a public right-of-way;
Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by
virtue of the number of animals maintained at a single residence and
the inadequacy of the facilities and care; or
H.
Attacks another animal off the property of the owner or keeper of the
attacking animal.
I.
§ 70-2 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 70-2
1:178
presumed vicious or dangerous. No animal may be declared vicious if an
injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time such injury
or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort
upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal or was
teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or was committing
or attempting to commit a crime. No animal may be declared vicious if the
animal was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate
vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault.
§ 70-3. Nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any property
located within the Town when the keeping of such animal constitutes a
public nuisance or menace to public health or safety.
§ 70-4. Adequacy of facilities and care.
Every owner shall provide his animals with sufficient good and wholesome
food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather; veterinary
care when needed to prevent suffering; humane care and treatment; and
maintain them in a secure enclosure.
§ 70-5. Administrative sanctions and remedies.
As part of any order issued in writing and by certified mail, pursuant to
this chapter, the Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to order the
following administrative sanctions and remedies if there is no compliance
after seven days from the date of issue:
A. Obedience training for the animal in question;
B. Muzzling of a dog or animal while off the property of the owner;
C. Confinement of an animal indoors, unless the animal is under the direct
control of a responsible adult;
D. Confinement of an animal in a secure enclosure;
E. Reduction of the number of animals kept at any one location;
F. Removal of an animal from the custody of the animal's owner or keeper
in cases of neglect or cruelty;
G. The sterilization of an animal;
H. A ban on maintaining other animals in the Town;
I. The euthanizing of an animal; and
J. Any other measure or sanction designed to eliminate a violation, prevent
future violations, or protect the health and safety of the public.
§ 70-6. Enforcement.
The Animal Control Officer or his designees shall be the enforcement
officials for this chapter. These officials, along with police officers, shall
have the authority to act on behalf of the Town in investigating complaints,
impounding and destroying animals, issuing citations, and taking other
lawful actions as required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Animal Control Officer shall fully investigate all complaints made pursuant
§ 70-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-6
1:179
to this chapter and shall take all statements under oath. The owner or
keeper of such animal shall be given an opportunity to make a statement
under oath. It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with any
Animal Control Officer or other enforcement official in the performance of
his duties.
§ 70-7. Penalties for offenses.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter to:
(1) Fail to comply with any provision of this chapter;
(2) Fail to pay any fines, civil penalties or costs imposed by the Animal
Control Officer within 15 days of the imposition of such fines or
costs, unless payment thereof is lawfully stayed; or
(3) Make any false statements, under oath, with respect to this chapter.
B. Any person who fails to comply with a written citation issued by the
Animal Control Officer or his designee within seven days shall be
deemed guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be subject to a fine
of $100. If a violation continues after such written notice, each day's
violation shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 70-8. Appeals procedure.
Any provision of this chapter may be appealed to the Town manager within
30 days of the issuance of the citation. The citation holder can appeal the
decision of the Town manager to the superior court.
§ 70-9. (Reserved)
§ 70-10. (Reserved)
§ 70-11. (Reserved)
§ 70-12. (Reserved)
§ 70-13. (Reserved)
§ 70-14. (Reserved)
§ 70-15. (Reserved)
§ 70-16. (Reserved)
§ 70-17. (Reserved)
§ 70-18. (Reserved)
§ 70-19. (Reserved)
§ 70-20. (Reserved)
§ 70-6 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 70-21
1:180
§ 70-21. (Reserved)
§ 70-22. (Reserved)
§ 70-23. (Reserved)
§ 70-24. (Reserved)
§ 70-25. (Reserved)
§ 70-26. (Reserved)
§ 70-27. (Reserved)
§ 70-28. (Reserved)
§ 70-29. (Reserved)
§ 70-30. (Reserved)
§ 70-31. (Reserved)
§ 70-32. (Reserved)
§ 70-33. (Reserved)
§ 70-34. (Reserved)
§ 70-35. (Reserved)
§ 70-36. (Reserved)
§ 70-37. (Reserved)
§ 70-38. (Reserved)
§ 70-39. (Reserved)
§ 70-40. (Reserved)
§ 70-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-40
1:181

ARTICLE II
Dogs
§ 70-41. Restraint generally.
A. It shall be unlawful, except at Town-designated dog parks, for the owner
or keeper of any dog to fail to keep his dog under restraint or to permit
his dog to run at large upon the streets and public ways of the Town or
upon property other than that of such owner or keeper.
B. No owner, keeper or custodian of any animal shall fail to exercise proper
care and control of such animal to prevent the animal from becoming a
public nuisance.
§ 70-42. Restraint of guard or attack dogs.
A. Every owner of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog confined
in a building, compartment or other enclosure. Any such enclosure
shall be completely surrounded by a secured fence or enclosure that is
appropriate to confine such dogs and shall be approved by the Animal
Control Officer.
B. The areas of confinement shall have gates and entrances thereto
securely closed and locked, and all fences shall be properly maintained
and escape-proof.
C. When outside the enclosure on the owner's or keeper's property, all
guard or attack dogs shall be under the direct and immediate control of
a responsible adult who can fully control the dog at all times.
D. When off the property of the owner or keeper, all guard or attack dogs
shall be under restraint of a responsible adult at all times.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs owned or controlled
by government law enforcement agencies while in the course of their
official duties.
§ 70-43. Feces removal.
A. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DOG — Any member of the canine species, male or female.
KEEP — Possessing, controlling, exercising or allowing a dog to run at
large.
OWNER — Any person possessing, keeping, harboring or having custody
of a dog.
B. Required; provision of disposal containers. It shall be unlawful for any
person owning, keeping, walking or in control of any dog to allow
or permit such animal to defecate upon any private property owned
by another person, condominium common elements, street, sidewalk,
gutter or other public area unless such person shall remove all feces so
deposited by such dog before leaving the immediate premises; provided,
however, that the Town may provide excrement disposal containers in
all public parks into which a person may deposit any feces instead of
removing such feces from the park premises.
§ 70-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-43
1:183
C. Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any visually
impaired person walking in control of a guide dog or by any person who
is physically unable to remove such feces.
D. Enforcement of section provisions. For the purposes of enforcing the
provisions of this section, tickets may be issued by any persons
authorized to issue tickets for parking violations, the Canine Control
Officer of the Town or his agent.
E. Appeal. Any person issued a ticket for violating any of the provisions
of this section may appeal the $25 fine to the Town Manager and, if
necessary, to the Superior Court. The Town Manager may, following a
hearing on any such appeal, upon a showing of good cause, sustain the
appeal and dismiss the ticketed violation.
§ 70-44. (Reserved)
§ 70-45. (Reserved)
§ 70-46. (Reserved)
§ 70-47. (Reserved)
§ 70-48. (Reserved)
§ 70-49. (Reserved)
§ 70-50. (Reserved)
§ 70-51. (Reserved)
§ 70-52. (Reserved)
§ 70-53. (Reserved)
§ 70-54. (Reserved)
§ 70-55. (Reserved)
§ 70-56. (Reserved)
§ 70-57. (Reserved)
§ 70-58. (Reserved)
§ 70-59. (Reserved)
§ 70-60. (Reserved)
§ 70-61. (Reserved)
§ 70-43 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 70-62
1:184
§ 70-62. (Reserved)
§ 70-63. (Reserved)
§ 70-64. (Reserved)
§ 70-65. (Reserved)
§ 70-66. (Reserved)
§ 70-67. (Reserved)
§ 70-68. (Reserved)
§ 70-69. (Reserved)
§ 70-70. (Reserved)
§ 70-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-70
1:185

ARTICLE III
Vicious or Dangerous Dogs
§ 70-71. Restraint.
Every animal established to be vicious or dangerous shall be confined by
its owner or authorized agent of its owner within a building or secure
enclosure as set forth in § 70-42 and, whenever outside the building or
secure enclosure, shall be securely muzzled and restrained by a responsible
adult with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not
more than six feet in length, or caged. Every person harboring an animal
established to be vicious or dangerous is charged with an affirmative duty
to confine the animal in such a way as defined in § 70-42.
§ 70-72. Insurance requirements; sign required on premises.
Every owner of an animal which has been established to be vicious or
dangerous shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. The owner shall provide the Town with written proof that the owner
has procured liability insurance in an aggregate amount of not less than
$100,000 for damage or injury to persons or property. Policy cancellation
shall constitute a violation of this section and subject the owner to the
penalties provided in this chapter, unless the owner provides the Town
with written proof that the vicious or dangerous animal has been sold,
given away, died, or otherwise disposed of.
B. The owner or keeper shall display a sign on the premises warning
that there is a vicious or dangerous animal or guard or attack dog on
the premises. Such sign shall be visible to anyone entering the main
entrance to the premises where the animal is domiciled or kept. The sign
shall include both an approved vicious animal logo and lettering so as to
warn both children and adults.
§ 70-73. (Reserved)
§ 70-74. (Reserved)
§ 70-75. (Reserved)
§ 70-76. (Reserved)
§ 70-77. (Reserved)
§ 70-78. (Reserved)
§ 70-79. (Reserved)
§ 70-80. (Reserved)
§ 70-81. (Reserved)
§ 70-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-82
1:187
§ 70-82. (Reserved)
§ 70-83. (Reserved)
§ 70-84. (Reserved)
§ 70-85. (Reserved)
§ 70-86. (Reserved)
§ 70-87. (Reserved)
§ 70-88. (Reserved)
§ 70-89. (Reserved)
§ 70-90. (Reserved)
§ 70-91. (Reserved)
§ 70-92. (Reserved)
§ 70-93. (Reserved)
§ 70-94. (Reserved)
§ 70-95. (Reserved)
§ 70-96. (Reserved)
§ 70-97. (Reserved)
§ 70-98. (Reserved)
§ 70-99. (Reserved)
§ 70-100. (Reserved)
§ 70-82 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 70-100
1:188
Chapter 73
ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation procedures and fines for violation of
wetlands regulations — See Ch. A181, Art.
XIII.
§ 70-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-100
1:189

ARTICLE I
Citation Hearing Procedure
[Adopted 8-15-2005; amended in its entirety 12-6-201024]
§ 73-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a citation hearing procedure in
accordance with C.G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(10)(A), 7-152b and 7-152c to be followed
in all instances when citations are issued by Town of Wethersfield municipal
officials.
§ 73-2. Hearing procedure.
A. Regulations and ordinances of the Town may be enforced by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, provided that the
regulations and ordinances have been designated specifically by the
Town for enforcement by citation in the same manner in which they
are adopted, and the designated municipal officer or employee issues a
written warning providing notice of the specific violation before issuing
the citation. Except where some other appeals procedure is specifically
provided, any municipal citation issued pursuant to any ordinance of the
Town of Wethersfield, other than a license denial or revocation order,
may be appealed to a hearing officer as provided in this section.
B. The Town Manager shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers,
who shall be other than police officers or employees or persons who
issue citations, to conduct the hearings authorized by this section.
C. After a citation has been issued and the fine or penalty has not been
paid, the Town shall send notice to the alleged violator promptly (and
no later than 12 months after the expiration of the final period for the
uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation
issued under any ordinance of the Town for an alleged violation). Such
notice shall inform the violator and any other persons cited of the
following:
(1) The allegations against the violator and other persons cited and the
amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due.
(2) That the alleged violator or other person cited may contest liability
by delivering, in person or by mail, written notice within 10 days of
the date of the original notice to said violator that he or she desires
to contest liability before a citation hearing officer.
(3) That if the alleged violator does not demand such a hearing, an
assessment and judgment shall be entered against him or her.
(4) That such judgment may issue without further notice.
D. If the alleged violator or other person to whom notice has been sent
pursuant to Subsection C above wishes to admit liability for any alleged
violation, he or she may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full
amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees in person or by mail, to the
official designated by the Town. Any alleged violator or other person who
does not deliver or mail a written demand for a hearing within 10 days
24.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 2-1-2011.
§ 73-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-2
1:191
of the date of the first notice provided in Subsection C above shall be
deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated municipal official
shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer. The
hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees provided for by law and shall follow the procedures set forth
in Subsection E below.
E. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less
than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of such
notice, provided that the hearing officer shall grant, upon good cause
shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement
or continuance. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of
violation issued by a police officer or other issuing officer shall be filed
and retained by the Town, shall be deemed to be a business record within
the scope of C.G.S. § 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein.
The presence of the police officer or issuing officer shall be required
at the hearing if such person so requests. The alleged violator or other
person wishing to contest liability shall appear at the hearing and may
present evidence in his or her behalf. A designated Town official, other
than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the Town.
If the alleged violator fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an
assessment by default against him or her upon a finding of proper notice
and liability under the applicable ordinance. The hearing officer may
accept from such alleged violator copies of police reports, Motor Vehicle
Department documents and other official documents by mail and may
determine thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary.
The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and
with such methods of proof as he or she deems fair and appropriate. The
rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied,
but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. If the offense
consists of a motor vehicle parking violation, proof of the registration
number of the motor vehicle involved shall be prima facie evidence in
all proceedings that the owner of such vehicle was the operator thereof,
provided that in the case of a leased or rented motor vehicle, such proof
shall be prima facie evidence in any proceeding that the lessee was the
operator thereof. The hearing officer shall announce his or her decision
at the end of the hearing. If he or she determines that the alleged
violator or other person is not liable, he or she shall dismiss the matter
and enter his or her determination, in writing, accordingly. If he or she
determines that the person is liable for the violation, he or she shall
forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such
person as provided by the ordinance.
F. If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer
shall send, by first-class mail, a notice of the assessment to the person
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months
after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with
the Clerk of the Superior Court facility designated by the Chief Court
Administrator, together with an entry fee of $8. The certified copy of
the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within
§ 73-2 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 73-2
1:192
such twelve-month period, assessments against the same person may be
accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The Clerk shall enter
judgment, in the amount of such record of assessment and court costs
of $8, against such person in favor of the Town. Notwithstanding any
other provision of the General Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment,
when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money
judgment, and a levy of execution on such judgment may issue without
further notice to such person.
G. The person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to
this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal
shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such
assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an
entry fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case
pursuant to C.G.S. § 52-259, in the Superior Court facility designated
by the Chief Court Administrator, which shall entitle such person to a
hearing in accordance with the rules of the Judges of the Superior Court.
§ 73-3. Issuance of written warning.
In those instances where there is time to do so and where a continuing
violation is not causing immediate or significant harm, a written warning
providing notice of the specific violation shall be sent prior to issuing the
citation.
§ 73-4. Amount of fine, penalty, cost or fee.
The fine, penalty, cost or fee imposed under this article for any single
violation shall not exceed the amount of $100 per occurrence. Each day
such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and a separate
citation may be issued unless otherwise specifically provided by the General
Statutes.
§ 73-5. Disposition of money received.
All moneys received pursuant to the procedure set forth above shall be
remitted to the office of the Town Treasurer.
§ 73-6. Applicability; amended chapters
Each of the following chapters is amended to add the following section: 53,
90, 99, 108, 116, 134, 136, 139, 157, 160.
§ _____-____. Enforcement.
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 73, Article I, of the Code of the
Town of Wethersfield shall be followed.
§ 73-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-6
1:193

ARTICLE II
Zoning and Wetlands Regulations
[Adopted 10-17-2005]
§ 73-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish penalties for violations of the
Town's Zoning Regulations and Inland and Wetland Regulations,25 establish
procedures for issuance of citations to violators and for collections of fines
and to have the Town's citation hearing procedure (Article I, Citation
Hearing Procedure, of this Chapter 73) apply to citations hereunder issued.
§ 73-8. Issuance of orders and citations.
The Town's Zoning Enforcement Official or agent is authorized to issue
cease-and-desist orders or other appropriate orders to a violator of the
Town's Zoning Regulations or the Town's Inland Wetland and Watercourses
Regulations or of any approval or permit issued by the Town Planning and
Zoning Commission or Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission. If
such violation has not been remedied either immediately or within 10 days
of the date of issuance of the cease- and-desist order or other appropriate
order, as provided in the order, the Enforcement Official, or such other Town
official or employee designated by the Town Manager to issue citations,
unless such time has been extended for good cause by the Enforcement
Official, shall issue a citation to the violator which shall invoke the Town's
citation hearing procedure set forth in Article I, Citation Hearing
Procedure, of this Chapter 73. However, in the case where a violation is
found by the Enforcement Official or agent to be willful, penalties may be
assessed from the date such violation has been committed.
§ 73-9. Penalties for offenses; hearing.
A. The penalty for each violation of the zoning regulations or approvals or
permits issued shall be $150 for each day that such violation continues
beyond the compliance date in the cease-and-desist order.
Notwithstanding the preceding, in instances of willful violations and
instances where the violation is not corrected within such manner and
time period stipulated in the order, fines may be assessed from the date
such violation has been committed.
B. The penalty for each violation of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations or approvals or permits issued shall be from $150 to $1,000
for each day that such violation continues beyond the compliance date in
the cease-and-desist order. Notwithstanding the preceding, in instances
of willful violations and instances where the violation is not corrected
within such manner and time period stipulated in the order, fines may be
assessed from the date such violation has been committed. The Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, within 10 days of the issuance
of an order, shall hold a hearing to provide the alleged violator an
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 167, Zoning, and Ch. A181, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations, respectively.
§ 73-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-9
1:195
opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain
in effect. No fines may be levied against the state or any employee of the
state acting within the scope of his employment.
§ 73-10. Procedure.
The procedure to be followed with respect to all citations issued under
this chapter shall be the citation hearing procedure set forth in Article I,
Citation Hearing Procedure, of this Chapter 73 of the Wethersfield Code.
§ 73-9 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 73-10
1:196
Chapter 75
ENVIRONMENTAL CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Committees, boards, commissions, etc. — See
Ch. 10.
Building construction — See Ch. 63.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 83.
Solid waste — See Ch. 136.
Zoning — See Ch. 167.
§ 75-1. Scope.
The provisions of this code shall set forth the minimum conditions for the
maintenance of premises, exterior and interior, of all rooming units, as
defined in this code.
§ 75-2. Definitions. [Amended 7-19-1999]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building customarily incident to a
principal building on the same lot.
BUILDING — A type of structure with exterior walls, erected and framed of
component structural parts, designated for the housing, shelter, enclosure
and support of individuals, which contains one or more rooming units as
defined herein.
BUILDING CODE — The Connecticut State Building Code and any other
state and local codes that are applicable.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health of the Central
Connecticut Health District26 and shall include his/her agent.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INFESTATION — The presence or evidence of presence within or
contiguous to a structure or premises of insects, rodents, vermin or other
pests.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, excluding the buildings or
structures thereon.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping purposes which
is leased or rented to the public by its owner and/or its operator on a
commercial or for-profit basis, including tourist courts, motels and motor
courts, but excluding single-family, duplex and apartment units.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 29, Central Connecticut Health District.
§ 73-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-2
1:197
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and including the residue from burning wood, coal, coke and
other combustible material; paper, rags, wood, rubber, tree branches, yard
trimmings, tin cans, metal, mineral matter, glass and dust and other similar
materials.
TENANT — The occupant of a rooming unit.
§ 75-3. Applicability.
A. Every premises and the exterior and interior portion of a building which
contains a rooming unit, as defined herein, shall comply with the
provisions of this code.
B. The provisions of this code shall not infringe upon the provisions of any
state or municipal code or ordinance. The code and/or ordinance which
provides the greatest protection for the health, safety and welfare of the
people shall prevail.
§ 75-4. Licensing. [Amended 7-19-1999; 5-5-2003; 5-16-2005]
No person shall operate or be responsible for control over a rooming unit
unless he holds a valid permit issued by the Director of Health in the name
of the operator and for the dwelling specified in the permit. The fee for
such permit shall be $100 for buildings of one to 25 units, $150 for 26 to
50 units and $200 for in excess of 50 units. The operator shall apply to the
Director of Health for such permit, which shall be issued by the Director of
Health only after determining that said building is in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. This permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous
place within the building at all times. No such permit shall be transferable.
The Director of Health or his agents shall have the right to inspect all
rooming units and premises to confirm compliance with all provisions of this
code. Every permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
§ 75-5. Standards for rooming units.
A. Every rooming unit shall be equipped with a complete bathroom fixture
group consisting of a flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower in good working condition and installed and maintained in a
manner prescribed by ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town of
Wethersfield and the State of Connecticut. Said fixture group shall be
properly connected to an approved disposal system and to an approved
pressure water system.
B. All bathroom fixtures shall be cleaned and sanitized daily.
C. All linen, blankets and other laundry shall be maintained on a regular
basis. Linen, blankets, bed coverings and mattresses shall be wellmaintained.
All clean linen, blankets and other laundry shall be stored in
a separate area in a sanitary and organized manner.
D. Drinking cups provided by the management shall be either singleservice
throwaway-type or glass which is sanitized and wrapped at each
change of occupancy.
E. Extermination necessary to prevent infestation shall be provided by a
professional exterminator registered in the State of Connecticut.
§ 75-2 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 75-5
1:198
F. All floor coverings shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner
and in good repair.
G. Adequate window screening shall be provided.
H. All storage areas shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and organized
manner, free from combustible, flammable materials. Such materials
shall be stored as approved by the Town Fire Marshal.
I. Every rooming unit shall be equipped with heating facilities which are
properly installed and maintained in safe and acceptable working
condition and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable
rooms and bathrooms located therein to a minimum temperature of 65°
F. Hot water shall be provided to a minimum of 120° F. as measured at
the tap or discharge point.
J. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by the same tenant(s), in
excess of 72 hours shall contain at least 80 square feet of floor space
when occupied by one person. Every room so occupied for sleeping by
more than one person shall contain at least 60 square feet of floor space
for each occupant thereof.
K. The use of resistance heating coil-type cooking devices, including but
not limited to stoves, hot plates, electric frying pans, toasters and
toaster ovens, is prohibited in rooming units. Microwave ovens and
coffee makers listed by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and rated not
to exceed 110 volts are permitted only if the owners of the property
hire a licensed electrician to certify to the Town Building Department
that the existing electrical system is capable of supporting the use
of additional appliances in each room. [Added 2-17-1998; amended
12-6-2004]
§ 75-6. Standards for all premises.
A. All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon.
B. All premises shall be kept free from species of weeds or plant growth
which are noxious or detrimental to the public health and/or in excess of
a height of six inches.
C. All premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free
from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
D. All premises shall have sufficient containers kept secure in a sanitary
condition for the disposal of garbage and rubbish.
§ 75-7. Structural standards.
A. All principal and accessory buildings shall be maintained structurally
sound and in good repair.
B. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces shall
be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance, and repair shall
be kept in such condition as to exclude rodents. The foundation elements
shall adequately support the building at all points.
C. Every exterior and interior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or
rotting boards or timbers and any other condition which might admit
rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied
spaces of the building. All exterior and interior surface material must
§ 75-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-7
1:199
be adequately protected with paint, stain or siding in accordance with
acceptable standards, and all siding material must be kept in good
repair.
D. Stairs and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety, as provided in
the Building Code, and shall comply with the following subsections:
(1) Every stair, every porch and every appurtenance attached thereto
shall be constructed so as to be safe to use and capable of supporting
the loads to which it is subjected, as required by the Building Code,
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
(2) Where deemed necessary for safety, every flight of stairs which is
more than two risers high shall have handrails located as required
by the Building Code, and every porch which is more than two risers
high shall have handrails so located and of such design as required
by the Building Code. Every handrail and balustrade shall be firmly
fastened and shall be maintained in good condition.
E. Every window, exterior and basement hatchway shall be substantially
tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair.
F. Every window shall be fully supplied with glass window panes or an
approved substitute which are without open cracks and holes.
§ 75-8. Electrical standards.
A. Each rooming unit shall have electric service and outlets and/or fixtures
capable of providing at least three watts per square foot of floor area and
shall have at least one floor- or wall-type outlet for each 60 square feet
or fraction thereof of floor area. In no case shall there be fewer than two
outlets.
B. Convenient switches for turning on one light in each room or
passageway shall be located so as to permit the area ahead to be lighted.
C. Every public hall and stairway in buildings containing three or more
rooming units shall be adequately lighted at all times so as to provide at
least six footcandles of light at the tread or floor level.
D. Every public hall and stairway in buildings containing not more than two
rooming units may be supplied with conveniently located light switches
controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when
needed in place of full-time lighting.
§ 75-9. Tenant responsibilities.
All tenants shall be responsible for maintaining the rooming unit in which
he or she resides and shall exhibit a degree of personal hygiene within the
rooming unit so as to maintain safe and sanitary conditions in compliance
with this code. At no time shall a tenant infringe upon any neighboring
rooming units due to odor, vermin or any other result emanating from poor
sanitary practices.
§ 75-10. Enforcement. [Amended 7-19-1999]
A. The Director of Health shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions herein.
§ 75-7 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 75-10
1:200
B. The Director of Health shall give notice of any violations of the provisions
of this code to the person or persons responsible therefor. Such notice
shall be in writing, including a description of the real estate sufficient
for identification, specifying the violation which exists and the remedial
action required and allowing a reasonable time for the performance of
any act it requires.
§ 75-11. Service of notice.
The service of notice of violation to the person or persons responsible for a
building or premises shall be one of the following:
A. By delivery to the owner and operator personally or by leaving the notice
at the usual place of abode of the owner and operator with a person of
suitable age and discretion;
B. By certified or registered mail addressed to the owner and operator at
their last known addresses, with postage prepaid thereon; or
C. By posting and keeping posted for 24 hours a copy of the notice in
placard form in a conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 75-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-5-1990]
The person or persons responsible for a building or premises where a
violation of any of the provisions of this code shall exist or who shall
maintain any building or premises in which such violations exist shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $100 for each violation; provided,
however, that where a violation of any of the provisions of this code also
constitute a violation of Chapter 833a of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as the same may be amended, then the penalties imposed upon the person
or persons responsible for such building or premises or who maintain
such buildings or premises shall be as set forth in Section 47a-55 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be amended. For the
purposes hereof, each day that a violation exists after notice of the same
is given to the person or persons responsible for or who maintain such
building or premises shall constitute a new violation and a fine may be
imposed for each such violation.27
Chapter 80
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 105. Nuisances — See Ch. 108.
27.Editor's Note: Former § 75-13, Appeals, and § 75-14, Appeals Board, both of which were
amended 7-19-1999 and which immediately followed this section, were repealed 4-2-2007.
§ 75-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-1
1:201
§ 80-1. Provisions subject to statutes.
This chapter shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the General
Statutes.
§ 80-2. Prohibited discharges.
The discharge of any firearm within 500 feet of any building in the Town is
prohibited.
§ 80-3. Discharges by minors.
The discharge of any firearm in the Town by a minor, except under the direct
supervision of his parent or legal guardian, is prohibited.
§ 80-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter relating to firearms shall not apply to any
person discharging any firearm on an established target practice range of
an organized rifle or gun club or on any indoor range, nor shall they apply
to any landowner using firearms when in the act of protecting his property
from destructive animals.
§ 80-5. Air guns.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer or expose for sale or
to discharge in the Town any air gun, air rifle or similar device in which
the expulsive or impelling force is compressed or condensed air or gas.
Nothing in this section is to be construed to limit, except as already limited
by ordinance or statute, the sale or use of a firearm.
§ 80-6. Archery in public.
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot arrows from a bow or by any
other means on, into or across public property, any street or way dedicated
to public use or accepted as a public highway or any private property except
with the permission of the owner.
§ 80-7. Bowhunting.
It shall be unlawful to hunt with bow and arrows except in those areas
where hunting is permitted by ordinance.
§ 80-8. Archery ranges.
Nothing contained in §§ 80-6 and 80-7 shall be construed to prevent the
use by any person of archery ranges established by the Town upon public
property under proper supervision.
Chapter 83
§ 80-1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 80-8
1:202
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 63.
§ 80-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-8
1:203

ARTICLE I
Sprinkler Systems and Smoke Detectors
[Adopted as Secs. 2-4-1 through 2-4-7 of the Code of 1972]
§ 83-1. Sprinkler systems required. [Amended 5-6-1991]
With the exception of those buildings covered by state law and listed in
§ 83-3, all new buildings and all additions to existing buildings shall be
equipped with an automatic sprinkler system. Each such system shall be
approved as to layout and installation by the Insurance Services Office or
its successors and by the Wethersfield Fire Marshal and Chief Building and
Zoning Official. During a period of time that an automatic sprinkler system
is inoperative (more than four hours during a twenty-four-hour period), that
portion of the building with an inoperative system shall be evacuated or the
Wethersfield Fire Marshal may permit an approved fire watch. Fire watch
personnel will be appointed by the Chief or his designee in cases where the
building owner does not provide an approved fire watch.
§ 83-2. Installation of sprinkler systems.
A. Sprinkler systems installed within existing buildings shall be approved
as to layout and to installation by the Insurance Services Office or its
successors and the Wethersfield Fire Marshal and Chief Building and
Zoning Official.
B. Every sprinkler system installed in new and existing buildings shall be
installed in accordance with the current requirements of the National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 13, Standard for the Installation
of Sprinkler Systems, 13D, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler
Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Mobile Homes, and No.
13R, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential
Occupancies up to Four Stories in Height. [Amended 5-6-1991]
§ 83-3. Exempt buildings.
The following classes of buildings shall be exempt from the requirement for
automatic sprinkler systems:
A. Dwellings with a capacity of four families or less.
B. All buildings smaller than 2,000 square feet gross floor area.
C. Any portion of a building housing a process or material which would
interact with water to create a greater fire hazard than without water,
provided that an alternate fire suppression system is used.
D. Any building, structure or part thereof where the requirement for the
installation of an automatic sprinkler system would constitute a practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship, as determined by the Sprinkler
Systems Appeals Committee.
E. One addition may be permitted to an existing nonsprinkler building or
structure, provided that the addition shall not exceed 1,000 square feet
gross floor area, including basement.
§ 83-4. Sprinkler Systems Appeals Committee.
§ 83-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-4
1:205
A. The Sprinkler Systems Appeals Committee shall consist of three
members as follows: the Town Manager, the Town Engineer and one
member of the Board of Building Appeals to be selected by the Chairman
of the Board of Building Appeals.
B. Two members of said Committee shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of considering an application under the provisions of this
chapter.
C. The Sprinkler Systems Appeals Committee shall meet in public meeting
within seven working days following receipt of an application
transmitted to it from the Chief Building Official. The applicant or his
representative shall be notified, in writing, of the time, place and date of
the hearing to be held before the Sprinkler Systems Appeals Committee
and shall make a presentation in behalf of his application at said hearing.
D. All applications shall be made on prepared forms available in the office
of the Building Inspection Division. The Sprinkler Systems Appeals
Committee shall be guided in its decisions by the standards set forth
in the most recent edition of the National Fire Protection Association
Standard No. 13, entitled "Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler
Systems," No. 13D, "Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems
in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Mobile Homes," and No. 13R,
"Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential
Occupancies up to Four Stories in Height." Said decision shall be in
writing to the applicant on each application within five working days
following the close of its hearing on the application. [Amended
5-6-1991]
E. Should the use to which any building is being put be changed after
having an exemption pursuant to § 83-3 applied to it, such exemption
shall terminate on the 30th day after such change of use, and the owner
of such building shall be required to reapply for an exemption under said
§ 83-3D, based on the new use of the particular structure involved. This
Subsection E shall be included as a part of any decision of the Sprinkler
Systems Appeals Committee approving the exemption of a building from
the provisions of this chapter.
F. The cost of a sprinkler installation shall not be grounds for exempting
a building, structure or part thereof from the provisions requiring
sprinkler exemptions.
G. In the event that the Town of Wethersfield wishes to make application
under this section, the Chairman of the Board of Building Appeals will
select three members of the Board of Building Appeals to hear the
application of the Town rather than utilizing the procedure as set forth
in Subsection A hereof.
§ 83-5. Penalties for offenses.
It shall be illegal for any building to be used in violation of this chapter;
and any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than $75 nor more than $100, and each day that a violation of this chapter
occurs or shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 83-4 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 83-6
1:206
§ 83-6. Smoke detectors.
A. Any residential dwelling for which a building permit is issued after the
effective date of this section and which dwelling is not required to install
a smoke detection device under the Connecticut General Statutes or
regulations of the State Fire Marshal shall install, prior to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy, an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., approved
smoke detection device.
B. The manner and location of installing the smoke detection device shall
be approved by the Wethersfield Fire Marshal or his designee, and the
Wethersfield Fire Marshal may issue regulations in this regard.
§ 83-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-6
1:207

ARTICLE II
Open Burning
[Adopted 4-2-2001; amended in its entirety 8-6-2001]
§ 83-7. Control of open burning.
No person shall ignite, cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited or maintain
any open fires except as permitted by regulations promulgated by the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, or by other sections
of this Code.
A. Permits or certificates. The Town Manager shall designate an Open
Burning Official(s), who is authorized to issue written permits or
certificates as provided in such regulations. No such permits or
certificates shall be issued and no person shall ignite, cause or permit
to be ignited or maintain any open fire whether or not a permit or
certificate has been required or issued during the first or any other stage
of an air pollution emergency episode as declared by the Commissioner
of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection except as
permitted by such regulations.
B. Fires in public right-of-way. Under no circumstances, whether or not a
permit or certificate has been required or issued, shall a person ignite,
cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited or maintain any open fire within
the limits of any public road or right-of-way.
C. Fires burning out of control. Whether or not a permit or certificate has
been required or issued, no person shall ignite, cause to be ignited,
permit to be ignited or maintain any open fire, nor shall any person
authorize others to do so on land owned or controlled by him, in such
a manner as to allow such fire to burn out of control so as to require
response of fire apparatus and/or personnel.
D. Evidence of violations. A determination by the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal
on the question of whether a fire has been allowed to burn out of control
so as to cause response of fire apparatus and/or personnel shall be prima
facie evidence on such question in any prosecution under the provisions
of this article.
E. Banning of fires during periods of extreme fire danger. The Open
Burning Official shall have power to ban all outside fires during periods
of extreme fire danger in his discretion, and it shall be unlawful to ignite
or maintain any fire during the period of any such ban.
F. Extinguishing of fires. The Open Burning Official, Fire Marshal, Fire
Chief or any officer of the Fire Department, the Director of Health, or
his designee, or any sworn officer of the Police Department may require
any person who ignites or maintains a fire in violation of the provisions
herein to extinguish such fire forthwith. Failure to extinguish such fire
shall be a violation of this article.
G. Open burning requirements. Open burning shall be allowed only in
accordance with the following conditions:
(1) Reasonable safety precautions must be taken, including clearing of
grass and trees in the burning area, providing a charged water hose
or fire extinguisher, and providing adequate personnel to control the
§ 83-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-7
1:209
burn and having no other combustible material within 20 feet of the
allowed burn.
(2) No brush pile larger than 10 feet by 10 feet by three feet may be
burned at any one time. Brush must originate from the property
on which the burning will occur. "Brush" is defined as shrubs,
vegetation or prunings the diameter of which is not greater than
three inches at the widest point.
(3) Open burning must be performed in accordance with the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut and with the appropriate permit
from the local Open Burning Official.
(4) Open burning shall be permitted only during the period of November
through April, except for fire training exercises which may be
performed at any time of year.
(5) The open burning of brush on residential properties or undeveloped
land is prohibited.
(6) Agricultural burning for vegetation management shall only be
performed on those properties designated as "farmland" by the
Assessor's office for the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 83-8. Applicability.
The provisions of § 83-7 shall not apply to the following:
A. Barbecues or other outdoor fires solely for the cooking of food for human
consumption, provided that it is performed in or on a fireplace or an
appliance manufactured for such a purpose.
B. Campfires, and other fires for ceremonial or recreational purposes,
provided that only nonprocessed wood is burned and written permission
is obtained from the property owner prior to ignition.
C. Fires used in conjunction with construction activities, such as fires in
portable heating devices, fires that are essential to street installation or
paving activities, the repairing of utilities or similar work. Warming fires
utilized at stationary construction sites shall be conducted in a barrel or
similar container.
§ 83-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who fails to comply with any provisions of § 83-7 shall be fined
in an amount not to exceed $100 payable to the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 83-7 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 83-9
1:210
ARTICLE III
Private Fire Hydrants
[Adopted 12-17-2001]
§ 83-10. Maintenance of required fire hydrants.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to insure routine maintenance and
annual inspections of required private fire hydrants.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT — Any fire hydrant that is required to be
installed by the Division of Fire on private property.
C. Maintenance service. Any person or firm who owns fire hydrants in
accordance with Subsection A of this section shall be required to
annually subscribe to and pay for maintenance service which is available
through the Metropolitan District Water Bureau. Maintenance service
shall be performed at least once per year and shall include painting,
flushing and testing. Maintenance records are to be available for
inspection by any member of the Division of Fire or a member of the Fire
Marshals' Office during normal business hours. The owner of said fire
hydrants shall keep the hydrants clear of all obstructions, e.g., snow and
ice, to assure maximum access for utilization by fire personnel during
emergencies.
D. Repair of fire hydrants on private property. The Town may, at its option,
order the repair of a defective fire hydrant on private property and bill
the cost of such work to the owner.
E. Penalties for offenses. Any person or firm who fails to comply with the
provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine, payable to the Town
of Wethersfield, of $75 per day, and each day that the violation continues
to exist or for each day there is a failure or neglect to comply with the
above provisions shall be deemed a separate offense.
F. Administration and enforcement. The administration of this article shall
be by the Division of Fire, and the enforcement shall be by the Police
Department of the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 83-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-10
1:211
Chapter 87
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Central Connecticut Health District — See Ch.
9.
Chapter 90
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement centers — See Ch. 53 Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 70.
§ 83-10 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 83-10
1:212
ARTICLE I
Bingo and Raffles
§ 90-1. Bingo.
A. The playing of bingo as defined in Section 7-169(a) of the Connecticut
General Statutes is hereby permitted within the Town of Wethersfield
subject to the statutory provisions relating to bingo as set forth in
Chapter 98 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
B. The provisions of Subsection A shall be effective for the period beginning
September 16, 1974, to September 15, 1975. This ratification shall
operate as the second successive renewal of said section under the terms
of Section 7-169(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, and further
renewals shall not be necessary.
§ 90-2. Raffles.
The Town of Wethersfield hereby authorizes the holding of raffles in said
Town and adopts the provisions of Sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, of the
Connecticut General Statutes; provided, however, that this section and the
adoption by reference of the above general statutes shall not be construed
as an authorization for the holding of bazaars in the Town of Wethersfield
as the same are defined in said statutes.
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-2
1:213

ARTICLE II
Dog, Horse and Motor Vehicle Racing; Jai Alai
§ 90-3. Prohibitions.
No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall conduct horse
racing, dog racing or racing of any motor operated vehicles or operate a jai
alai fronton or concessions allied thereto within the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 90-4. Restraining actions.
Actions to restrain violations of this article may be brought in the name of
the Town in courts of competent jurisdiction.
§ 90-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation found guilty of
violating the provisions of this article shall be fined an amount not to exceed
$100 per day.
§ 90-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-5
1:215

ARTICLE III
Enforcement
§ 90-6. Enforcement.
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 73, Article I, of the Code of the
Town of Wethersfield shall be followed.
§ 90-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-6
1:217
Chapter 93
(RESERVED)
Chapter 99
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 116.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 122.
Solid waste — See Ch. 136.
Inoperable or abandoned vehicles — See Ch.
160.
§ 99-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK DEALER — Any person, except those exempted by the statutes of the
state, who shall engage in business as a dealer and trader in junk, old metal,
scrap, rags, wastepaper or other secondhand articles. Nothing herein shall
be construed to apply to any charitable organization dealing in such articles
or to any dealer in antique household furniture, china or glassware.
§ 99-2. License required.
Before engaging in the business of junk dealer in the Town, a license shall
be obtained from the Town. The fee for such license shall be $10 a year or
any portion thereof, and, unless sooner revoked, such license shall expire on
the last day of June succeeding the date of issuance thereof for each team
or vehicle used in connection with such business. Such dealer shall display
on both sides of such team or vehicle a sign designed and furnished by the
Chief of Police bearing the number of his license, the year in which such
license is in force (in numerals) and the words "Licensed Junk Dealer" in
Roman letters, each numeral and letter to be at least three inches in height;
such sign to be furnished by the Chief of Police without expense to such
person so licensed.
§ 99-3. State certification required. [Amended 6-18-1990]
Any person who shall engage in business as a junk dealer shall exhibit to
the Chief of Police a certified registration issued by the State Motor Vehicle
Department at the time of making application for a license to carry on such
business.
§ 90-6 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 99-4
93:218
§ 99-4. Weekly reports; holding period.
Each junk dealer shall make weekly, sworn statements of all his transactions
under such license, describing the goods received and setting forth the
name and residence and a description of the person from whom such goods
were received, to the Town Clerk, and shall keep all goods at least five days
after the filing of such statement.
§ 99-5. Enforcement. [Amended 8-15-2005]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 73, Article I, of the Code of the
Town of Wethersfield shall be followed.
Chapter 100
LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 143. Zoning — See Ch. 167.
§ 99-4 (RESERVED) § 99-5
93:219

ARTICLE I
Complex Land Development Applications
[Adopted 7-20-200928]
§ 100-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide the Wethersfield Planning and
Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, Inland Wetlands and
Watercourse Commission, Design Review Advisory Committee, Historic
District Commission and Town staff with the authority, granted in
Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-1c, to establish a schedule of
reasonable fees for the processing of land use applications that are
extraordinarily large, complex or significant and which may pose
environmental, traffic and/or other issues beyond the expertise of the
Town's staff to evaluate and make appropriate recommendations. Such fees
shall be used to cover the cost of retaining experts to analyze and review
the application.
§ 100-2. Procedure.
In such instances, the commission will review the matter with its staff
and determine if outside, independent studies and/or consultations are
necessary for the commission to decide the issues before it. The commission
shall seek, to the extent practical, to identify the need for such studies or
consultations prior to the commencement of the public hearing process;
provided, however, that the commission may also make such a
determination during the hearing process. The decision to require the
assistance of consultants shall require the affirmative vote of not less than
the following: five votes for planning and zoning applications, five votes
for inland wetlands and watercourse applications, four votes for Zoning
Board of Appeals applications, three votes for Historic District Commission
applications and three votes for Design Review Advisory Committee
applications. The board/commission shall notify the applicant of its
determination that such studies or consultations are needed and the
estimated fee costs within five business days following such determination.
If the applicant fails or refuses to deposit the consultants' estimated fee
with the Town, the application will be considered incomplete. At its next
regularly scheduled meeting or hearing on the application, the board/
commission shall note in its minutes that the application is considered
incomplete. Incomplete applications are considered sufficient ground for
denial of the application.
§ 100-3. Consultant selection.
Town staff shall select, after soliciting fee proposals and at its sole
discretion, the persons or entities that are to perform such studies or
consultations, and shall direct the performance of such studies or
consultations.
28.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 8-3-2009.
§ 100-1 (RESERVED) § 100-4
93:221
§ 100-4. Fee required.
A. The commission shall require an applicant, as a condition of processing
its application, to deposit the fee for any required consultation or special
study with the Town prior to the review of such application. All fees
required under this article shall be paid by cash, check or money order
made payable to the Town of Wethersfield. The commission hall require
the applicant to place a sum into a fee account in an amount reasonably
calculated to reflect 125% of the anticipated actual cost of such studies
or consultations. The applicant shall be provided with invoices of the
expenses incurred by the Town for any outside consultant work.
B. Upon completion of the technical review by the outside consultant, and
after publication of the Board or Commission's decision as required
by law, the balance of the fee which has not been expended by the
Commission for the study and/or consultation shall be returned or
released to the applicant.
§ 100-4 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 100-4
93:222
Chapter 101
LIGHTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 63.
Nuisances — See Ch. 108.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 143.
Zoning — See Ch. 167.
§ 101-1. Restrictions on lighting.
No person or entity shall have, keep, maintain or cause or permit to be
kept or maintained any floodlight, spotlight, other reflector-type light or
lighting for illumination of signs or for other purposes on any property in
such a manner that its light is unnecessarily directed or reflected into any
residential building in the immediate vicinity of the property containing the
floodlight, spotlight, reflector-type lighting or lighting so as to constitute,
while the light is on, a continuous annoyance, harassment or compromise of
privacy of the person(s) occupying such residential building.
§ 101-2. Shielding of lighting.
Any spotlight, floodlight, reflector-type light or light for illumination of signs
shall be shielded so that the light source cannot be seen from adjacent
residential properties; provided, however, that signs with exposed neon
tubes shall be permitted in business and industrial districts.
§ 101-3. Abatement; expenses.
Any violation of § 101-1 or 101-2 shall be abated by the property owner,
lessor, lessee or any other person in possession of the property on which
such lighting is located and, if not so done, may be abated by the Town at
the expense of the owner, lessor, lessee or any other person in possession
thereof or any one or more of them to whom the Town Manager or his
representative has given not less than 10 days' written notice of the Town's
intention to abate such violation. Such expense may be collected by the
Town in a civil action against any one or more of the above-named persons
responsible therefor. In the case of an emergency, the Town may abate such
violation without giving the 10 days' written notice.
Chapter 102
MASSAGE PARLORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 46.
§ 100-4 (RESERVED) § 101-3
93:223
§ 102-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Massage Parlor
Ordinance for the Town of Wethersfield."
§ 102-2. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that the business of operating massage establishments
as defined herein is a business affecting the public health, safety and
general welfare.
§ 102-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, other than the masseurs or masseuses,
who render any service to the permittee, who have no physical contact with
customers and clients.
GENERAL HOSPITAL — A hospital as described in the Connecticut Blue
Cross, Inc., Member Contract, located in Connecticut, and registered as
such by The American Hospital Association.
MASSAGE — Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the
external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any
apparatus or appliance with or without any such supplementary aids as
rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions,
ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or club where any
person engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on
any of the activities mentioned in the definition of "massage" of this chapter.
MASSEUR or MASSEUSE — Any person who, for any consideration,
engages in the practice of massage as herein defined.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint-stock
company or combinations of individuals of whatever form or character.
RECOGNIZED SCHOOL — Any school or institution which has for its
purpose the teaching of the theory, the method and professional work of
massage, which school requires a course of study not less than 70 hours to
be given in not more than three calendar months before the student shall
be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school
or institution following the successful completion of such course of study or
learning in a school which has been recognized and approved by the State
of Connecticut.
§ 101-3 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 102-4
93:224
§ 102-4. Establishment permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on or
permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on in or upon any premises
in the Town of Wethersfield the operation of a massage establishment
as herein defined without first having obtained a permit from the Town
Manager or his designee after approval by the Director of Public Health.
§ 102-5. Establishment permit application; fee.
A. Each applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage
establishment shall file an application with the Town Manager or his
designee and pay a filing fee of $125 which shall not be refundable.
B. The application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall set
forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered the proposed
place of business and the facilities therein. In addition to the foregoing,
any applicant for a permit shall furnish the following information:
(1) Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(2) Two portrait photographs taken within 30 days of application of at
least two inches by two inches and fingerprints from a governmental
agency.
(3) Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of the application.
(4) Massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether
such person has previously operated in this or another city or state
under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the
reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent
to such action of suspension or revocation.
(5) Any criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations.
C. Any misrepresentation shall be in and of itself sufficient cause for refusal
to issue any permits hereunder or revocation of any existing permit.
D. In the event that the applicant is other than an individual, all of the above
required information shall be supplied with reference to all stockholders,
partners or other individual principals, however doing business.
§ 102-6. (Reserved)29
§ 102-7. (Reserved)30
§ 102-8. Notice of hearing.
When the application is filed for a massage establishment permit under this
chapter, the Town Manager or his designee shall fix the time and place for a
public hearing where the applicant may present evidence upon the question
of his application. Not less than 15 days before the date of such hearing,
the Town Manager or his designee shall cause to be posted a notice of
such hearing in a conspicuous place on the property in which or on which
29.Editor's Note: Former § 102-6, Masseur or masseuse permit, was repealed 4-7-1997.
30.Editor's Note: Former § 102-7, Masseur or masseuse permit application, was repealed
4-7-1997.
§ 102-4 (RESERVED) § 102-8
93:225
the proposed massage establishment is to be operated. The applicant shall
maintain said notice for at least 15 days.
§ 102-9. Issuance of establishment permit.
A. The Town Manager or his designee may issue a permit within 14 days
following a hearing if all requirements for a massage establishment
described in this chapter are met and may issue a permit to all persons
who apply to perform massage services unless he finds:
(1) The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
comply with all the applicable laws, including but not limited to the
Building, Health, Town Planning, Housing, Zoning and Fire Codes of
the Town of Wethersfield.
(2) That the applicant and any other person who will be directly engaged
in the management and operation of a massage establishment has
been convicted of:
(a) A felony;
(b) An offense involving sexual misconduct with children; or
(c) Obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation
of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering.
B. The Town Manager or his designee, in his discretion, may issue a permit
to any person convicted of any of the crimes in Subsection A(2)(a), (b)
and (c) if he finds that such conviction occurred at least five years prior
to the date of the application.
C. Each such establishment shall conform to all rules and regulations
contained herein and the State Sanitary code, as well as to such terms
and conditions as the State Commissioner of Public Health and/or the
local Director of Health finds necessary and proper.
§ 102-10. (Reserved)31
§ 102-11. Revocation of permits generally.
A. Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by the
Town Manager or his designee after a public hearing before the Town
Manager or his designee if it is found that the provisions of this chapter
are violated or where the permittee or any employee of the permittee,
including a masseur or masseuse, has been convicted of any offense
found in § 102-10A(1), (2) or (3)32 and the permittee has actual or
constructive knowledge of the violation or conviction or, in any case,
where the permittee or licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized
police officer or health inspector of the Town of Wethersfield to inspect
the premises or the operation therein.
B. The Town Manager or his designee, before revoking or suspending any
permit, shall give the permittee at least 10 days' written notice of the
charges against him and the opportunity for a public hearing before the
Town Manager or his designee, at which time the permittee may present
31.Editor's Note: Former § 102-10, Issuance of masseur or masseuse permit, was repealed
4-7-1997.
32.Editor's Note: Former § 102-10, Issuance of masseur or masseuse permit, was repealed
4-7-1997.
§ 102-8 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 102-11
93:226
evidence bearing upon the question. In such cases, the charges shall be
specific and in writing.
§ 102-12. (Reserved)33
§ 102-13. Required facilities.
A. No permit to conduct the massage establishment shall be issued unless
an inspection by the Director of Public Health or his authorized
representative reveals that the establishment complies with each of the
following minimum requirements:
(1) Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and
showers shall be waterproofed with approved waterproof materials.
(2) Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five
or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the
premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided.
A single water closet per section shall be provided for each 20 or
more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one
time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water
closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex
accommodated therein.
(3) Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running
water should be installed in either the toilet room or vestibule.
Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser
and with sanitary towels.
B. The Director of Public Health shall certify that the proposed massage
establishment complies with all the requirements of this section and
shall give or send such certification to the Town Manager or his
designee.
§ 102-14. Operating requirements.
A. Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances,
apparatus and personnel, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary
condition.
B. All employees shall be clean and wear clean outer garments whose use
is restricted to the massage establishment. Provisions for a separate
dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises, with
individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall
open inward and shall be self-closing.
C. All employees, masseurs and masseuses must be modestly attired,
comparable in dress and fashion to a general hospital nurse uniform,
female or male, in use by such personnel as of the effective date of this
chapter. Diaphanous, flimsy and transparent clothing is prohibited.
D. Private parts of patrons must be covered by towels, cloth or
undergarments when in the presence of any employee, masseur or
masseuse. Any contact with a patron's genital area is strictly prohibited.
33.Editor's Note: Former § 102-12, Revocation of masseur or masseuse permit, was repealed
4-7-1997.
§ 102-11 (RESERVED) § 102-14
93:227
E. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity which shall be laundered after
each use thereof and stored in an approved, sanitary manner.
F. Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be
thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall
be thoroughly cleaned after each use.
G. Advertising. No massage establishment granted a permit under
provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause
to be placed, published or distributed any advertising material that
depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest
to prospective patrons that any services are available other than those
services as described in § 102-3 of this chapter or that employees,
masseurs or masseuses are dressed in any manner other than that
described in § 102-14C of this chapter; nor shall any massage
establishment indicate in the text of such advertising that any services
are available other than those services described in § 102-3.
H. Health services enumerated in the definition of massage in § 102-3 of
this chapter must be carried on in one cubicle, room, booth or area
within the massage establishment. No service enumerated in the
definition of massage in § 102-3 of this chapter may be carried on in
any other cubicle, room, booth or area except where such cubicle, room,
booth or area has transparent doors or walls so that all activity within a
cubicle, room, booth or area is visible from outside the same.
I. A massage establishment shall not carry on, engage in or conduct
business on Sunday and on any other days shall not carry on, engage in
or conduct business before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
J. A full schedule of service rates shall be posted in a prominent place
within the massage parlor in such a manner as to come to the attention
of all patrons. No charges other than the specified rates for specified
services are to be allowed, with the patron being notified of the full cost
prior to the rendering of any service.
§ 102-15. Daily register.
Every person who engages in or conducts a massage establishment shall
keep a daily register, approved as to form by the Town Manager or his
designee, of all patrons with names, addresses and hours of arrival and, if
applicable, the rooms or cubicles assigned. Said daily register shall at all
times during business hours be subject to inspection by Health Department
officials and by the Police Department and shall be kept on file for one year.
§ 102-16. Inspections.
The Police Department and the Department of Public Health shall, from
time to time, no less than twice a year, make an inspection of each massage
establishment in the Town of Wethersfield for the purposes of determining
that the provisions of this chapter are complied with. Such inspections
shall be made at a reasonable time, in a reasonable manner. It shall be
unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to
the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner.
§ 102-14 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 102-17
93:228
§ 102-17. Transfer of permits.
No permit shall be transferable except with the written consent of the
Town Manager or his designee and the approval of the Department of
Public Health; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of
the permittee, the massage establishment may continue in business for a
reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of permit.
§ 102-18. (Reserved)34
§ 102-19. Compliance time limit.
All persons presently operating a massage establishment or working as a
masseur or masseuse, as defined herein, must comply with all the provisions
of this chapter and must file for the appropriate permit within 10 days of
the effective date of this chapter.
§ 102-20. Exemptions.
This chapter does not apply to schools, hospitals, nursing homes,
sanitariums or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the
healing arts under the laws of the State of Connecticut or to persons
working under the direction of any such person or in any such
establishment.
§ 102-21. Enforcement.
The Town Manager or his designee or the Director of Public Health may,
after a public hearing, make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations
not in conflict with, but to carry out, the intent of this chapter.
§ 102-22. Penalties for offenses.
Every person, except persons who are specifically exempt by this chapter,
whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or
employee of operator or acting as a participant or worker in any way who
gives massages or conducts a massage establishment without first obtaining
a permit and paying a license fee to the Town of Wethersfield or who shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and subject to a fine not to exceed $100. Each day that the subject violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 104
NATURAL GAS AND OIL EXPLORATION
34.Editor's Note: Former § 102-18, Experience in lieu of schooling, was repealed 4-7-1997.
§ 102-17 (RESERVED) § 102-22
93:229

ARTICLE I
Storage, Disposal or Use of Hydraulic Fracturing Waste
[Adopted 2-20-2018]
§ 104-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect, preserve and promote public
health, safety and welfare and the environment by prohibiting within the
Town of Wethersfield natural gas waste and oil waste from natural gas
extraction activities or oil extraction activities pursuant to Section 7-148 of
the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 104-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPLICATION — The physical act of placing or spreading natural gas
waste or oil waste on any road or real property located within the Town of
Wethersfield.
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING — The fracturing of underground rock
formations, including shale and nonshale formations, by man-made fluiddriven
techniques for the purpose of stimulating oil, natural gas, or other
subsurface hydrocarbon production.
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES — All geologic or geophysical
activities related to the exploration for or extraction of natural gas,
including, but not limited to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic
fracturing.
NATURAL GAS WASTE —
OIL EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES — All geologic or geophysical activities
related to the exploration for or extraction of oil, including, but not limited
to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic fracturing.
Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is generated as a result
of natural gas extraction activities, which may consist of water, brine,
chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, or
other contaminants;
A.
Leachate from solid wastes associated with natural gas extraction
activities;
B.
Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with the
underground storage of natural gas;
C.
Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with
liquefied petroleum gas well storage operations; and
D.
Any products or by-products resulting from the treatment, processing,
or modification of any of the above wastes.
E.
§ 104-1 (RESERVED) § 104-2
93:231
OIL WASTE —
§ 104-3. Prohibitions.
A. The application for any purpose of natural gas waste or oil waste,
whether or not such waste has received beneficial use determination
or other approval for use by DEEP (Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection) or any other regulatory body, on any road or
real property located within the Town is prohibited.
B. The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any wastewater
treatment facility within or operated by the Town is prohibited.
C. The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any solid waste
management facility within or operated by the Town is prohibited.
D. The storage, disposal, sale, acquisition, handling, transfer, treatment
and/or processing of natural gas waste or oil waste from natural gas
extraction activities or oil extraction activities is prohibited within the
Town.
§ 104-4. Provisions to be included in certain bids and contracts.
A. All bids, contracts, or purchase orders related to the retention of services
to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real
property within the Town shall include a provision stating that no materials
containing natural gas waste or oil waste shall be utilized in providing such
a service.
B. All bids, contracts, or purchase orders related to the purchase or acquisition
of materials to be used to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or
maintained road or real property within the Town shall include a provision
stating that no materials containing natural gas waste or oil waste shall be
provided to the Town.
C. The following statement, which shall be a sworn statement under penalty of
perjury, shall be included in all bids, contracts, or purchase orders related to
the purchase or acquisition of materials to be used to construct or maintain
any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real property within the
Town and all bids, contracts, or purchase orders related to the retention
of services to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained
road or real property within the Town.
Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is generated as a
result of oil extraction activities, which may consist of water, brine,
chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, or
other contaminants;
A.
B. Leachate from solid wastes associated with oil extraction activities; and
Any products or by-products resulting from the treatment, processing,
or modification of any of the above wastes.
C.
§ 104-2 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 104-4
93:232
"We __________ hereby submit a (bid, contract, or purchase order) for
materials, equipment and/or labor for the Town of Wethersfield. The (bid,
contract, or purchase order) for (project). We hereby certify under penalty
or perjury that no natural gas waste or oil waste will be used by the
undersigned bidder or any contractor, or subcontractor, agent or vendor
agent in connection with the bid, contract, or purchase order; nor will the
undersigned bidder or any contractor or subcontractor, agent or vendor
agent thereof apply any natural gas waste or oil waste to any road or real
property within the Town of Wethersfield as a result of the submittal of this
(bid, contract, or purchase order)."
§ 104-5. Transportation.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to ban the transportation of any
product or by-product described herein on any roadway in or through the
Town.
§ 104-6. Penalties for offenses.
In response to a violation of any provision of § 104-3 of this article, the Town
may impose the following fines and penalties:
A. A fine of $250 for each separate offense or violation. This provision may
be enforced in accordance with the citation procedures of Section 7-152c
of the General Statutes and Chapter 73 of the Wethersfield Code.
B. The Town is also authorized to take any other action, or exercise any
other remedy or assess any other fines or penalties as may be allowed or
permitted at law or in equity.
C. Any and all remedies shall be cumulative and two or more remedies may
be exercised at the same time.
§ 104-7. Expiration and exception for research activities.
A. This article will expire on the date that regulations adopted by the
Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection take
effect if the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection regulations:
(1) Prohibit all activities enumerated in § 104-3 of this article; or
(2) Regulate the activities enumerated in § 104-3 of this article,
providing that:
(a) Such wastes shall be subject to the state's hazardous waste
management regulations, as set forth in Sections 22a-449(c)-100
to 22a-449(c)-119, inclusive, and Section 22a-449(c)-11 of the
regulations of Connecticut state agencies;
(b) Ensure that any radioactive materials that may be present in
wastes from hydraulic fracturing do not create or will not
reasonably be expected to create a source of pollution to the air,
land or waters of the state and do not otherwise pose a threat to
the human health or the environment of this state; and
(3) Require disclosure of the composition of the waste from hydraulic
fracturing.
§ 104-4 (RESERVED) § 104-7
93:233
B. In the event such regulations do not prohibit or regulate all of the
activities enumerated in § 104-3, the prohibitions enumerated in § 104-3
of this article shall not expire but shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 104-8. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or part of this article
or the application thereof to any person, individual, corporation, firm,
partnership, entity or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such order or
judgment shall not affect, impair, effect or invalidate the remainder of
this article, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph, subdivision, section or part of this article or in its application
to the person, individual, corporation, firm, partnership, entity or
circumstance directly involved in the controversy in which such order or
judgment shall be rendered.
§ 104-9. When effective.
This article shall become effective 10 days after publication in a newspaper
having general circulation within the Town.
§ 104-7 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 104-9
93:234
Chapter 105
NOISE CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 70.
Noise to attract sales — See Ch. 116.
Snowmobiles — See Ch. 134.
Zoning — See Ch. 167.
§ 105-1. Title.
The short title of this chapter shall be the "Town of Wethersfield Noise
Control Ordinance."
§ 105-2. Purpose.
It is recognized that people have a right to and should be ensured an
environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize
their health, safety or welfare or degrade the quality of their lives. This
chapter is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety,
welfare and quality of life for the citizens of Wethersfield through the
reduction, control and prevention of noise.
§ 105-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BACKGROUND NOISE — Noise of a measurable intensity which exists at
a point as a result of a combination of many distant sources individually
indistinguishable. In statistical terms, it is the level which is exceeded 90%
of the time (L90) in which the measurement is taken.
BUSINESS ZONE — Those areas so designated under the Village Business
Zone (VB), Town Center Zone (TC), Office Zone (O), General Business Zone
(GB), Regional Commercial Zone (RC) and Business Park Zone (BP) of the
Zoning Regulations of the Town of Wethersfield.35
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Town of Wethersfield or a
duly authorized officer subject to his order.
CONSTRUCTION — The assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration,
demolition or site preparation for or of public or private rights-of-way,
buildings or other structures, utilities or property.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT — Any equipment or device operated by fuel
or electric power used in construction or demolition work.
35.Editor's Note: See Chapter 167, Zoning.
§ 104-9 (RESERVED) § 105-3
93:235
DAYTIME HOURS — The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday and the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on
Sunday.
DECIBEL — A unit of measurement of the sound level, the symbol for which
is "db."
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar
property.
DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT — Includes but is not limited to power
saws, drills, grinders, lawn and garden tools and other domestic power
equipment intended for use in residential areas by a homeowner.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle authorized by any local
authority to have sound warning devices, such as sirens and bells, which
can lawfully be used when responding to an emergency.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following an emergency or work required to protect persons or
property from exposure to imminent changes.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — Any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the
standards set forth in § 105-5.
IMPULSE NOISE — Sound of short duration, usually less than one second,
with an abrupt onset and rapid delay.
INDUSTRIAL ZONE — Those areas so designated under the Office Zone
(O) and Business Park Zone (BP) of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of
Wethersfield.36
INTRUSION ALARM — A device with an audible signal and which, when
activated, indicates an intrusion by an unauthorized person.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle as defined in Subdivisions (30) and (31)37 of
Section 14-1, Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.
MUFFLER — A device for abating sound such as escaping gases.
NIGHTTIME HOURS — The hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Sunday evening through Saturday morning and between 10:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m. Saturday evening through Sunday morning.
NOISE LEVEL — The sound-pressure level as measured with a sound-level
meter using the A-weighting network. The sound level is designated "db(A)"
or "db(a)."
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, municipality, agency or political or
administrative subdivision of the state or other legal entity of any kind.
36.Editor's Note: See Chapter 167, Zoning.
37.Editor's Note: At the time of original amendment of this definition, these subsections
referred to the defined terms "motor vehicle" and "new motor vehicle." See now C.G.S.
§ 14-1(50) and (52).
§ 105-3 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 105-3
93:236
PREMISES — Any building, structure, land or portion thereof, including all
appurtenances, owned or controlled by a person. A noise emitter's premises
includes contiguous publicly dedicated street and highway rights-of-way, all
road rights-of-way and waters of the state.
PROPERTY LINE — That real or imaginary line along the ground surface
and its vertical extension which separates real property owned or controlled
by any person from contiguous real property owned and controlled by
another person and which separates real property from the public right-ofway.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley, park, waterway, railroad or similar place which is owned or
controlled by a government entity.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Those areas so designated under Open Space Zone
(AA-OS), AA Residence Zone, A-1 Residence Zone, A Residence Zone, B
Residence Zone, C Residence Zone, and Special Residential Development
Zone (SRD) of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Wethersfield.38
SOUND — A transmission of energy through solid, liquid or gaseous media
in the form of vibrations which constitute alterations in pressure or position
of the particles in the medium and which, in air, evoke physiological
sensations, including but not limited to an auditory response when
impinging on the ear.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument used to measure sound levels. A
sound-level meter shall conform, as a minimum, to the American National
Standards Institute operational specifications for sound level meters
SI.4-1971 (Type S2A).
SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — Twenty times the logarithm to the base 10
of the ratio of the pressure of a sound to the reference pressure of 20
micronewtons per square meter (20 X 10-6 newtons/meter2) or 0.0002 dyne
per square centimeter, and is expressed in decibels (db).
§ 105-4. Noise measurement procedures.
For the purpose of determining noise levels as set forth in this chapter, the
following guidelines shall be applicable:
A. Built on a single chassis,
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck, and
B.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
C.
38.Editor's Note: See Chapter 167, Zoning.
§ 105-3 (RESERVED) § 105-4
93:237
A. A person conducting sound measurements shall have been trained in
the techniques and principles of sound-measuring equipment and
instrumentation.
B. Instruments used to determine sound-level measurement shall be soundlevel
meters as defined by this chapter.
C. The following steps should be taken when preparing to take sound-level
measurements:
(1) The instrument manufacturer's specific instructions for the
preparation and use of the instrument shall be followed.
(2) Measurements to determine compliance with § 105-5 shall be taken
at a point that is located more or less one foot beyond the property
line of the noise emitter's premises and within the noise receptor's
premises.
(3) The recommended practices for determining statistical noise levels
shall be those as outlined in the document entitled "Connecticut
Noise Survey Data Form No. 101."
§ 105-5. Noise levels.
It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to be emitted any noise
beyond the property lines of his/her premises in excess of the following
noise levels:
Zone in Which Noise Receptor is Located
Zone in
Which Noise
Emitted is
Located
BP, O
[db(A)
VB, TC, GB,
RC
[db(A)]
Residential
Daytime
Hours
[db(A)]
Residential
Nighttime
Hours
[db(A)]
BP, O 70 66 61 51
VB, GB, TC,
RC
62 62 55 45
Residential 62 55 55 45
§ 105-6. Background and impulse noise.
A. In those individual cases where the background noise levels caused
by sources not subject to this chapter exceed the standards contained
herein, a source shall be considered to cause excessive noise if the noise
emitted by such source exceeds the background noise levels by five
db(A), provided that no source subject to the provisions of this chapter
shall emit noise in excess of 80 db(A) at any time and provided that this
section does not decrease the permissible levels of other sections of this
chapter.
B. No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess
of 80 db peak sound-pressure level during nighttime hours to any
residential zone.
C. No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess of
100 db peak sound-pressure level at any time to any zone.
§ 105-4 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 105-7
93:238
§ 105-7. Exceptions.
A. This chapter shall not apply to noise emitted by or related to:
(1) Natural phenomena.
(2) Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church.
(3) Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any
other alarm systems used in an emergency situation.
(4) A public emergency sound signal.
(5) Warning devices required by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration or other state or federal safety regulations.
(6) Farming equipment or farming activity.
(7) An emergency.
(8) Snow removal equipment.
B. The following shall be exempt from this chapter, subject to special
conditions as specified:
(1) Noise generated by any construction equipment which is operated
during daytime hours, provided that the operation of construction
equipment during nighttime hours shall not exceed the maximum
noise levels as specified in § 105-5.
(2) Noise from domestic power equipment operated during daytime
hours.
(3) Noise from demolition work conducted during daytime hours,
provided that when considered emergency work, demolition shall be
exempted at all times from the noise levels set in this chapter.
(4) Noise created by any aircraft flight operations which are specifically
preempted by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(5) Noise created by any recreational activities which are permitted by
law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the Town,
including but not limited to parades, sporting events, concerts and
fireworks displays.
(6) Noise created by blasting other than that conducted in connection
with construction activities shall be exempted, provided that the
blasting is conducted between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. local time,
at specified hours previously announced to the local public and
provided that a permit for such blasting has been obtained from local
authorities.
(7) Noise created by leaf, refuse and solid waste collection, provided
that the activity is conducted during the hours specified in this Code
or, if no hours are specified or are specifically prohibited, then during
daytime hours.
(8) Noise created by fire or intrusion alarm shall, from time of activation
of the audible signal, emit noise for a period of time not exceeding
10 minutes when such alarm is attached to a vehicle or 30 minutes
when attached to any building or structure.
(9) Public-address systems used in election campaign activities during
daylight hours only.
§ 105-8. Vehicle noise restrictions.
The following activities are prohibited:
§ 105-7 (RESERVED) § 105-8
93:239
A. Motor vehicle noise. All motor vehicles operated within the limits of
the Town of Wethersfield shall be subject to the noise standards and
decibel levels set forth in the Department of Motor Vehicle Regulations
Sections 14-80a-1a through 14-80a-10a entitled "Maximum Permissible
Noise Levels from Vehicle."
B. Motor vehicle sound-amplifying devices. No sound-amplifying devices on
or within motor vehicles shall emit noise in excess of the noise levels as
specified in § 105-5.
C. Recreational vehicle noise. No person shall create or cause to be created
any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise due to the operation of a
recreational vehicle. All recreational vehicles operated within the limits
of the Town of Wethersfield shall be subject to the noise standards and
decibel levels set forth in the Department of Motor Vehicle Regulations
Sections 14-80a-1a through 14-80a-10a entitled "Maximum Permissible
Noise Levels from Vehicle."
§ 105-9. Enforcement.
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 73, Article I, of the Code of the
Town of Wethersfield shall be followed.
§ 105-10. Variances.
A. Any person living or doing business in Wethersfield may apply to the
Chief of Police for a variance from one or more of the provisions of this
chapter which are more stringent than the Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection regulations for the control of noise, provided
that the applicant supplies all of the following information to the Chief
of Police at least 20 days prior to the start of the activity for which the
variance is sought:
(1) The location and nature of the activity.
(2) The time period and hours of operation of said activity.
(3) The nature and intensity of the noise that will be generated.
B. No variance from this chapter shall be granted unless it has been
demonstrated that:
(1) The proposed activity will not violate any provisions of the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection regulations;
(2) The noise levels generated by the proposed activity will not
constitute a danger to the public health; and
(3) Compliance with this chapter constitutes an unreasonable hardship
on the applicant.
C. The application for a variance shall be reviewed and approved or
rejected at least five days prior to the start of the proposed activity.
Approval or rejection shall be made in writing and shall state the
condition(s) of approval, if any, or the reason(s) for rejection.
D. Failure to rule on an application within the designated time shall
constitute approval of the variance.
§ 105-8 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 105-11
93:240
§ 105-11. More stringent provisions to apply.
All provisions of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Wethersfield39 which
are more stringent than those set forth herein shall remain in force. If, for
any reason, any word, clause, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be
held to make the same unconstitutional or be superseded by any law or
regulations, this chapter shall not thereby be invalidated, and the remainder
of the chapter shall continue in effect.
Chapter 108
NUISANCES
§ 108-1. Removal of weeds and similar vegetation.
Each year, every owner, lessor, lessee or other person in possession of
land shall cut to a height of not more than eight inches all weeds and
similar vegetation not planted as a crop to be harvested or for ornamental
purposes.
§ 108-2. Removal of vegetation injurious to health.
Every owner, lessor, lessee or other person in possession of land shall keep
it free from vegetation of any type which, in the opinion of the Health
Director, is injurious to public health. Such vegetation shall be removed
within 10 days of receipt of notice from the Health Director.
§ 108-3. Penalties for offenses.
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may be punished by a
fine not to exceed $100. Each day any such violation shall continue or each
act in violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 108-4. Enforcement.
This chapter may be enforced by citations issued by designated municipal
officers or employees. The citation hearing procedure established by
Chapter 73 of Wethersfield Code shall be followed. Effective date: February
1, 2011.
§ 108-5. Abatement; expenses.
Any violation of § 108-1 or § 108-2 shall constitute a nuisance which, at the
Town's option, may be abated by the Town at the expense of the owner,
lessor, lessee or any other person in possession or any one or more of them
to whom the Town Manager or his representative has given not less than
10 days' written notice of intention to abate such nuisance. Such expense
may be collected by the Town in a civil action against any one or more of
the above-named persons responsible therefor.
39.Editor's Note: See Chapter 167, Zoning.
§ 105-11 (RESERVED) § 108-5
93:241
Chapter 111
PARKLAND DEDICATIONS
§ 111-1. Dedicated lands.
A. The following described property is set aside and dedicated to the people
of Wethersfield by the Town as parkland:
(1) The land located on Cedar Street and designated as "Lot Number
EPT2" and the land located on Crest Street and designated as "Lot
Number 6," both designations as described in the Development
Designation Report, Phases 1-4, dated September, 1989.
(2) The land known as "Wintergreen Woods." [Added 3-5-1990]
(3) The land known as the "1860 Reservoir," "Standish Park" and "Mill
Woods Park," as described in the Conservation Commission's
Inventory of Open Space. [Added 1-22-1991]
(4) The land known as "Cove Park," "William J. Pitkin Recreation
Complex," "Solomon Welles House and Grounds," "Broad Street
Green," the "Beaver Brook Linear Park" (Spring Street and Wells
Road) and "Hanmer Park," as described in the Conservation
Commission's Inventory of Open Space. [Added 8-19-1991]
(5) The land now known as "Tanglewood Open Space" and to be referred
to in the future as the "Tanglewood Nature Preserve." [Added
12-21-1992]
(6) The land now known as "Savage Park," located on the west side of
the Silas Deane Highway and designated on the Tax Assessor's Map
No. 205, Parcel, 71, and to be referred to in the future as "Savage
Park." [Added 7-1-2002]
B. The Town of Wethersfield, through its Town Council, shall study and
examine all other Town-owned land for a similar parkland designation.
C. There may be no significant modification to environmentally sensitive
areas in parks except under the following conditions: [Added
11-6-1995]
(1) That such a proposed modification is made pursuant to a master
plan;
(2) The proposed modification has the prior approval of the
Conservation Commission, the Inland Wetland Commission, Advisory
Recreation and Parks Board, the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the Town Council; and
(3) The master plan has the prior approval of the Town Council and any
other appropriate boards and commissions that the Town Council
may designate or appoint to review the proposed master plan.
§ 108-5 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 111-1
93:242
Chapter 113
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 105.
Nuisances — See Ch. 108.
Pocket bikes — See Ch. 157, Art. IV.
§ 113-1. Golf on school grounds.
The playing or practice of golf on school grounds is prohibited, except as
authorized by the Board of Education.
§ 113-2. Restricted acts. [Amended 5-2-1994; 5-1-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts in
any park or playground or upon any property (including property devoted
to school use but excluding Town-owned street rights-of-way) that is owned,
leased or controlled by the Town of Wethersfield:
A. To deface, remove or destroy any sign, notice or protective device.
B. To provide any music or entertainment or make or cause to be made any
public speech or address except by permission from the Department of
Parks and Recreation.
C. To sell, offer or solicit for sale any goods or merchandise without
permission from the Department of Parks and Recreation.
D. To gamble or bet or have any instrument of gambling; specifically
excluding bingo for other than cash prizes or gift certificates, with
participation limited to members of the sponsoring club or organization,
a permit for the same to be issued pursuant to the Connecticut General
Statutes and the conditions contained herein.
E. To operate any commercial vehicle except on business of the Town or to
give instructions to any person in driving an automobile or in learning
to drive an automobile or to drive at a rate exceeding 15 miles per hour
or to drive any automobile or other vehicle except on provided roads
or to park any car except in areas designated for public parking or to
park overnight without permission from the Department of Parks and
Recreation or the Department of Public Works.
F. To operate any motor-powered minibike or go-cart.
G. To drive or propel a bicycle except on roads, sidewalks or footpaths,
unless otherwise posted.
H. To remain, stay or loiter in any park or playground from sunset to 8:00
a.m. except in those areas or activities authorized for use outside those
hours by the Department of Parks and Recreation.
I. To wade or swim in any pond, brook, lake or river in any park or
playground under the control of the Town except at the provided
swimming areas and only then during supervised periods determined
and designated by the Department of Parks and Recreation.
§ 111-1 (RESERVED) § 113-2
93:243
J. To distribute any circulars, cards or written matter or to post, plaster
or affix any placard, notice or sign without permission from the
Department of Parks and Recreation.
K. To plant or remove trees or shrubs without permission of the
Department of Parks and Recreation.
L. To fish in any pond, brook, lake or river except at areas set aside and
designated for such purposes.
M. To play baseball, golf, football or other active games except in areas
approved by the Department of Parks and Recreation.
N. To permit or take a dog onto such Town-owned, -leased or -controlled
property, except when under the control of a responsible person and
except that such dog is also kept on a leash as well as under proper
control in those areas designated as requiring a leash by the
Department of Parks and Recreation. However this provision does not
apply to designated dog parks.
O. To operate or use any motorized model airplane, motorized model boat
and/or motor-powered boat on any Town-owned or -leased property or
in any park or playground, except in areas approved by the Department
of Parks and Recreation.
§ 113-3. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of § 113-2 shall not be construed to prevent such activities
as the Board of Education or its duly authorized agents may permit in
furtherance of its educational program within the scope of its statutory
authority on Town property devoted to school use.
Chapter 116
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 113-2 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 113-3
93:244
ARTICLE I
License
§ 116-1. License required.
No person, except as hereinafter stated, shall sell, offer for sale or solicit
orders for any goods, wares or merchandise within the Town without a
license issued by the Chief of Police upon the filing of an application as
provided herein.
§ 116-2. Expiration.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on the
30th day of June after the date of issue.
§ 116-3. Application; fees.
A. Application. The application for such a license shall be made to the Chief
of Police, in writing, and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and description of the applicant; if a partnership, the
names of all partners; if a corporation, club or association, the names
of officers.
(2) The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer.
(5) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the
license number or other means of identification.
B. Fees. The license fees shall be as follows: $100 per year for each person
licensed, per year. Each helper or assistant to the person licensed must
himself procure a license. "Year" means the fiscal year ending June 30 of
each year or any part thereof. [Amended 6-18-1990; 6-6-2005]
C. Waiver of fees. The payment of a fee by any applicant who has not
attained 18 years of age at the time the license is issued shall be
waived, provided that the license is used for some charitable, nonprofit
or educational purpose or primarily for some purpose other than income
or profit.
§ 116-4. Use by licensee only.
No license, license plate or lapel button issued under the provisions of this
article shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom
issued.
§ 116-5. Identifying plate and button; exhibition.
A. Plate and button. Each vehicle used by the licensee shall display on both
sides a plate designed and furnished by the Chief of Police bearing the
number of the license, the expiration date of the license and the words
"Licensed Vendor." Each licensee shall wear a lapel button designed and
furnished by the Chief of Police.
§ 116-1 (RESERVED) § 116-5
93:245
B. Exhibit of license. Peddlers and solicitors are required to exhibit their
licenses at the request of any citizen.
§ 116-6. Suspension; revocation.
A. Causes. Any license may be suspended by the Chief of Police without
hearing and revoked by him after notice and hearing for any of the
following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude
subsequent to the issuance of the license.
(5) Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner
as to constitute a breach of peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of suspension and hearing. Notice of such suspension and of
the hearing on the revocation of the license shall be given together, in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds for suspension and the
time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid,
to the licensee at his last known address at the time the license is
suspended, and the date fixed for the hearing shall not be less than five
days nor more than 10 days after the mailing of the notice.
§ 116-7. Recordkeeping.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep a record of all licenses
issued under the provisions of this article and a detailed account of all
receipts for such licenses, which receipts shall be turned over monthly to
the Town Treasurer.
§ 116-5 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 116-7
93:246
ARTICLE II
General Selling Provisions
§ 116-8. Presumption of intrastate commerce.
The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares or merchandise by any
peddler within the Town shall raise a presumption that said goods, wares or
merchandise are subjects of intrastate commerce.
§ 116-9. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Sales by farmers and gardeners of the produce of their farms and
gardens or the sale, distribution and delivery of milk, teas, coffees,
spices, groceries, meats and bakery goods, newspapers, sales on
approval, conditional sales of merchandise and any other persons or
sales which may be exempt from such regulation by the General
Statutes.
B. Sales by persons having an established place of business in the Town.
C. Sales to dealers and business establishments.
D. Sales for the benefit of a charitable organization located in the Town.
E. Sales by persons for their own account who are residents of the Town
and who have not attained 16 years of age.
F. Sales by persons pursuant to a permit authorized by the proper Town
authority.
§ 116-10. Noisemaking.
No licensee shall shout, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device
for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise
which such licensee proposes to sell.
§ 116-11. Restrictions on street usage.
A peddler or solicitor using a vehicle shall have no exclusive right to
any location on public streets or public property, shall not be permitted
any stationary location therein and shall not be permitted to operate in
any congested area or any area where his operation might impede or
inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this article the judgment of
a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to
whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 116-12. House calls at night.
Calls at the dwelling of any person for sale or solicitation by any licensee
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. is prohibited except by
appointment.
§ 116-8 (RESERVED) § 116-13
93:247
§ 116-13. Enforcement. [Amended 8-15-2005]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 73, Article I, of the Code of the
Town of Wethersfield shall be followed.
§ 116-13 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 116-13
93:248
Chapter 119
POOLS, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Central Connecticut Health District — See Ch.
9.
Chapter 122
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 63.
Numbering of buildings — see Ch. 65.
Dog waste — See Ch. 70.
Environmental Code — See Ch. 75.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 83.
Lighting — See Ch. 101.
Solid waste — See Ch. 136.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 153.
Abandoned and inoperable vehicles — See Ch.
160.
§ 122-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the Town
of Wethersfield" ("this code"), and the standards established by this code
shall be referred to as and constitute the minimum property standards of
the Town of Wethersfield ("Town").
§ 122-2. Intent; authority.
A. This code is intended to protect, preserve and promote public health,
safety and welfare; to prevent and control the incidence of
communicable diseases; and to reduce environmental hazards to health,
safety and welfare, insofar as they are affected by the maintenance of
residential and nonresidential structures, equipment and premises as
provided by this code. This code is also further intended to provide
minimum standards governing the condition, occupancy and
maintenance of occupied and unoccupied premises and establish
reasonable safeguards for the health, safety and welfare of the
occupants and users of said premises, the community and the general
public. This code is further intended to maintain and preserve the beauty
of the neighborhoods and to allow for control of blighted premises.
B. This code shall establish minimum standards and responsibilities for the
maintenance of all premises and delegates administrative responsibility
and enforcement powers and creates enforcement procedures.
C. This code is adopted in accordance with the provisions of Connecticut
General Statutes §§ 7-148, 7-148aa and 7-152c.
§ 116-13 (RESERVED) § 122-3
93:249
§ 122-3. Scope of provisions.
A. Applicability.
(1) This code shall apply uniformly to the maintenance, use and
occupancy of all premises now in existence or hereafter constructed,
maintained or modified and shall include:
(a) Dwellings or dwelling units, including one-family and two-family
dwellings and multiple dwellings.
(b) Lots, plots or parcels of land, whether vacant or occupied.
(c) Buildings of non-dwelling use, including commercial properties.
(d) Accessory structures accessory to any building.
(e) All apartments, boardinghouses, group homes, lodging houses,
rooming houses, tenement houses and unrelated family units.
(2) This code shall not apply to barns as identified in the book
"Wonderful Barns of Wethersfield," copyright 1994, by Eleanor Buck
Wolf, or to any other barn built before 1900, except when the Town
Manager or his/her designee determines that existing conditions
pose a threat to the health, safety and/or welfare of the public.
§ 122-4. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to that of a principal building, structure or use
on the same lot.
BLIGHTED PREMISES —
Any building or structure, or any part of a structure that is a separate
unit, or a parcel of land, or any accessory structure, or fence, in which
at least one of the following additional conditions exists:
The Town Manager or his/her designee determines that existing
conditions pose a serious threat to the health, safety and welfare of
the persons in Town;
(1)
It is not being maintained, as evidenced by the existence, to a
significant degree, of one or more of the following conditions:
(a) Missing, broken or boarded windows or doors;
Collapsing or deteriorating exterior walls, roofs, stairs,
porches, handrails, railings, basement hatchways, chimneys,
flues, or floors;
(b)
Exterior walls which contain holes, breaks, loose or rotting
materials;
(c)
(d) Foundation walls which contain open cracks and breaks;
Overhang extensions, including but not limited to canopies,
marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes
and exhaust ducts, which contain rust or other decay,
(e)
(2)
A.
§ 122-3 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 122-4
93:250
COMMUNITY STANDARD — A judgment by a reasonable member of the
community.
CONNECTICUT GENERAL STATUTES — Includes any applicable
amendments.
OWNER/OCCUPIER — Any person, institution, foundation, entity or
authority which owns, leases, rents, possesses, or is responsible for
property within the Town.
PROXIMATE PROPERTY — Any premises or parcel of land within 1,000 feet
of a blighted premises.
§ 122-5. Signs, awnings and marquees.
A. Signs. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view
permitted by reason of other ordinances or laws shall be maintained in
good repair. Any signs which have excessively weathered or faded or
those upon which the paint has excessively peeled or cracked or whose
supporting members have deteriorated shall be removed forthwith or
put into a good state of repair by the owner of the sign.
B. Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying
structural member which extends over any street, sidewalk or other
portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall
not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event that such
awnings or marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with
(f) Rat infestations;
Garbage or trash improperly stored or accumulated on the
premises;
(g)
In the case of fences, broken or rotted boards or in an
otherwise dilapidated condition; or
(h)
Any other exterior condition reflecting a level of maintenance
which is not in keeping with community standards or which
constitutes a blighting factor for adjacent property owners or
occupiers or which is an element leading to the progressive
deterioration of the neighborhood.
(i)
It is attracting illegal activity as documented in Police Department
records;
(3)
It is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Marshal or as
documented in the Fire Department records; and/or
(4)
It is a factor creating a substantial and unreasonable interference
with the use and enjoyment of other premises within the
surrounding area as documented by neighborhood complaints,
police reports, the cancellation of insurance on proximate
properties, or similar circumstances.
(5)
Blighted premises shall not include any such building, structure or
parcel of land located on any active farm.
B.
§ 122-4 (RESERVED) § 122-5
93:251
the foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting members, be
removed forthwith. In the event that said awnings or marquees are
made of cloth, plastic or of similar materials, said cloth or plastic, where
exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good condition and shall
not show evidence of excessive weathering, ripping, tearing or other
holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any encroachment
on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
§ 122-6. Removal of weeds and similar vegetation.
A. Every owner/occupier of properties upon which a building exists, or who
is in possession of a vacant lot in an approved subdivision which fronts
on a paved public road and to which a public water and/or public sewer
lateral has been provided, shall cut, to a height of not more than eight
inches, all grass, weeds and similar vegetation not planted as a crop to
be harvested or for ornamental purposes.
B. Every owner/occupier of property shall keep his property free from
vegetation of any type which, in the opinion of the Town Manager or his/
her designee, is injurious to public health.
C. Any violation of § 122-6A or B shall constitute a nuisance which may
be abated by the Town at the expense of the owner, lessor, lessee or
any other person in possession or any one or more of them to whom
the Town Manager or his/her designee has given not less than 10 days'
written notice of intention to abate such nuisance. Such expense may be
collected by the Town in a civil action against any one or more of the
above-named persons responsible therefor.
§ 122-7. Storage; littering.
A. Accumulation restricted. It shall be unlawful for an owner/occupier to
allow solid waste to accumulate on premises in the Town in such a
manner as to create an offensive, unsightly or unsanitary condition.
B. Storage requirements. In the event that property usage would result in
the stacking or piling of materials, including equipment and appliances,
even if wanted and useful, they must be so arranged as to prohibit
the creation of a blighting factor to their neighbors. Furthermore, all
useful, wanted material, including equipment and appliances, stored outof-
doors shall be stored in an orderly fashion in the rear yard.
C. Throwing or depositing in Town. It shall be unlawful for any person
to throw or deposit solid waste, material designated recyclable or
recyclables in any part of the Town in such a manner as to create
an offensive, unsightly or unsanitary condition. Property owners shall
maintain their property litter free.
D. Throwing or depositing on streets and public grounds. It shall be
unlawful for any person to throw or deposit solid waste, material
designated recyclable or recyclables upon streets or sidewalks, in any
catch basin, drain or watercourse or in parks or any public grounds in
the Town, except that solid waste, material designated recyclable and
recyclables may be deposited in proper containers.
§ 122-8. Complaints; warning
§ 122-5 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 122-8
93:252
A. Any individual, civic organization, municipal agency, or Town employee
affected by the action or inaction of an owner/occupier of property
subject to the provisions of this chapter may file a complaint of violation
of this chapter with the Town Manager. The Town Manager or his/her
designee, upon his or her determination whether there is a violation of
this chapter, shall forward a notice letter to the owner/occupier at the
time such determination has been made.
B. Such a notice letter from the Town Manager or his/her designee shall be
issued prior to issuing a citation.
C. Such notice letter shall include:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification, specifying
the violation which is alleged to exist and the remedial action
required;
(2) A due date, within a reasonable time, for the performance of any act
required; and
(3) The amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees that may be imposed
for noncompliance.
D. The owner/occupier may not contest a warning.
E. Delivery of a notice letter or citation to the owner/occupier shall be by
one of the following methods:
(1) By personal delivery to the owner/occupier or by leaving the citation
or notice letters at the usual place of abode of the owner/occupier
with a person of suitable age and discretion;
(2) By certified or registered mail addressed to the owner/occupier at
his or her last known address, with postage prepared thereon; or
(3) By posting and keeping posted for 24 hours a copy of the citation or
notice letter in placard form in a conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 122-9. Enforcement.
A. If the corrective actions specified in the notice letter are not taken, the
Town Manager or his/her designee may issue a written citation to the
owner/occupier.
B. A citation shall be in writing and include:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification and a
description of the violation which exists.
(2) The amount of the fines which may not exceed $100. Each day such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and a separate
citation may be issued.
(3) A statement that the owner/occupier may contest his liability and
request a hearing, in accordance with Chapter 73 of the Wethersfield
Code, by delivering, in person or by mail, written notice of objection
within 10 days of the date of the citation.
(4) Effective date: February 1, 2011.
C. Delivery of the citation shall be by the manner provided in § 122-8.
D. In lieu of citation and in accordance with § 7-148(c)(7)(E) of the
Connecticut General Statutes, if the owner of any property, the condition
of which constitutes an immediate threat to life, health, or safety or is
otherwise unfit for human habitation, fails to comply with any order to
repair or remove any building or portion thereof, or otherwise remediate
§ 122-8 (RESERVED) § 122-9
93:253
the property, issued pursuant to the General Statutes or to the Code
of Ordinances of the Town or when there exists actual and immediate
danger upon the property, so as to endanger life or property, the official
charged with enforcement of such provisions may proceed forthwith
to cause to be done all work required to be done in compliance with
such an order, and if necessary, to demolish or secure any structure or
structures covered by any such order, and the Town shall have a lien on
such property for the cost of such work or demolition, except that when
no imminent danger exists, the owner of the property shall be given
written notice of the Town's intention to undertake said work at least
10 days prior to the commencement thereof, and the Town may recover
the cost of the work or demolition from the owner of such property by
appropriate proceeding on complaint of said official.
§ 122-10. Severability.
In the event that any part or portion of this code is declared invalid for any
reason, all the other provisions of this code shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 122-11. Construal of terms and provisions
A. Where terms are specifically defined or the meanings of such terms are
clearly indicated by their context, those meanings are to be used in the
interpretation of this code.
B. Where terms are not specifically defined and such terms are defined in
the Charter and Municipal Code of the Town of Wethersfield, such terms
shall have the same meanings for the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter.
C. Where terms are not specifically defined in this chapter, they shall have
their ordinarily accepted meanings or such meanings as the context may
imply.
D. The provisions of this code shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other codes, ordinances or regulations of the Town of
Wethersfield.
E. In any case where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance,
regulation or other provision of the Charter and Municipal Code of the
Town of Wethersfield or the State of Connecticut, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people of the Town of Wethersfield shall prevail.
Chapter 125
PUBLIC PROPERTY, USE OF
§ 122-9 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 122-11
93:254
ARTICLE I
Location of Cellular Equipment at Kelleher Court
[Adopted 11-4-2002]
§ 125-1. Use of public safety tower.
No additional private companies will be permitted to locate equipment on
the public safety tower at Kelleher Court.
§ 125-1 (RESERVED) § 125-1
93:255
Chapter 127
RADIO COVERAGE, TOWN-WIDE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 63.
§ 127-1. Radio coverage required.
Except as otherwise provided, no person shall erect, construct, maintain or
modify any building or structure or any part thereof, including stairwells, or
cause the same to be done which fails to support adequate radio coverage
for Town public safety services, including but not limited to police, fire, and
public works departments. A certificate of occupancy may not be issued for
any building or structure which fails to comply with this requirement.
A. The frequency range which must be supported shall be 806 to 816 MHz
and 856 to 866 MHz, or as otherwise established and required in writing
by the Town as being necessary for public safety purposes.
B. For purposes of this chapter, adequate radio coverage shall include the
following:
(1) A minimum signal level of DAQ 3 (Delivered Audio Quality 3)
available in 95% of the area as agreed to be in the coverage
acceptance test plan by the Town and the radio system manufacturer
prior to system testing.
§ 127-2. Amplification system required.
A. Buildings and structures subject to the requirements of this chapter
which do not provide adequate radio coverage shall be equipped with an
internal multiple antenna system with FCC-type accepted bidirectional
800 MHz amplifiers as necessary to achieve adequate radio coverage.
The building owner shall be solely responsible for the installation and
maintenance of such system if required. Installation shall be in
accordance with NFPA 72.
B. Buildings and structures shall be equipped with any of the following, in
order to achieve adequate radio coverage:
(1) A radiating cable system; or
(2) An internal multiple antenna system with FCC-type accepted
bidirectional UHF amplifiers as needed to encompass the frequency
range stated above or frequency range subsequently established by
the Town;
(3) A system that has been approved by the Town Manager as being
capable of providing amplification to meet these chapter
requirements.
§ 125-1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 127-3
93:256
§ 127-3. Owner responsibility.
It shall be the responsibility of any owner of a building or structure which
currently holds a certificate of occupancy, or allows the building or
structure to be used for any purpose other than construction, to be in
compliance with this chapter upon its effective date.
§ 127-4. Inadequate radio coverage.
Any building or structure which fails to support adequate radio coverage
must have a plan acceptable to the Town Fire Marshal within 90 days by the
owner or his agent to address the inadequate radio coverage. Review of the
plan may be extended by the Town Manager as Director of Public Safety.
The owner of the building or structure shall have the approved plan enacted
within one year after approval of the plan.
§ 127-5. Acceptance test procedures.
A. Acceptance testing for an in-building radio amplification system is
required, upon completion of installation of the system. It is the building
owner's responsibility to have the radio system tested to ensure that twoway
coverage on each floor of the building is a minimum of DAQ 3.
B. Each floor of the building shall be divided into a grid of approximately 40
equal areas. A maximum of two nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail
the test. In the event that three of the areas fail the test, in order to be
more statistically accurate the floor may be divided into 80 equal areas.
In such event, a maximum of four nonadjacent areas will be allowed
to fail the test. After the eighty-area tests, if the system continues
to fail the building owner shall repair, replace, alter or upgrade the
system altered to meet the DAQ 3 coverage requirement. Talk back
testing from site to Town of Wethersfield Dispatch Center shall use
a two-watt portable transceiver with speaker/microphone and flexible
antenna. A spot located approximately in the center of a grid area will
be selected for the test, then the radio will be keyed to verify twoway
communication to and from the outside of the building. Once the
spot has been selected, use of another spot within the grid area will
not be permitted. Field strength testing instruments are to be recently
calibrated (within the past 12 months) and of the frequency selective
type incorporating a flexible antenna similar to the ones used on the
handheld transceivers.
C. The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the results kept
on file with the building owner so that the measurements can be verified
each year during the annual tests. In the event that the measurement
results become lost, the building owner will be required to rerun the
acceptance test to reestablish the gain values.
§ 127-6. Annual tests.
When an in-building radio system is installed, the building owner shall test
all active components of the system, including but not limited to amplifier,
the power supplies, and backup batteries, a minimum of once every 12
§ 127-3 (RESERVED) § 127-6
93:257
months. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same
as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. Backup batteries and
power supplies shall be tested under load for a period of one hour to
verify that they will operate during an actual power outage. All other active
components shall be checked to determine that they are operating within
the manufacturer's specifications for the intended purpose.
§ 127-7. Five-year test.
In addition to the annual test, the building owner shall perform a radio
coverage test a minimum of once every five years to ensure that the radio
system continues to meet the requirements of the original acceptance. The
procedure set forth above shall apply to such tests.
§ 127-8. Qualifications of testing personnel.
All tests shall be conducted, documented, and signed by a person in
possession of a current FCC general radiotelephone operator license. All
test records shall be retained at the inspected premises by the building
owner and a copy submitted to the Town of Wethersfield Town Manager
within 30 days of when the test has been conducted. In the event the
test shall fail to comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter,
appropriate repairs shall be made and additional tests conducted until tests
meet the minimum requirements of this chapter.
§ 127-9. Inspections.
Town personnel, after providing reasonable notice to the owner or his
representative, shall have the right to enter onto the property to conduct
field testing to be certain that the require level of radio coverage is present.
§ 127-10. Property owner's maintenance responsibilities.
A. Upon completion of all the tests to the minimum standards of the Town,
the property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the system.
A maintenance contract shall be provided to the Town Fire Marshal
with name of contractor, who will supply a twenty-four-hour, seven-day
emergency response within two hours after notification by either the
Town or the property owner. The maintenance contract shall also contain
information as to contact personnel with phone numbers. Property
owners shall also submit information to the Town Fire Marshal as to
contact personnel with phone numbers for the property owner.
B. The property owner shall also be responsible for making any repairs,
replacement or upgrades to the systems as directed by the Town Fire
Marshal, should the system fail or no longer work in the future.
§ 127-11. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to buildings less than 5,000 square feet or two
stories or less, or any three-family or less multifamily detached residential
building or structure less than 5,000 square feet.
§ 127-6 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 127-12
93:258
§ 127-12. Failure to comply.
Failure to comply with this chapter shall be grounds for the Chief Building
Official to revoke any previously issued certificate of occupancy for the
building or structure. A written appeal may be taken to the Town Manager
regarding the revocation of the certificate of occupancy within 30 days of
the revocation.
Chapter 130
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 63. Environmental Code — See Ch. 75.
§ 130-1. Permit required for certain systems.
No subsurface sewage disposal system shall be constructed, installed,
altered or repaired in the Town unless a permit has been issued by the
Director of Health or his designee for such work. Application for such
permit shall be made on a form approved by the Director of Health and
shall be filed with the Central Connecticut Health District,40 together with
the appropriate fee. Such permit shall be obtained before a building permit
is issued for the construction of any dwelling, apartment, boardinghouse,
hotel, business, commercial or other structure which is to be provided with
any such subsurface sewage disposal system. The Director of Health of the
Central Connecticut Health District shall set such standards as he deems
necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public,
but in no case shall such standards be less than the minimum standard as
required by the Public Health Code as required by the state.
§ 130-2. Fees. [Amended 5-16-2005]
Type Fee
Soil testing, new $125
Soil testing, repair $100
Plan review and permit to install, new $150
Plan review and permit to install, repair $125
Subdivision plan review $150
Addition review $50
Soil testing, addition $100
Chapter 134
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 29, Central Connecticut Health District.
§ 127-12 (RESERVED) § 130-2
93:259
SNOWMOBILES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreational vehicle noise — See Ch. 105,
Noise, § 105-8C.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 139.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 157.
Inoperable or abandoned vehicles — See Ch.
160.
§ 134-1. Use on private lands.
No snowmobile may be operated in the Town of Wethersfield on land other
than that of the owner or operator of the snowmobile unless such owner or
operator has the written permission of the owner or owners of such land. In
the event that such written permission is given to operate the snowmobile,
said written permission shall be carried by the operator at all times while
operating the snowmobile and shall be produced for any police officer,
upon request. Such written permission shall be considered void unless it
includes the signature of the owner of the land, the effective dates and times
of such permission, the address or other location of the land concerning
which permission is granted, the registration number of the snowmobile for
which permission is granted and the name or names of persons to whom
permission is granted.
§ 134-2. Use on Town property.
No snowmobile shall be operated on land owned by the Town without
permission, in writing, by the Town Manager or his authorized agent. Such
written permission by the Town Manager or his authorized agent shall be
confined to those properties that have been designated by rules established
by the Director of Recreation and Parks with the approval of the Advisory
Recreation and Park Board for use for snowmobiling and only upon such
terms and conditions as are specified in said rules.
§ 134-3. Investigation by police.
Any police officer of the Town of Wethersfield shall be authorized to request
the operator of any snowmobile being operated within the limits of the Town
to stop in order to permit such officer to determine whether the operator
has written permission to operate upon the land upon which the officer
observes such snowmobile being operated.
§ 134-4. Proof of registration to be prima facie evidence.
Whenever there is a violation of the chapter, proof of the registration
number of any snowmobile therein concerned shall be prima facie evidence
in any criminal action that the owner was the operator thereof.
§ 130-2 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 134-5
93:260
§ 134-5. Enforcement. [Amended 8-15-2005]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 73, Article I, of the Code of the
Town of Wethersfield shall be followed.
Chapter 136
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal waste — See Ch. 70. Environmental Code — See Ch. 75.
§ 136-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority established
pursuant to Chapter 446e of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
BULKY WASTE — Landclearing debris and waste resulting directly from
demolition activities other than clean fill.
CLEAN FILL — Natural soil, rock, brick, concrete, ceramics and asphalt
paving fragments which are virtually inert and pose neither a pollution
threat to ground- or surface waters nor a fire hazard.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Corrugated containers having liners of
kraft (brown) paper that are in clean condition (not soiled by any garbage
or other material) and which are not coated with any wax material.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE — Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, office
paper, glass food and beverage containers, metal food and beverage
containers, waste oil, scrap metal, storage batteries (lead acid batteries)
and leaves.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health for the Central
Connecticut Health District.41[Amended 12-20-1999]
DIRECTOR OF PHYSICAL SERVICES — The Director of Physical Services
for the Town of Wethersfield.[Added 12-20-1999]
DWELLING — Any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING OCCUPANT — The owner, renter or other occupant of each
separate dwelling unit, whether or not in the same building with other
dwelling units.
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 29, Central Connecticut Health District.
§ 134-5 (RESERVED) § 136-1
93:261
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GLASS FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — Clear, brown and green
glass food and beverage containers up to one gallon in size, washed clean
of their contents with their caps and lids removed, and which do not contain
any other materials except paper labels.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Dangerous materials or substances which may
pose a present or potential hazard to human health or the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, including but
not limited to cleaning fluids, paints, explosives, acids, caustics, poisons,
drugs, radioactive materials, infectious materials and asbestos-containing
material.
HDPE (HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE) BOTTLES — Plastic bottles up to
one gallon in size, washed clean of their contents, and which do not contain
any other materials except paper labels.
INDUSTRY — The manufacture, milling, assembly or warehousing of a
product and the maintenance and/or storage of commercial vehicles or
construction equipment.
METAL CANS — Metal containers up to one gallon in size, washed clean of
their contents, and which do not contain any other materials except paper
labels.
MID-CONNECTICUT SYSTEM — The system for the processing of solid
waste and the recovery of energy therefrom constructed by the Authority
pursuant to the Municipal Services Agreement.42
MUNICIPAL SERVICES AGREEMENT — The municipal solid waste
management services contract between the Town of Wethersfield and the
Authority dated June 30, 1982.
NEWSPAPERS — Fresh dry newspapers, not sunburned, free from paper
other than newsprint, containing not more than the normal percentage of
rotogravure and colored sections (magazines and advertising materials),
which can be either tied in bundles with string or placed in brown kraft
paper grocery bags.
NONRESIDENTIAL PREMISES — Premises used for wholesale or retail
trade business and professional offices, industry, churches, schools,
nonprofit organizations, farms operated as a business, government
buildings, hospitals and other humane institutions, orders of fraternal
organizations, clubs and places of amusement, entertainment and
recreation.
42.Editor's Note: Former definition of "multiple dwelling," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 6-7-1993.
§ 136-1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 136-1
93:262
PET (POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE) BOTTLES — Plastic bottles up to
three liters in size, washed clean of their contents, and which do not contain
any other materials except paper labels and HDPE base cups.
PREMISES — A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of
land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or
nondwelling structure, and includes any such building, accessory structure
or other structures thereon.
RECYCLABLES — Corrugated cardboard, glass food and beverage
containers, metal food and beverage containers, newspapers and plastic
HDPE and PET bottles.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES — Premises containing one or more dwelling
units but not including hotels or motels or apartments with four or more
dwelling units (e.g., single-family and two-family dwellings, apartments with
three or fewer dwelling units, exempt apartments, condominiums and Town
houses, planned unit developments and congregate housing).[Amended
6-7-1993]
RUBBISH — Cold ashes, junk, discarded containers, dust, sweepings, waste
paper, boxes, crates, rags, clothing, textiles, glass (other than food and
beverage containers), crockery and similar waste materials, excluding body
wastes, hazardous wastes, bulky wastes and clean fill.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, rubbish and bulky wastes, excluding body
wastes, hazardous waste, clean fill, material designated recyclable and
recyclables.
WHITE GOODS — Major appliances, fluorescent light ballasts (bulbs
removed), microwave ovens, submersible pumps, mercury vapor lamps,
fans and hot-water heaters.[Added 5-6-1991]
§ 136-2. General provisions.
A. Solid waste. All solid waste accumulated in the Town shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of by the Town or by persons licensed by the
Town to perform such work. No other person shall collect, convey over
any street or dispose of any solid waste.
B. Designated recyclables. Each person who generates solid waste from
residential premises within the Town shall keep materials designated
recyclable separated from other solid waste. Each person who generates
solid waste from nonresidential premises within the Town shall keep
materials designated recyclable separated from other solid waste or
shall make provision for the separation of materials designated
recyclable from other solid waste, either on or off the premises.
C. Recyclables generated from premises which are provided solid waste
collection and disposal services by the Town, including all residential
premises, churches, fraternal, social and patriotic associations or clubs,
schools and all other Town-owned premises or facilities, shall be
collected, conveyed and disposed of by the Town or by persons approved
by the Town to perform such work. All such recyclables shall be prepared
for collection and disposal in conformance with regulations established
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 136-1 (RESERVED) § 136-2
93:263
D. Materials designated recyclable which are generated from premises
other than those listed in Subsection C (e.g., nonresidential and
commercial premises) shall be collected and disposed of by individual
arrangements with persons licensed by the Town to perform such work.
§ 136-3. Collection.
A. The Town shall, by means of its own staff or by contract or other
agreement, collect solid waste and recyclables from all residential
premises, churches, fraternal, social and patriotic associations or clubs,
schools and all other Town-owned premises or facilities in a manner
and frequency as determined by the Town. It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any person not authorized by the Town to collect or pick up
or cause to be collected or picked up any solid waste or recyclables from
such premises.
B. Occupants of premises receiving curbside collection of solid waste and
recyclables shall place solid waste and recyclables for collection at the
curb no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of the week on which collection
at the premises is scheduled to take place. No solid waste or recyclables
shall be placed or stored at the curb or within the Town right-of-way
preceding the designated collection time by more than 48 hours.
C. Occupants, owners, proprietors or other responsible person(s) of
premises receiving bulk container collection of solid waste and/or
recyclables from the Town shall place solid waste and/or recyclables in
the proper container provided.
D. Suspension. The Director of Health may suspend collection of solid
waste or recyclables from any premises whereof the owner, the dwelling
occupant, the proprietor or other responsible person(s) does(do) not
comply with the terms of this chapter or regulations made hereunder
after a written warning has been sent to the address of noncompliance
by certified mail.
E. Material uncollectible. The Town or its agent shall at no time collect body
wastes, hazardous wastes or other wastes which have not been prepared
for collection in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the
rules and regulations issued by the Director of Health relating hereto.
§ 136-4. Containers.
A. Solid waste. The owner of each premises where solid waste is created
or generated shall provide, at a suitable place upon such premises,
sufficient receptacles for receiving and holding such solid waste during
the intervals between collections. Solid waste containers shall be
maintained in a good condition, free of holes and fissures large enough
to permit the infiltration of vermin, and shall be equipped with securely
fitting covers.
B. Recyclables. The Town shall supply each dwelling unit and each facility
or premises receiving curbside collection of recyclables with a container
for the storage of their recyclables. Initial containers shall be provided
at no cost; replacements will be made available at a cost as determined
by the Town. Such containers shall remain the property of the Town and
shall be used for the storage of recyclables only. Premises receiving bulk
§ 136-2 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 136-4
93:264
container collection of recyclables shall be provided bulk containers by
the Town.
§ 136-5. Storage; littering.
A. Accumulation restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow
solid waste to accumulate on premises under his/her control in the Town
in such a manner as to create an offensive, unsightly or unsanitary
condition.
B. Throwing or depositing in Town. It shall be unlawful for any person
to throw or deposit solid waste, material designated recyclable or
recyclables in any part of the Town in such a manner as to create an
offensive, unsightly or unsanitary condition.
C. Throwing or depositing on streets and public grounds. It shall be
unlawful for any person to throw or deposit solid waste, material
designated recyclable or recyclables upon streets or sidewalks, in any
catch basin, drain or watercourse or in parks or any public grounds in
the Town, except that solid waste, material designated recyclable and
recyclables may be deposited in proper containers.
§ 136-6. Collection license required; fee; responsibilities of
collectors.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting
or disposing of solid waste in the Town without first obtaining a
commercial hauler license from the Director of Physical Services.
Application for such license and holders of such license shall place on
file with the Director of Physical Services an up-to-date schedule of
collections, and such shall be kept up-to-date. [Amended 12-20-1999;
8-19-2002]
B. Term; fees. [Amended 5-6-1991; 6-15-1992; 10-3-1994; 6-5-1995;
9-3-1996; 6-16-1997; 7-6-1998; 10-1-2001; 8-19-2002]
(1) Each commercial hauler license shall be for a period of one year
beginning July 1, and the fee thereof may not exceed $100 per
vehicle per year.
(2) Commercial users of the transfer station shall be charged $305 for
an annual permit, which shall include the disposal of 1/2 cubic yard
of waste. A fee of $115 shall be charged for each additional 1/2 cubic
yard of waste disposed of throughout the year.
(3) A fee of $25 shall be charged for the first white good, $15 for the
second white good and $10 for the third white good collected at each
stop by the Town. A fee of $50 shall be charged for four or more
white goods collected at each stop by the Town. Residents aged 65
years and older or who are totally disabled as determined by social
security shall be charged $10 for each white good collected by the
Town. A fee of $10 shall be charged for each white good containing
chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) delivered to the transfer station at 100
Marsh Street. No fee shall be charged for white goods which do not
contain chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) delivered to the transfer station.
(4) Wethersfield residents shall be charged $30 for an annual permit to
use the transfer station, which shall include the disposal of 1/2 cubic
§ 136-4 (RESERVED) § 136-6
93:265
yard of waste. A fee of $15 shall be charged for each additional 1/
2 cubic yard of residential bulky waste disposed of throughout the
year.
C. Rules and regulations may be prescribed by the Director of Health to
preserve and advance public health and sanitation in the operation of
any such business. Any such license may be suspended or revoked by
the Director of Health for any violation of this chapter or any regulations
made pursuant hereto. The Director of Health may refuse to issue or
reissue a license to persons who have committed repeated violations.
D. Any person licensed under this chapter who has reason to believe that
a person from whom he collects solid waste has violated § 136-2B of
this chapter shall issue a written warning notice to such person and
shall promptly notify the Director of Health, in writing, of the alleged
violation.
E. Any person licensed under this chapter shall assist the Town in
identifying any person(s) responsible for creating loads containing
significant quantities of materials designated recyclable mixed with solid
waste which are delivered to a resource recovery facility or solid waste
facility by the collector and detected by the Town or owner/operator of
such facility.
F. No solid waste or recyclables shall be collected from any premises in
the Town of Wethersfield between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
[Added 9-7-1993]
§ 136-7. Disposal.
A. Solid waste. The Town shall make available facilities for the disposal
of solid waste, provided that such facilities may be located outside
the boundaries of the Town. On and after the effective date of this
chapter, all solid waste generated and/or collected within the boundaries
of the Town, with the exception of material designated recyclable and
recyclables, shall be disposed of at the Mid-Connecticut System as
outlined in the Municipal Services Agreement. Presenting solid waste
collected from outside the Town to any facility so as to cause the Town
to pay for its disposal shall be considered fraud against the Town.
B. Materials designated recyclable or recyclables collected by the Town or
its authorized agent or from any residential premises shall be disposed
of at a site designated by the Director of Health. Materials designated
recyclable or recyclables collected by the other conveyers or from
nonresidential premises shall be disposed of in accordance with
applicable state law or regulations.
§ 136-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which fails to comply with
any provision of this chapter or with any regulations of the Director of
Health as provided for in this chapter shall be subject to the following
penalties, in those cases where no other penalty is cited in this chapter:
A. Residents who fail to separate materials designated recyclable from
other solid waste:
(1) First violation: a written warning.
§ 136-6 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 136-8
93:266
(2) Subsequent violations: a fine not to exceed $100 for each such
violation.
B. Nonresidential premises or institutions that fail to provide for separation
of materials designated recyclable from other solid waste:
(1) First violation: a written warning.
(2) Subsequent violations: a fine not to exceed $500 for each such
violation.
C. A collector who dumps more than one cubic foot in volume of solid waste
at one time in an area not designated for such disposal by the Town
or who knowingly mixes other solid waste with materials designated
recyclable:
(1) First violation: $1,000.
(2) Subsequent violations: $5,000.
§ 136-9. Enforcement. [Added 12-6-201043]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 73, Article I, of the Code of the
Town of Wethersfield shall be followed.
Chapter 139
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse placement — See
Ch. 93.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 116.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 157.
Abandoned or inoperable vehicles — See Ch.
160.
43.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 2-1-2011.
§ 136-8 (RESERVED) § 136-9
93:267

ARTICLE I
Removal of Obstructions
§ 139-1. Removal of obstructions. [Amended 8-25-2008]
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
OBSTRUCTION — Any impediment on a sidewalk or public highway that
interferes with the removal of snow and ice from said sidewalk or public
highway or interferes with the safe and orderly flow or passage of motor
vehicle or pedestrian traffic. Such impediments may include, but are
not limited to, grass clippings, brush, leaves, sand, gravel, stones, litter,
vegetable and animal matter, refuse and rubbish.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association or other aggregation
of individuals.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Any public streets, avenues, boulevards, roads,
drives, parkways, alleys and other travel ways within the Town.
B. Sidewalks. The owner, agent of the owner or occupant of any building
or land bordering upon any street, square or public place within the
Town where there is a sidewalk shall cause to be removed therefrom
and keep the sidewalks of said property free from all obstructions which
would endanger the safety, health or well-being of pedestrians; provided,
however, that no such owner or agent of the owner or occupant having or
occupying a residential lot with frontage on two nonintersecting streets
shall be subject to the requirements of this section with regard to the
sidewalks along the rear frontage.
C. Public highways.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to place an obstruction on a public
highway in the Town. The Police Department shall be responsible for
enforcing the provisions of this article. Upon notification of a police
officer, the property owner or occupant of the property that adjoins
a public highway must remove the obstruction. If the obstruction
is deemed by the police officer as an immediate public highway
hazard, such police officer shall immediately notify the Department
of Public Works for its prompt removal. If the obstruction interferes
with or obstructs any public works project or operation, any public
works employee may remove such obstruction or interference from
the highway. The Town, for the cost of such removal, may bill the
owner or occupant of the property. This billing will also apply to any
unscheduled leaf collection provided to Town residents as a result of
the placement of leaves that are determined to be an obstruction on
a public highway.
(2) Placement of leaves on public property. Nothing contained in this
article shall prohibit a person who owns or occupies property along
a public highway from placing leaves on public property adjacent
to or in front of his or her own property for the purposes of a
scheduled collection only. However, no person shall be permitted to
place leaves or other material on public property that is not in front
of or along side of the property he or she owns or occupies. At no
§ 139-1 (RESERVED) § 139-1
93:269
time shall leaves or other materials be placed upon the paved portion
of a public highway.
D. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. Any person observed placing an
obstruction on a sidewalk or public highway or any person who places
leaves on public property in violation of this article shall be subject to a
fine of $50. Any property owner adjoining a sidewalk or public highway
on which an obstruction is placed shall be subject to a fine of $50 for
failure to remove such obstruction within 48 hours of notification by a
police officer, and may be subject to a fine of $50 per day thereafter for
every day the obstruction is on the public highway in violation of this
article. If the Department of Public Works removes the obstruction, as
provided in § 139-1C, the adjoining property owner shall be billed for
the expense of said removal in addition to the penalties provided in this
section.
§ 139-2. Removal of snow and ice.
A. Sidewalks. The owner, agent of the owner or occupant of any building or
land bordering upon any street, square or public place within the Town
where there is a sidewalk graded, paved or planked shall not collect
and direct the flow of any water over said sidewalk and shall cause
to be removed therefrom all snow, sleet and ice within a period of 24
hours after the cessation of the snow, sleet or rainfall, and, whenever
any such sidewalk or any part thereof shall be covered with ice, the
owner, agent of the owner or the occupant of the building or the lot
adjacent thereto shall, within the space of 10 hours thereafter during
the daytime, cause such sidewalk to be made safe and convenient by
removing the ice therefrom or by covering the same by sand or other
suitable substances; provided, however, that no such owner or agent
of the owner or occupant having or occupying a residential lot with
frontage on two nonintersecting streets shall be subject to the
requirements of this section with regards to the sidewalks along the rear
frontage relative to snow and ice removal and sanding.
B. Fire hydrants. All snow and ice accumulating in the street higher than
a point four inches below the bottom of the lowest outlet on any fire
hydrant, and within a radius of three feet from the center of such
hydrant, shall be removed by the owner, agent of the owner or occupant
of the premises adjoining that portion of the street within 24 hours
after such snow and ice has ceased to fall, be deposited or accumulate.
Said owner, agent of owner or occupant shall also clear a path having
a minimum width of three feet between any fire hydrant and the edge
of the traveled portion of the abutting street, highway, private road or
drive.
§ 139-3. Removal by Town; costs.
Should any owner, agent of the owner or occupant of any building or land
adjacent to a public sidewalk fail to remove therefrom any obstruction or
snow or ice or cover the ice with sand or some other suitable substance
within the periods prescribed by §§ 139-1 and 139-2, the Town may proceed
to have the required work completed, and the expense of such work shall
§ 139-1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 139-3
93:270
be assessed against the owner of the premises adjacent to the sidewalk
where such work is performed, and such expense shall be a lien against
such adjacent premises, provided that the Director of Finance causes to be
filed a certificate of lien in the Town Clerk's office within 60 days from the
completion of such work. The provisions of this section shall be in addition
to fines for violations.
§ 139-4. Placement of removed obstructions into public ways.
A. No person shall lay, throw, blow, place or plow or cause to be laid,
thrown, blown, placed or plowed on or into any public street or way
any snow or ice from any private property, public or private sidewalk
or public right-of-way. If, in the removal of snow or ice from any such
property, sidewalk or way, it is necessary to temporarily place snow or
ice on any public street or way, such snow or ice shall immediately be
removed from the public street or way by and at the expense of the
person causing such deposit.
B. No person in the process of clearing any property, sidewalk or way as
defined above shall:
(1) Leave the surface of adjoining public ways any less clear of snow
and ice than such person found the public way just previous to
commencement of clearance.
(2) Plow or deposit snow or ice on the side of embankments to public
ways so as to narrow or decrease the width of the traveled portion of
the public way as it existed just previous to such person's clearance.
(3) Plow or deposit snow or ice on that portion of the public right-of-way
that adjoins another person's property without the consent of that
person.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the official snow removal
operations of the Town of Wethersfield and the State of Connecticut.
D. The penalty for each violation or offense shall be $50, and each and
every twenty-four-hour period of failure or neglect to comply with the
provisions of this section shall be deemed a separate offense or violation.
§ 139-3 (RESERVED) § 139-4
93:271

ARTICLE II
Construction and Repair
§ 139-5. Council vote to install sidewalks; specifications.
The Council may vote to make and lay sidewalks on any public way at
the expense of the owners of lands abutting on that public way. Such
sidewalk shall be of such material, width, thickness and at such grade as
the Department of Public Works may prescribe.
§ 139-6. Conduct of work.
Subject to the approval of the Council, the Department of Public Works
shall adopt, from time to time, such regulations and specifications for the
conduct of the work provided for by this chapter as it may deem for the best
interests of the Town. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such
regulation or specification.
§ 139-7. Notice of hearing on project.
At least five days' notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper having
a circulation in the Town and by delivery through first-class mail to the last
known addresses of the owners of record before a hearing shall be held on
each sidewalk installation project. The notice shall include a description of
the project, an estimate of all costs of the project and an estimate of the cost
of the project to be assessed against each property owner.
§ 139-8. Installation orders.
Within five days of the passage of an order to install by the Council, a
true and attested copy of such order shall be delivered through certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last known addresses of the owners of
record.
§ 139-9. Compliance with order; costs.
Every such owner shall comply with such order within 30 days after receipt
of such notice unless the Council determines that an emergency exists, in
which case 10 calendar days shall be allowed to effect such work. Whenever
the owner of any premises abutting upon any public way in the Town
neglects or fails to install new sidewalks ordered by the Council, it shall be
the duty of the Public Works Director to install the same. At the conclusion
of such installation, the Public Works Director shall calculate the total cost
of the installation and the cost to be assessed against each property owner,
provided that no assessment against any owner shall exceed 1/2 of the
linear-foot cost times the number of linear feet of walk being assessed. The
Council shall establish and order the final assessment against each property
owner based upon the calculation made by the Public Works Director.
§ 139-5 (RESERVED) § 139-10
93:273
§ 139-10. Replacement and repair.
Owners of land fronting upon any street or highway, unless exempted by
ordinance of the Council, may be ordered by the Public Works Director to
replace, repair or otherwise correct defects in any sidewalk adjacent to his
land. Notice of the work required shall be delivered in the same manner as
notice provided for in § 139-7. Every such owner shall comply with the order
of the Public Works Director within 30 days after receipt of such notice,
unless the Public Works Director shall determine that an emergency exists,
in which case five calendar days shall be allowed to effect the work.
§ 139-11. Appeals from orders.
Any owner of land who is aggrieved by any order made in accordance
with § 139-10 may petition the Council for a recision or modification of the
aforesaid order. Such appeal shall be in writing and must be received by
the Council within five calendar days after notice has been received by said
owner. If such appeal shall be denied, such owner shall have 15 days from
the date of such rejection to effect such work.
§ 139-12. Correction by Town; costs.
Whenever the owner of any premises fronting on any public way in the Town
fails, neglects or refuses to repair, replace or otherwise correct defects in
an adjacent sidewalk and where no appeal has been taken from the order of
the Public Works Director, the Public Works Director shall have the defect
corrected and calculate the cost to be assessed against the owner.
§ 139-13. Calculation of assessments.
A. The unit cost for sidewalk construction shall be calculated as the total
project cost of paving and grading, divided by the total length of the
project.
B. The unit cost of each foot of length for sidewalk construction shall
be assessed, in accordance with § 139-9, upon the adjoining property,
except as follows:
(1) A residential lot with frontage upon more than one street shall be
assessed for the first sidewalk construction along any one side.
(2) The length of the assessment against any residential lot shall not
exceed the length of the shortest side along an approved street.
(3) A residential lot with frontage on two nonintersecting streets shall
not be assessed for the rear frontage.
C. A lot shall be considered to be a parcel of land that could not be
subdivided into additional residential lots under the applicable
dimension and area regulations of the Town.
§ 139-14. Assessment payments.
Upon delivery to the Finance Director by the Public Works Director of
any calculation of cost for replacing or repairing a sidewalk or of a final
assessment order by Council for construction of a sidewalk, the Finance
§ 139-10 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 139-14
93:274
Director is authorized to collect from the adjacent property owners the total
amount of such bill; provided, however, that the maximum assessment shall
be set at the actual unit of cost incurred by the Town in the last annual
sidewalk installation contract.
§ 139-15. Liens on property.
The cost of any work done or any final assessment levied under this chapter
shall be the subject of a lien in favor of the Town upon the premises liable
therefor. Such lien shall be filed within 60 calendar days from the date of
completion of such installation, replacement or repair. Date of completion
shall be considered to be the date of the billing sent to the adjacent owners.
§ 139-14 (RESERVED) § 139-15
93:275

ARTICLE III
Excavations
§ 139-16. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this Article, shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or organization of any kind.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway or other
public place located in the Town of Wethersfield, and shall include sidewalks
and driveway aprons.
§ 139-17. Permit and license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of any
kind in any of the streets in the Town of Wethersfield without first securing
a license and a permit therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 139-18. Licensing and insurance provisions.
A. All contractors excavating within Town streets shall be licensed. The
contractor applying for license shall furnish the Town with a valid
insurance certificate completed by his agent or insurer for the minimum
amount described as follows:
(1) Liability:
(a) Bodily injury limits of $500,000 each person/$500,000 each
accident.
(b) Property damage limits of $500,000 each accident.
B. The insurance shall cover the entire contract period as well as the
maintenance period, and in the event that the insurance expires during
this time, the contractor shall furnish the Town with a renewal certificate
at least 10 days prior to expiration.
C. The property damage insurance shall specifically cover damage to
underground pipes and conduits damaged while using powered or
mechanized equipment to excavate in the public right- of-way.
D. Before a license is granted, the applicant must file with the Engineering
Division a surety bond in the sum of not less than $10,000 made on a
form provided for that purpose. Said surety bond may be cash or written
by an indemnity or surety company authorized to transact business
in Connecticut and approved by the Town Manager or his agent.
Excavator's licenses are not transferable. Before any permit shall be
issued to open or excavate any street in the Town, the applicant shall pay
to the Town Engineer a permit fee in the amount of $35 to cover the cost
of inspection and other incidental services in connection therewith. Any
work performed without obtaining the necessary permits and licenses
as prescribed in this article shall result in a doubling of the fees as
contained in this section. Permits shall be valid for a period of 30 days.
If the estimated value of the work exceeds $10,000 in the opinion of
§ 139-16 (RESERVED) § 139-18
93:277
the Town Engineer, he may require the contractor make application for
multiple permits for the various components of the work. The Town
Engineer or his designated representative may at any time cancel or
suspend permits for just cause.
§ 139-19. Permits.
Any person who desires to make any opening or excavation in any of
the streets in the Town of Wethersfield shall make application to the
Engineering Division, in writing, for that purpose. Such an application
shall be made upon blanks to be furnished by the Town and shall contain
the name of the applicant, the exact location of the proposed opening or
excavation, the approximate size or depth thereof, the CALL BEFORE YOU
DIG permit number and an agreement on the part of the applicant that
the work shall be done in full compliance with all related ordinances of
the Town and the laws of the State of Connecticut and that the applicant
shall hold the Town harmless from and indemnify it against any and all
actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges for or by reason
of the proposed opening or excavation and all damages to persons or
property resulting in any manner therefrom or occurring in the prosecution
of corrected work or from any other related matter.
§ 139-20. Construction procedures.
A. Any person who opens or excavates any street in the Town shall
thoroughly and completely refill the opening or excavation, puddling and
ramming so as to prevent any settling thereafter; and shall restore the
surface to the same condition as it was before the opening or excavation,
and such restoration shall be in accordance with the specifications of the
Engineering Division of the Town of Wethersfield for roadway standards
of streets in the Town. The surface shall conform to the proper grade
and be of the same surface covering as the part of the thoroughfare
immediately adjoining the opening. If, within five years after the
restoration of the surface, defects appear, the contractor shall repair
the defect within 12 hours. If the Town Engineer or his representative
deems that an emergency exists, repairs will be completed by the most
expeditious means possible. All repair costs shall be reimbursed to the
Town or charged to the excavator's surety bond.
B. The backfill of trenches within the roadway limits and paved areas shall
be placed in layers not more than 12 inches thick and shall be thoroughly
compacted by tamping or other approved means to the satisfaction of the
Town Engineer or his designated agent. The materials used for backfill
shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the Town Engineer
or his agent, and if, in his opinion, the excavated material is unsuitable
for backfill, the contractor shall dispose of this unsuitable material and
substitute approved bank run gravel or other material in the amounts
and proportions specified by the Town Engineer. When the backfill has
been completed within 12 inches of the finished pavement on the surface
grade, the first eight inches shall be filled and compacted using an
approved grade of processed stone and then covered with four inches
of bituminous concrete placed in two lifts, as shown on the standard
§ 139-18 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 139-20
93:278
drawings of the Engineering Division. All trenches shall be covered with
a suitable bituminous patching material at the end of every workday.
C. Final patching shall be completed within six months and shall conform
to the Town of Wethersfield Standard Roadway Construction Drawings
and Specifications.44
D. All other work in connection with openings in any street, including
excavation, protection, refilling and temporary paving, shall be done by
the applicant at his expense, and all such work shall be subject to the
provisions of this article and to the supervision and approval of the Town
Engineer.
§ 139-21. Notification of Police and Fire Departments.
The contractor shall notify the Police Department and the Fire Department
24 hours in advance of making any excavation which requires blocking more
than 50% of the width of the street. Police protection, if required, shall be
at the expense of the contractor.
§ 139-22. Restrictions.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline
into the highway a distance greater than one foot beyond the center
line of the street before being refilled and the surface of the highway
restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel to the satisfaction
of the Town Engineer.
B. No more than 500 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at any
one time.
C. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with the
water mains, sewers or their lateral connections or any other subsurface
utility until permission of the proper authorities has been obtained.
D. The contractor shall at all times at his own expense preserve and protect
from injury all adjoining property by providing proper foundations and
taking other measures suitable for the purpose. The contractor shall,
at his own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences,
or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the
excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or
private property or highways resulting from his operations.
E. No tunneling to include pipe jacking and pneumatic or vibratory boring
or piercing tools shall be allowed without the express approval of the
Town Engineer and permission therefor endorsed upon the permit. The
backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be made only in the presence of
the Town Engineer or an inspector designated by him and shall be done
only in a method approved by him.
F. No contractor shall make a trench cut of over 48 inches in width without
first obtaining special permission from the Town Engineer or his
designated agent.
G. On all streets, a temporary paving satisfactory to the Town Engineer,
thoroughly bound and compacted, shall be installed flush with the
surface of the adjoining paving at the end of each work day.
44.Editor's Note: Said documents are on file in the Town offices.
§ 139-20 (RESERVED) § 139-22
93:279
H. As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly
cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris. The
contractor shall take necessary precautions to prevent and avoid dust
and to keep the streets clean each day. All cleanup operations shall be
accomplished at the expense of the contractor and shall be carried out
to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer.
I. Each contractor shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such
a manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to
the general public and occupants of neighboring property and in strict
compliance with the provisions of Chapter 105, Noise Control, of the
Code of the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 139-23. Safeguards.
During the making of any street excavation, every reasonable precaution
shall be taken by the applicant to keep the street in a safe and passable
condition both day and night. Unless emergency conditions exist,
construction or maintenance operations which will result in the narrowing
or closing of the travel portion of any arterial street will not be permitted
prior to start of peak hour traffic. Traffic-control devices must be set up
prior to the start of construction or maintenance operations and shall be
properly maintained during the time such special conditions exist. They
shall remain in place only as long as they are needed and shall be
immediately removed thereafter. Where operations are performed in stages,
there shall be in place only those devices that apply to the conditions
present during the stage in progress, and such devices shall be covered
or out of the view of traffic at times when they do not apply. Payments to
traffic flagmen or police where required by the Chief of Police or the Town
Engineer shall be the responsibility of the contractor.
§ 139-24. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for each violation or offense shall be $100 and each and every
twenty-four-hour period of failure or neglect to comply with the provisions
of this article shall be deemed a separate offense or violations. Licensed
contractors failing to obtain the required permit shall also be subject to
license suspension for a period of not more than 90 days.
§ 139-22 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 139-24
93:280
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 139-25. Enforcement.
This chapter, pertaining to Chapter 139, Articles I and III, has been
specifically designated for enforcement by citations issued by designated
municipal officers or employees, and the citation hearing procedure
established by Chapter 73, Article I, of the Code of the Town of Wethersfield
shall be followed.
§ 139-25 (RESERVED) § 139-25
93:281
Chapter 141
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 143. Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
A181.
§ 139-25 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 139-25
93:282
ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges and Connections to Stormwater Drainage Systems
[Adopted 5-27-2007 (Ch. 97 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 141-1. Purpose; intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut through the
regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to
the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This
article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants
into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply
with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are:
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by illicit stormwater discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
§ 141-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Employees or designees of the
Director of Public Works/Town Engineer.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance
of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
§ 141-1 (RESERVED) § 141-2
93:283
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 141-7 of this article.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by EPA [or by
a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable to an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants
may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and
other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute
to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved
and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including
but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, processed or domestic wastewater to
enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or conveyance had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by
an authorized enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
B.
§ 141-2 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 141-2
93:284
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
§ 141-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
§ 141-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Director of Public Works/Town Engineer shall administer, implement,
and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties
imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in
writing by the Director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or
entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
§ 141-5. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
article.
§ 141-6. Minimum standards; disclaimer.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 141-7. Discharge prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system, specifically dumping down catch
basins and manholes or watercourses, any materials, including but
§ 141-2 (RESERVED) § 141-7
93:285
not limited to pollutants or liquids containing any pollutants that
cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than stormwater.
(2) The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge
to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as
follows as per Section 3(a)(2) of the General Permit for the Discharge
of Stormwater from MS4, as amended from time to time.
(3) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article providing they contain no pollutants:
(a) Landscape irrigation;
(b) Uncontaminated groundwater discharges such as pumped
groundwater, foundation drains, water from crawl space pumps
and footing drains;
(c) Irrigation water;
(d) Lawn watering runoff;
(e) Residual street wash water;
(f) Discharges or flows from fire-fighting activities (except training);
and naturally occurring discharges such as rising groundwaters,
uncontaminated groundwater infiltration [as defined at 40 CFR
35.2005(20)], springs, diverted stream flows and flows from
riparian habitats and wetlands;
(g) Pool water discharge;
(h) Water main flushing.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency or the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection, provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and
provided that written approval by the Director of Public Works/Town
Engineer has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain
system.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
§ 141-8. Suspension of MS4 access.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations.
(1) The Director of Public Works/Town Engineer may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
§ 141-7 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 141-8
93:286
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to
the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply
with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized
enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United
States, or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
(1) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may
have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency
will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access.
The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a
reconsideration and hearing.
(2) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access
to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
§ 141-9. Industrial, commercial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial, commercial or construction activity
NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of
such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a
form acceptable to the Director of Public Works/Town Engineer prior to the
allowing discharges to the MS4.
§ 141-10. Monitoring of discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial, commercial or construction
activity.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Director of Public Works/Town Engineer shall be permitted to
enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article
as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
article. If a discharger has security measures in force that require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow
access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Director of Public Works/Town
Engineer ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of inspection, sampling, and the examination and copying of records
that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to
discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties
as defined by state and federal law.
(3) The Director of Public Works/Town Engineer shall have the right to
set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the
opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The Director of Public Works/Town Engineer has the right to require
the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
§ 141-8 (RESERVED) § 141-10
93:287
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at
all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger
at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
Director of Public Works/Town Engineer and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director of Public Works/Town
Engineer access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater
discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of
a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated
with industrial, commercial or construction activity commits an
offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency
reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this article.
(7) If the Director of Public Works/Town Engineer has been refused
access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is
discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is
a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or
any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized
enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 141-11. Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater
pollutants by use of BMPs.
The Director of Public Works/Town Engineer will adopt requirements
identifying Best Management Practices for any activity, operation, or facility
that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater,
the storm drain system, or waters of the state. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials
or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any
person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the
source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial,
commercial, or construction activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall
be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) or stormwater
management plan (SMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of
the NPDES permit.
§ 141-10 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 141-12
93:288
§ 141-12. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, and other obstacles that would
pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
§ 141-13. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain
system, or waters of the State of Connecticut, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in
person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Director of Public Works/Town Engineer within
three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited
materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the
owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence.
Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 141-14. Enforcement.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever the Director of Public Works/Town
Engineer finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet
a requirement of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may
order compliance by a written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, sampling, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
§ 141-12 (RESERVED) § 141-14
93:289
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
§ 141-15. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received
by the Director of Public Works/Town Engineer within 15 days from the date
of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Agency shall take place within 45 days from the date of
receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Agency shall be final.
§ 141-16. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15
days of the decision of the Inland Wetland and Watercourses Commission
upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then
representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the
subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the governmental agency or designated
contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
§ 141-17. Cost of abatement of violation.
Within 15 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs.
The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount
of the assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid within a
timely manner as determined by the decision of the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission or by the expiration of the time in which to file an
appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property
and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable
to the Town of Wethersfield by reason of such violation. The liability shall
be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 18% per
annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the first day following
discovery of the violation.
§ 141-18. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized
enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
§ 141-14 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 141-18
93:290
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations
or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
§ 141-19. Compensatory actions.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a
violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, watercourse cleanup, etc.
§ 141-20. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 141-21. Penalties for offenses.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be
liable for fines and penalties to the full extent of the law. The Town may
recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
§ 141-22. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
§ 141-18 (RESERVED) § 141-22
93:291
Chapter 143
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 63.
Environmental Code — See Ch. 75.
Parkland dedications — See Ch. 111.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 130.
Excavations — See Ch. 139, Art. III.
Zoning — See Ch. 167.
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
A181.
§ 141-22 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 141-22
93:292
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 143-1. Purpose.
For the purpose of providing for orderly growth of the Town of Wethersfield
and establishing standards for the design and construction of streets and
improvements in new subdivisions and in accordance with the provisions
of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, the Planning and
Zoning Commission of the Town of Wethersfield hereby adopts the following
regulations for the subdivision of land, to become effective July 8, 1966.
§ 143-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of interpretation and enforcement of these regulations,
certain words contained herein shall be defined as follows:
COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of
Wethersfield.
ENGINEERING DIVISION — The Engineering Division of the Town of
Wethersfield.
RESUBDIVISION — A change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision or resubdivision if such change affects any street layout shown
on such map or affects any area reserved thereon for public use or
diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional
building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the
approval or recording of such map.
STREET — Includes and means streets, avenues, lanes or any right-of-way
dedicated or used for the purpose of public or private travel and, for the
purpose of these regulations, shall meet the minimum requirements set
forth in § 143-6.[Amended 6-18-1990]
SUBDIVIDER — The owner of record at the time of filing of an approved
subdivision plan or the person holding an option to purchase such land or
an agreement to purchase such land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more
parts or lots made subsequent to the adoption of subdivision regulations for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development
expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural
purposes, and shall include resubdivision.[Amended 6-18-1990]
§ 143-1 (RESERVED) § 143-2
93:293

ARTICLE II
Requirements for Subdivision or Resubdivision
§ 143-3. Plan required.
No subdivision of land shall be made and no land in any subdivision shall be
sold or offered for sale and no street or utility construction shall be started
until a plan of subdivision, prepared in accordance with the requirements of
these regulations, has been approved by the commission and has been filed
in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 143-4. Effect on streets. [Amended 6-18-1990]
In the case of subdivisions requiring construction of new streets, any
existing street which provides either frontage to new lots or access to
new streets shall meet the minimum standards established and defined in
§ 143-6. Where a subdivision requires expenditures by the Town to improve
existing streets to conform to minimum requirements, the Commission may
disapprove such subdivision until the Town Council has approved such
expenditures or until other provisions have been made to assure that such
existing streets will be improved to the required minimum standards.
§ 143-5. Extension of public water.
The Commission shall require extension of public water to all subdivisions.
§ 143-6. Street specifications. [Amended 6-18-1990]
For the purpose of these regulations, streets shall meet the following
minimum requirements:
A. The layout of the street right-of-way shall have been approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and shall have at least one
intersection with another Town street or state highway.
B. The street right-of-way shall have a minimum width of 50 feet.
C. The street shall be one that is not under consideration for
discontinuance or realignment by the authority having jurisdiction.
D. The street alignment and grades shall be in harmony with existing and
proposed streets and the pilot plan of development of the Town and shall
conform substantially to these regulations.
E. Street construction (subbase and base courses) shall be sufficient to
carry safely and adequately potential future traffic computed on the
basis of land areas to be served and population density based on zoning
requirements.
F. Storm drainage disposal shall be adequate for present uses, and
additional storm drainage created by new subdivisions shall not increase
the Town's obligation for additional storm drainage disposal on existing
streets or other private or public lands.
G. State highways shall be considered to meet the above standards.
H. No subdivision containing a provision for private streets shall be
approved.
§ 143-3 (RESERVED) § 143-7
93:295
§ 143-7. Land to be usable for building purposes.
All land to be subdivided shall be of or shall be capable of being properly
changed, in the judgment of the Commission, to such a character that it
can be used for building purposes without danger to public health or safety
or to the environment. Land subject to periodic flooding, poor drainage or
other hazardous conditions shall not be subdivided. Land with inadequate
capacity for sanitary sewage disposal shall not be subdivided unless
connected to public sewers. Plans for the subdivision of land shall conform
to all ordinances and regulations of the Town of Wethersfield, the Town plan
of development, as may be amended, the overall storm drainage plan of the
Town and all applicable state laws and regulations.
§ 143-8. Sidewalks.
Provision shall be made for sidewalks in all subdivisions. Construction of
sidewalks is required on the subdivision side of existing streets without
sidewalks and on both sides of new subdivision streets, except that no
sidewalk will be required on permanent dead-end streets less than 600 feet
in total length as measured from the street line of the intersecting street to
the center of the cul-de-sac.
§ 143-9. Water and drainage provisions.
A. All subdivisions shall make adequate provisions for water supply (both
for domestic and for fire-fighting purposes), hydrants, stormwater and
sanitary sewage disposal and required utilities and improvements. All
utilities shall be installed underground. All underground utilities shall be
installed within the right-of-way according to specifications outlined in
these regulations and as shown on Drawings No. 1 and 2 of § 143-43.
Conduits, wires, etc., for all underground utilities, whether for
immediate or future use, shall be installed during the construction of the
roadway.
B. In subdivisions to which underground utilities are to be furnished from
a public source, all necessary mains, branch offsets to each lot and
fire hydrants shall be installed by the subdivider, as approved by the
corporation or municipal department having jurisdiction, and to the
satisfaction of the recognized authorities of the Town and without
expense to the Town.
C. An adequate subsurface stormwater drainage system for the entire
subdivision area shall be provided, unless, in the judgment of the
Commission, the natural topography and/or easy access to natural
watercourses makes storm drainage unnecessary. Storm drainage shall
be carried to existing watercourses or connect to existing storm drains
and shall conform to the Town's overall storm drainage plans.
§ 143-10. Streetlighting.
A complete streetlighting system, including excavations, cable, poles and
fixtures approved by the operating utility company, shall be installed
without cost to the Town. All costs relating to the installation of this system,
§ 143-7 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 143-10
93:296
including all energy charges incurred until the acceptance of the public
utilities and improvements by the Town Council, shall be those of the
developer. Streetlights shall be energized prior to street acceptance where,
in the opinion of the Town, they are required for reasons of safety. The
developer shall make arrangements with the utility company to have all
streetlight costs charged at the overhead rate.
§ 143-11. Erosion and sedimentation control.
An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be provided as part of any
application for subdivision where the disturbed area of development is more
than 1/2 acre. Such plan shall show proper measures to control erosion
and reduce sedimentation as set forth in the Connecticut Guidelines for
Soil and Erosion Control, published by the Connecticut Council on Soil and
Water Conservation, January 1985, as may be amended, and the specific
requirements of § 143-24.
§ 143-12. Passive solar energy.
A plan of subdivision shall make provision for use of passive solar energy
techniques or demonstrate that such techniques have been considered
in the development of the plan. Site design techniques for passive solar
energy use shall include but not be limited to house orientation, street and
lot layout, vegetation, natural and man-made topographical features and
protection of solar access within the development.
§ 143-13. Sanitary sewage disposal.
A. The subdivider shall install a complete sanitary sewer system under the
supervision of the Metropolitan District Commission.
B. The subdivider shall install laterals from the sewer in the street to the
street property line of each building lot.
C. Any habitable buildings constructed in the subdivision shall have house
connections installed and shall have such connections extended inside
the building.
§ 143-14. Open space generally.
A. Except as provided in § 143-15C, a subdivision of any tract or parcel of
land containing 10 acres or more shall provide public open space for
parks and playgrounds or for conservation, in places deemed proper by
the Commission, at the proportionate rate of one acre for 25 families.
Where a subdivision containing less than 15 acres of land is located less
than 1/2 mile from and readily accessible to public open space reserved
for such purposes and where there are no brooks, streams or other
natural features requiring preservation in open space, the Commission
may waive this requirement.
B. When only a part of such tract is to be developed immediately and the
subdivider shall agree to dedicate an area of land in the undeveloped
portion of such tract equal to the requirements for open space in the
developed portion and shall grant to the Town an option to accept such
dedication when such undeveloped portion is hereafter subdivided, then
§ 143-10 (RESERVED) § 143-14
93:297
the Commission may waive the requirements for immediate provision of
open space in a subdivision which is a part of a larger tract of land.
C. Such open spaces shall abut or have direct access to a public street
through a right-of-way dedicated to public use. The right-of-way shall not
be included in the required playground area, shall be at least 15 feet
wide and shall be leveled off in a manner suitable for foot and vehicle
traffic, with a maximum grade of 12%.
D. When a property line of a subdivision abuts an existing public open
space, the Commission may require the new public open space lines to
form a continuation of the existing area to provide a single large unified
area.
E. No required public open space shall abut any Town boundary line of the
Town of Wethersfield.
F. Required public open space shall be contained in a rectangle whose
average greatest dimension is not more than three times its lesser
dimension wherever possible.
G. Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) Any subdivision or resubdivision application which requires a
provision for public or private open space under the terms of this
section shall contain a site improvement plan for such public or
private open space, and such plan shall be subject to the approval of
the Commission.
(2) Except as otherwise permitted, in writing, by the Commission, there
shall be no depositing, dumping or storage of waste or other natural
or man-made materials, supplies or equipment on any subdivision
land designated as open space. No work nor removal nor filling shall
be done nor shall the existing natural characteristics of open space
land be altered from its original condition until a site improvement
plan, prepared by a competent professional person, shall have been
approved by the Commission.
(3) Land to be used as public or private open space shall be left in
condition for the purpose intended. Undesirable growth and debris
shall be removed from all such areas. Wooded and brook areas
should be left natural, where appropriate. Open spaces shall be
graded to properly dispose of surface water and shall be seeded in a
manner directed by the Commission.
(4) Any security deposit or bond for the completion of work shown on
the public utilities and improvement plan shall also be available for
completion of public or private open space requirements in the event
of a default of performance by the subdivider or his successor.
§ 143-15. Open space in Special Residence Zones.
A. In addition to land designated by the Commission as parks and
playgrounds under § 143-14, a subdivision plan submitted under the
Special Residence Zone shall provide additional land dedicated for parks
and playgrounds, or conservation in places deemed proper by the
Commission.
B. The purposes of such open space are to provide, through the design and
layout of streets, lots and open spaces:
§ 143-14 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 143-15
93:298
(1) Conservation and improvement of natural features and green areas,
including areas along roads, the banks of rivers, streams and lakes
and ridgetops to provide visual barriers to restrict urban sprawl.
(2) Provision, in appropriate areas of population concentration, of areas
of land for active recreational use.
(3) Retention of fish and wildlife refuge areas and nature observation
areas; protection of the quality of water bodies.
(4) Protection of natural drainageways and floodwater retention areas.
(5) The provision of adequate controls to assure the permanence of open
space use in areas so designated, through public acquisition or by
easement or other suitable type of agreement.
C. Such areas shall contain not less than 10% of the gross area of the
subdivision, and the proposed use thereof, whether public or private,
shall be stipulated on the subdivision plan.
D. Such area, where approved by the Commission, may be retained in
private ownership, in which case the use of the open space shall not be
prohibited to any residents of the subdivision.
E. Where private ownership of open space may be approved by the
Commission, such open space along watercourses and water bodies
shall be subject to easements to the Town to permit maintenance to
preserve stormwater flow.
F. No single area required above shall contain less than one acre except
that where, in the judgment of the Commission, a smaller area is
appropriate to a particular subdivision and provides for the most
desirable subdivision of land.
G. No subdivision containing a provision for private open space shall be
approved unless restrictive covenants burdening all the related land
in the subdivision have been approved by the Commission, and the
approved subdivision map shall not be released by the Commission for
filing with the Town Clerk unless such approved restrictive covenants
are filed simultaneously with the subdivision map and unless such
restrictive covenants have priority over all other interests in the land not
specifically excused by the Commission.
H. In order to verify that the restrictive covenants referred to in Subsection
G are not subordinate to any unexcused encumbrances, the subdivider
shall provide a certificate of title signed by an attorney and dated as of
the date of filing of such restrictive covenants.
§ 143-16. Reserved strips.
No privately owned reserved strips will be permitted which control access
to land dedicated to public use or which may be so dedicated or which limit
or control development potential of or access to private lands.
§ 143-17. Natural features.
Due regard shall be given to the preservation and potential enhancement
of existing natural features, large trees, scenic points and other assets of a
community nature.
§ 143-15 (RESERVED) § 143-18
93:299
§ 143-18. Commission approval for certain lots.
Where the total of lots under separate ownership and lots occupied by
buildings is greater than 80% of the original number of lots in a subdivision,
no plan of resubdivision that results in a lot size substantially smaller than
the typical lot originally established shall be approved except by a 2/3
affirmative vote of the Commission.
§ 143-18 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 143-18
93:300
ARTICLE III
Procedures and Plan Requirements
§ 143-19. Subdivider to be familiar with regulations.
Before submitting a proposal for the subdivision of land, the subdivider shall
familiarize himself with these regulations and with any existing or proposed
plans of the Commission or other Town authorities in the neighborhood of
the land to be subdivided that will have an influence on the street and/or lot
layout and the installation of utilities and storm drainage.
§ 143-20. Proposal to be submitted; application. [Amended
6-18-1990]
A proposal for the subdivision of land shall be submitted to the Commission
at any regular meeting of the Commission and shall include all of the
required information, maps, data, application and fees. The engineering
division may receive, for the developer's convenience and for administration
review as to completeness, an application for subdivision approval prior to
the regular Commission meeting, provided that the date of submission shall
be considered to be the next following regular meeting of the Commission
or 35 days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
§ 143-21. Application fee. [Amended 6-6-2005]
The fee for each application shall be $100 or $50 per lot, whichever sum is
greater.
§ 143-22. Subdivisions within inland wetlands.
An applicant with a subdivision involving land regulated as an inland
wetland or watercourse shall file an application with the Wethersfield Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Commission within 10 days after filing such
application with the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall give due consideration to any report filed with it
by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission prior to rendering a
decision on such application.
§ 143-23. Public hearing.
The Commission may hold a public hearing regarding any subdivision
proposal if, in its judgment, the specific circumstances require such action.
No plan of resubdivision shall be acted upon by the Commission without a
public hearing.
§ 143-24. Erosion and sedimentation control.
A plan for erosion and sedimentation control shall contain but not be limited
to:
A. A narrative describing:
(1) The development.
§ 143-19 (RESERVED) § 143-24
93:301
(2) The schedule for grading and construction activities, including:
(a) The start and completion dates.
(b) The sequence of grading and construction activities.
(c) The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion
and sediment control measures.
(d) The sequence for final stabilization of the project site.
(3) The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control
measures and stormwater management facilities.
(4) The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment
control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(5) The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil
erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater
management facilities.
(6) The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion
and sediment control measures and stormwater management
facilities.
B. A Site Plan Map at a sufficient scale to show:
(1) The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties.
(2) The existing and proposed topography, including soil types,
wetlands, watercourses and water bodies.
(3) The existing structures on the project site, if any.
(4) The proposed area alterations, including cleared, excavated, filled
or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if
applicable, new property lines.
(5) The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and
sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(6) The sequence of grading and construction activities.
(7) The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and
sediment control measures.
(8) The sequence for final stabilization of the development site.
C. Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the
applicant or requested by the Commission or its designated agent.
§ 143-25. Plan to be certified; inspections.
A. Where an erosion and sedimentation control plan is required, no building
permits may be issued and no site work may be started unless and until
the erosion and sedimentation control plan is certified by the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Wethersfield.
Certification shall be based upon compliance with the principles,
minimum standards and methods contained in the Connecticut
Guidelines for Soil and Water Conservation, above, as judged
appropriate by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission. That
Commission may refer an erosion and sedimentation control plan to the
Hartford County Soil and Water Conservation District for review prior to
acting on a request for certification.
B. Measures undertaken in accordance with a certified erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be inspected periodically during
development to assure proper installation and maintenance. Failure to
install or maintain control measures in a manner consistent with the
§ 143-24 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 143-25
93:302
certified plan shall be grounds for issuance of a cease and desist order
applicable to those construction activities to which defective or deficient
control measures pertain.
§ 143-26. Subdivision plan specifications.
A. A subdivision plan shall contain all of the information required in
§ 143-41 of Article VI of the Engineering Division of the Town of
Wethersfield, except that where all of a parcel of land on an existing
street is subdivided into not more than three lots, only the applicable
data in § 143-41 of Article VI need be furnished.
B. A subdivision plan shall be submitted in 20 copies, blue-line paper prints
drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet on the following sheet sizes:
24 inches by 36 inches, 24 inches by 18 inches or 18 inches by 12 inches.
Where more than one sheet is required, a key map at a scale of one inch
equaling not more than 200 feet shall be included on each sheet, with
the lots shown on the 40-scale map identified on the key map.
C. The subdivision plan shall be drawn in ink on 0.003-mil Mylar or a
reproduction of equivalent quality. Two copies shall be furnished to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, at the subdivider's expense. Affixed to
this plan shall be a transparent copy of the letters of approval from all
commissions and boards acting on said subdivision.
D. Application for approval of a subdivision plan shall cover all of the land
in a tract under one ownership on the effective date of this regulation.
[Amended 6-18-1990]
§ 143-27. Public improvement and utilities map.
A plan-profile map or maps shall be considered a part of the Subdivision
Map and shall contain all of the information required in Article VI of
the "Design and Construction Standards for Public Improvements" of the
Engineering Division of the Town of Wethersfield. Elevations shall be based
on an indicated bench mark referencing metropolitan district datum. Plans
and profiles shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet horizontally
and one inch equals four feet vertically. Said map shall be no longer than 36
inches. The original shall be drawn in ink and a reproducible Mylar supplied
to the Town of equivalent quality at the subdivider's expense.
§ 143-28. Drainage analysis maps.
A drainage analysis map based on Coast and Geodetic Survey (CGS) datum
showing the tributary watershed at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet shall
be furnished to the Engineering Division.
§ 143-29. Consideration and approval of plans.
A. No subdivision proposal shall be approved until all the required plans,
maps and data are complete to the satisfaction of the Commission and
Engineering Division.
B. The Commission shall approve, modify and approve or disapprove any
subdivision application or maps and plans submitted therewith within
65 days after the public hearing thereon or, if no public hearing is held,
§ 143-25 (RESERVED) § 143-29
93:303
within 65 days after the submission thereof, unless the applicant shall
consent, in writing, to an extension of such time limit. The Commission
shall include in its minutes the reasons for disapproval of a subdivision
plan.
C. Upon approval of a subdivision plan, the Chairman or Clerk shall sign
the original linen or linens, and the Engineering Division will procure the
necessary copies for the Town at the subdivider's expense.
§ 143-30. Filing of approved plan. [Amended 2-5-1991]
A. Notice of the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission
concerning a subdivision application shall be sent to the applicant by
certified mail within 15 days after the decision is rendered. Within 30
days after the Planning and Zoning Commission approves a subdivision,
the subdivider shall submit to the Engineering Division two three-mil
black line Mylar transparencies of the subdivision map with affixed
transparencies of letters of approval of all Town boards and commissions
having rendered decisions on matters related to the subdivision and
bearing a block for the endorsement and date of endorsement by the
Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission. Failure of the
subdivider to submit the two Mylar transparencies of the approved
subdivision map within 30 days of the date of the Commission's approval
shall cause such approval to become null and void.
B. Upon receipt, the Engineering Division shall submit the Mylar
transparencies for endorsement by the Chairman of the Commission.
The subdivision map shall be available to the applicant for filing as of
the date of endorsement, subject to the fulfillment of the requirements
of § 143-31, and shall be considered delivered as of the date of
endorsement. As required by the Connecticut General Statutes,
approved plans for subdivision must be placed on file in the office of
the Town Clerk within 90 days of the date the Mylar transparencies are
endorsed by the Chairman of the Commission.
§ 143-31. Final Subdivision Map. [Amended 2-5-1991]
The Engineering Division shall hold the endorsed Mylar transparencies of
an approved plan of subdivision until the subdivider submits the following
to the Engineering Division:
A. A warranty deed covering all roads, easements, open space, etc., to the
Town.
B. A certificate of title for the above.
C. A letter stating that the subdivider acknowledges that although the
Town may record the deed and take legal title to the public utility
improvements, the recording and acceptance of the deed will not
constitute formal acceptance of these improvements, which acceptance
can only be accomplished by action of the Town Council; the subdivider
will accept a reconveyance of any conveyance if the Town so elects at
any time up to the time of formal acceptance of the improvements by the
Town Council.
D. A performance bond or bank book (including a signed withdrawal slip) if
building permits are desired.
§ 143-29 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 143-31
93:304
E. An executed declaration of restrictions and covenants covering the
private open space, if any, in a form acceptable to the Commission.
F. If the subdivider chooses to proceed under § 143-34A of the subdivision
regulations, he must also submit a covenant prohibiting the sale of any
lots until property surety is posted for that lot. Surety submitted must be
approved by the Town Manager as well as the Commission.
§ 143-32. Submission to Town Attorney; signing by Commission
Chairman.
A. The Engineering Division will submit all the items mentioned in § 143-31
above to the Town Attorney for his review and approval. It is
recommended that the subdivider's attorney contact the Town Attorney
prior to drafting the above documents.
B. Upon approval of the Town Attorney of the items referred to in § 143-31,
the Engineering Division will release the endorsed Mylar transparencies
to the subdivider for filing. [Amended 2-5-1991]
§ 143-33. Time extensions.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may extend the time for filing of plans
for subdivision for two additional periods of 90 days, and the plans shall
remain valid until the expiration of such extended time.
§ 143-34. Securities and bonds.
A. The Commission, in order to assure the Town of the completion of all
work and installations required by these regulations, the public utilities
and improvements plan of subdivision, the public or private open space
plan and the stipulations of any subdivision approval, may require any
one of the following methods for securing completion, or any reasonable
combination of them:
(1) The completion of all or a specified portion of such work and
installation before any lot of a subdivision is sold and before any
building permits are issued. Notice of any requirement under this
subsection will be filed in the land records at the time the
Subdivision Map is filed.
(2) The deposit with the Finance Director of the Town of cash or of
an assigned savings bank account in the name of the Town of
Wethersfield in an amount to be specified by the Commission but
in no event to exceed 110% of the cost of completing the required
work and installations as estimated by the Engineering Division of
the Town.
(3) A bond with surety and conditions satisfactory to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the Director of Public Works or his designee
and the Town Attorney, provided that no bond shall be acceptable
where, by its provisions, any sums would necessarily be expended
by the Town in order to liquidate the amount of any default that may
occur. The terms shall be for a period as specified by the Commission
and may be extended by the Town Planning and Zoning Commission
upon approval of the developer and surety company.
§ 143-31 (RESERVED) § 143-34
93:305
(4) An assessment method to be secured by lien against all the real
property of the project or such parts as the Commission specifies.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall refer the matter of security
for completion of required work and installation to the Director of Public
Works or his designee for his recommendation and/or comments.
C. Each security provision in this article shall make provision for a
management fee to be paid to the Town of Wethersfield, which fee shall
be 10% of the cost of completing any required work or installation after
default by the subdivider or his successor.
D. The Commission shall specify with particularity in its minutes the details
of any security requirements and shall specify the time or times within
which such requirements are to be satisfied.
E. A performance bond and any cash security deposit filed pursuant to
these regulations shall not be released until the Engineering Division
has certified completion of the public utilities improvements and
applicable public or private open space improvements in substantial
accordance with the requirements of the subdivision approval and the
street or streets and public open space and any required easements have
been legally accepted by the Town. Application for release or reduction
of the security deposit and performance bond shall be made to the
Engineering Division for recommendation and/or advice. A reduction
of any bond or cash security deposit will be allowed only if, after
Engineering Division inspection, the Commission finds that the
remaining security or bond is adequate to cover the then estimated cost
of completion, plus 10% of such cost. In no event shall security delivered
to the Town for completion of public improvements be reduced below
25% of the amount of the total cost of improvements, as shown on the
cost estimate prepared by the Engineering Division, until acceptance
of the road and all public improvements by the Town Council has been
obtained. The decision on any application for a release or reduction of a
security deposit or bond shall be made by the Commission.
F. Upon acceptance of the public utility improvements and release of the
bond by the Town Council, the subdivider will post a maintenance bond
with the Town Manager to be in force for a period of one year. The
amount of the maintenance bond will be 10% of the total cost of the
public utilities and improvements, excluding sewer, water, gas,
electricity, telephone and any other similar utility.
G. The subdivider, if directed by the Town, shall not install the two-inch
dense graded bituminous concrete wearing course until 80% of the
approved lots have received certificates of occupancy.
H. If the Town so orders, the subdivider shall have the option of negotiating
with the Town for the purpose of having the Town accept payment in
lieu of placing the finished pavement. The Town would then accept
responsibility for the installation of this pavement.
§ 143-34 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 143-34
93:306
ARTICLE IV
Improvements and Modifications
§ 143-35. Streets.
A. Proposed streets shall be appropriate to the topography and location
and shall conform to the objectives of the plan of development and the
Commission's tentative street layouts, where they are developed. Street
patterns shall give due consideration to contours and nature features.
Where required by the Commission, provision shall be made for the
extension of the street pattern to abutting undeveloped property.
B. Permanent dead-end streets shall generally not exceed 600 feet in length
as measured from the street line of the intersecting street to the center
of the cul-de-sac. Such streets shall terminate in a turnaround not less
than 100 feet in diameter with an island of natural vegetation or
landscaping in the center not less than 30 feet in diameter and providing
a paved circumferential lane not less than 25 feet wide.
C. Temporary dead-end streets, where required by the Commission or
where indicated on the plan, may exceed 600 feet in length but in
general shall provide required street frontage for not more than 20
dwellings. In such cases, the full width of the right-of-way to the
subdivision property line shall be dedicated to the Town, but the Town
will require only an easement to the segments to the turnaround outside
the normal road right-of-way width.
D. The easement on segments of the turnaround shall provide that the Town
or its agent may enter the property within such segments for the purpose
of continuing and removing turnaround improvement when the street is
to be extended.
E. Extensions.
(1) When a street ending in a temporary cul-de-sac is to be extended
as a continuance street, the subdivider constructing such street
extension shall be responsible for and shall include in the bond all
work related thereto, including:
(a) Removal outside of the final paved road right-of-way of all road
materials and facilities not needed and replacement with earth
loam and seeding as required.
(b) Extension of all utilities and improvements, including sidewalks,
where required.
(c) Repair and replacement of any change on public or private
property directly related to the removal of the cul-de-sac, in
accordance with Town standards and subject to the concurrence
of the abutting property owner to the extent that his permission
is needed to complete the cul-de-sac repair and replacement on
his private property outside the temporary easement.
(2) The above work shall be completed within two months from the date
of notification by the Director of Public Works certifying that the
existing cul-de-sac is no longer needed.
F. Where a street may now or in the future carry other than the
neighborhood traffic and where shown on the plan of development and
tentative overall street layouts, a right-of-way width greater than the
§ 143-35 (RESERVED) § 143-35
93:307
required minimum may be required, and such requirements will be
determined by the Commission during review of the preliminary plan.
No street shall have a right-of-way width less than 50 feet.
G. The subdivision plan and the public improvement and utility map of
any proposed subdivision shall show all work required to connect and
complete the improvements and utilities between proposed street
pattern and any nonimproved connecting street in any existing
subdivision.
§ 143-36. Lot layout.
Layout of lots shall conform to modern standard practices and shall be
appropriate for the intended construction. Corner lots shall have extra
width to permit a front yard on each street, which will be required in all new
subdivisions. Wherever possible, key lots shall be used at the narrow end
of a block. Side lot lines shall generally be at right angles to straight street
lines or radial to curved street lines. Except in cases of unusual topography
or property lines, through lots bounding on two generally parallel streets
will not be permitted.
§ 143-37. Planting of trees.
All dead and diseased trees shall be removed from land to be dedicated to
public use. Existing trees in land required for public open space, § 143-14
shall be preserved unless otherwise directed by the Commission. Existing
trees shall be preserved whenever feasible, and where no trees are
preserved in the front yard, each lot shall have two trees of not less than
1 1/2 inches' caliper, of a species approved by the Town Tree Warden,
planted not less than 10 feet inside the sidewalk, between the sidewalk
and the building line. At the request of a single lot owner other than the
developer, the provision requiring two trees per lot may be waived for his
lot.
§ 143-38. Construction specifications.
A. Streets.
(1) Streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way.
(2) Streets or curbs, gutters and sidewalks, where required, shall be
constructed in accordance with the best modern practice, as more
fully described in Design and Construction Standards for Public
Improvements of the Engineering Division of the Town of
Wethersfield, which are included herein as § 143-42 and the
materials shall meet the specifications of the State of Connecticut
Department of Transportation.
B. All storm drainage lines and structures shall be constructed in
accordance with the best modern practice, as more fully described
in Design and Construction Standards for Public Improvements of the
Engineering Division of the Town of Wethersfield, which are included
herein as § 143-43, and materials shall meet the specifications of the
State of Connecticut Department of Transportation.
§ 143-35 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 143-38
93:308
C. Sanitary sewer and water installation shall be made in accordance with
the standards and requirements of the Metropolitan District
Commission.
D. Where a site grading plan is required by the Commission, land shall be
brought to final grades shown, and lot grades exceeding 5% or subject
to erosion shall be stabilized with an existing cover crop.
§ 143-39. Modification conditions.
A. Where, in the Planning and Zoning Commission's judgment, the size
of the subdivision or specific conditions of topography, property lines
or proposals for development of adjoining properties create conditions
limiting the most effective subdivision of land, the Commission may
waive or modify certain requirements under these regulations by a 3/
4 vote of all the members of the Commission, provided that the public
interest and safety are not adversely affected and land in the subdivision
can be more effectively subdivided. The Commission shall state upon its
records the reason for which a waiver is granted in each case.
B. Where conditions governing a subdivision or the time of year
construction indicate, in the judgment of the Engineering Division, minor
modifications in construction materials and techniques, the Engineering
Division may modify specific construction requirements contained in
§§ 143-41, 143-42 and 143-43 herein, in the interest of obtaining better
work and/or materials, provided that such modifications shall not
increase the scope of the work or conflict with the general purpose and
intent of these regulations.
§ 143-38 (RESERVED) § 143-39
93:309

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 143-40. Enforcement.
These regulations shall be enforced under the provisions of any ordinance
enacted in accordance with the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision
of 1958, as amended.
§ 143-40 (RESERVED) § 143-40
93:311

ARTICLE VI
Design and Construction Standards
§ 143-41. Data required for subdivision of land. [Amended
6-18-1990]
The following design and construction standards are hereby adopted and
made part of the subdivision regulations of the Town of Wethersfield:
A. Subdivision plan. A subdivision plan shall be so designated in the title
block and shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet in
accordance with Class A-2 requirements of the Code of Recommended
Practice for Standards of Accuracy of Surveys and Maps by the
Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors, Inc., and certified by a
registered land surveyor in the State of Connecticut. The plan shall show
two coordinate ties referenced to the National Geodetic System and shall
contain the following:
(1) The name of the owner or owners or assignee, subdivider, North
point, scale of map and date and revised dates.
(2) Boundaries of the subdivision from a boundary survey conforming
to Class D, as set forth by the Connecticut Association of Land
Surveyors, Inc.
(3) Total acreage of the parcel to the nearest tenth of an acre.
(4) Names of abutting property owners and property lines abutting the
subdivision boundaries and proposed street names.
(5) Indication of zones and zone boundary lines.
(6) Topography, flow line of watercourses and existing structures and
culverts.
(7) Layout of existing and new streets, buildings and lots, public open
spaces, easements and encroachment lines with approximate
dimensions.
(8) Proposals for furnishing improvements and utilities.
(9) In land of difficult topography, where most of the lots are to be
developed by the subdivider, a preliminary site grading plan may be
required.
(10) Where sewage disposal is proposed through septic tanks, seepage
and groundwater tests shall be made to the satisfaction of the
Director of Health, whose report thereon shall be submitted with
the preliminary study.
(11) Data on streets, as defined in § 143-2 above, shall be complete.
(12) A key map at a scale of one inch equaling not more than 200 feet
shall show the street or streets giving access to the subdivision
extending to the intersections of at least two other streets.
(13) Layout of streets to be constructed with accurate placement of
merestones at all PT (point of tangency) and PC (point of curvature)
points and within sight of the next nearest merestone. The
merestone is to be set in accordance with Class A-2 of the
Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors, Inc., and under the
direction of a Connecticut registered land surveyor. Merestones
shall be supplied by the Town of Wethersfield at the developer's
expense.
§ 143-41 (RESERVED) § 143-41
93:313
(14) Street names.
(15) All easements, rights-of-way and encroachment lines.
(16) Building lines on all lots and side and rear yard lines on odd-shaped
lots. On curved streets, the chord distance of the building line (front
yard) shall be shown.
(17) When more than one sheet is required, a key map of the entire
subdivision shall be included on each sheet.
B. The subdivider shall provide that all maps which show horizontal and
vertical dimensions data and the design of street patterns and lot layouts
and the staking of such data in the field shall be performed by a land
surveyor registered in Connecticut. The design of public improvements
and utilities shall be performed by a professional engineer registered in
Connecticut, and such professional engineer shall:
(1) Supervise construction of all improvements and utilities shown on
such plans; and
(2) Submit for approval to the Engineering Division an as-built drawing
upon completion of all public improvements. This plan shall be on
a 0.003-mil Mylar and certified by a Connecticut registered land
surveyor. Certification shall show the public utility improvements in
substantial agreement with the approved public utility improvement
plans.
C. The public utilities and improvements plan shall contain:
(1) The name of the owner or owners or assignee, subdivider, North
point, scale of map, and date and revised dates.
(2) Boundaries of the subdivision from a boundary survey conforming
to Class D, as set forth by the Connecticut Association of Land
Surveyors, Inc.
(3) Total acreage of the parcel to the nearest tenth of an acre.
(4) Names of abutting property owners and property lines abutting the
subdivision boundaries and proposed street names.
(5) Indication of zones and zone boundary lines.
(6) Topography, flow line of watercourses and existing structures and
culverts.
(7) Layout of existing and new streets, buildings and lots, public open
spaces, easements and encroachment lines with approximate
dimensions.
(8) Proposals for furnishing improvements and utilities.
(9) In land of difficult topography, where most of the lots are to be
developed by the subdivider, a preliminary site grading plan may be
required.
(10) Where sewage disposal is proposed through septic tanks, seepage
and groundwater tests shall be made to the satisfaction of the
Director of Health, whose report thereon shall be submitted with
the preliminary study.
(11) Data on streets, as defined in § 143-2 above, shall be complete.
(12) A key map at a scale of one inch equaling not more than 200 feet
shall show the street or streets giving access to the subdivision
extending to the intersections of at least two other streets.
§ 143-41 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 143-41
93:314
(13) Plan-profile map or maps showing all streets to be constructed
with stations every 50 feet, curve data with vertical curve stations
every 25 feet, widths of right-of-way paving and sidewalks where
required. Where required, in the judgment of the Engineering
Division, street intersections shall be developed at a larger scale,
showing catch basins, gutter, road center line, curb and sidewalk
elevations.
(14) Plan-profile maps may also show all utility lines, encroachment
lines and all easements for utilities, drainage, walks and other
rights-of-way with location, size and inverts of existing and new
culverts or the entire drainage system, except for detail required in
§ 143-41C(13) above, may be shown on a separate map at a scale of
one inch equaling not more than 40 feet.
(15) Drainage analysis map shall show the tributary watershed area and
downstream area affected by runoff. Drainage computations shall
consider the entire watershed area and criteria and computations
used in determining pipe sizes shall be submitted in writing.
(16) When a site grading plan is required by the Commission, such plan
shall become part of the public utilities and improvement plan.
§ 143-42. Construction of streets, curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
A. All streets shown on the public utilities and improvements plan shall
be constructed in conformance with standard cross sections of the
Engineering Division of the Town.
B. Streets grades at the center line shall not exceed 7% for primary streets
nor 10% for residential streets. No street grades shall be less than 1%
except in a specific case where the Engineering Division agrees that
there is practical difficulty, in which case grades not less than 0.5% may
be permitted.
C. Street specifications.
(1) Road pavements shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications of the State of Connecticut Department of
Transportation.
(2) Subbase gravel: six inches or more thick after compaction (if
required by the engineering division).
(3) Base course: eight inches processed stone applied in two courses
four inches thick after compaction, well-keyed and dry-bound, and
two inches bituminous concrete binder.
(4) Surface: two inches dense graded bituminous concrete pavement.
D. Branch offsets for all underground services to be individual parcels shall
be extended by the developer beyond the street right-of-way lines prior
to installation of the bituminous surface course.
E. Bituminous concrete curbs shall be constructed on both sides of all
streets in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards for
Public Improvements, Wethersfield, Connecticut. Wherever possible,
curb cuts for driveways shall be formed as the bituminous lip is installed.
F. Gutters and shoulders shall be formed as a continuation of street paving,
as shown on typical cross-section sheets.
§ 143-41 (RESERVED) § 143-42
93:315
G. Sidewalks, where required, shall be portland cement concrete, as shown
on the standard details of the Engineering Division and in accordance
with the sidewalk specifications of the Town of Wethersfield. Pedestrian
access ramps are to be installed at all intersecting streets as shown
on the detail typical intersection. Ramps are to be portland cement
concrete and shall not have a slope greater than one foot rise in 12 feet,
or 8.33%, unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer.
H. All of the area which is not covered by sidewalk or pavement within the
street right-of-way shall be graded, loamed and seeded in conformance
with Form 811 and amendments thereto of the Connecticut State
Highway Department specifications.
§ 143-43. Construction of storm drainage lines and structures.
A. A complete system of storm drainage shall be constructed in accordance with the
best standard practice and in accordance with the typical standard details of the
Engineering Division and the following design criteria:
(1) Design storm (return frequency):
(a) Residential drainage systems:
[1] Pipe design: ten-year storm.
[2] Major ditches and channels: twenty-five-year storm.
[3] Positive flood relief without property damage: one-hundred-year storm.
(b) Existing streams or their improvements: encroachment lines based on the onehundred-
year storm.
(2) Time of concentration shall be computed on the sum of overland flow time (sheet flow),
plus time in swales and gutters, plus time in pipes (pipes assumed flowing full), with
minimum of 10 minutes to be used for storm sewer design.
(3) Runoff factors:
(a) Areas containing pavement, sidewalks and roofs: 90%. Areas containing lawns and
natural ground: 15% to 30%, depending on the slope of the ground.
(b) Weighted runoff factors are to be used in drainage computations. Runoff factors adjacent undeveloped land are to be based on ultimate development of the land accordance with existing zoning and the Table of Weight and Runoff Factors.
Table of Runoff Factors
Types of Terrain Value C
Impervious surfaces 0.90-0.95
Steep barren surfaces 0.80-0.90
Rolling barren surfaces 0.60-0.80
Flat barren surfaces 0.50-0.70
Rolling meadow 0.40-0.65
Deciduous timberland 0.35-0.60
Conifer timberland 0.25-0.50
Orchard 0.15-0.40
Rolling farmland 0.15-0.40
Flat farmland 0.10-0.30
§ 143-42 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 143-43
93:316
Table of Runoff Factors
Types of Surface Value C
Watertight surfaces such as roofs and pavements 0.70-0.90
Block pavements with open joints 0.50-0.70
Macadam pavements 0.25-0.60
Gravel surfaces 0.15-0.30
Parks, cultivated lands, lawns, etc., depending on slopes
and character of soil
0.50-0.30
Wooded areas 0.01-0.20
(4) Design method: The Rational Method shall be used, where "Q" equals "Air."
B. Storm sewer design.
(1) Minimum size pipe: 15 inches' diameter.
(2) Roughness coefficient:
(a) Reinforced concrete pipe:
[1] Twelve inches through 24 inches: n equals 0.015.
[2] Thirty inches and larger: n equals 0.013.
(b) Asphalt-coated corrugated pipe:
[1] All sizes: n equals 0.021.
(3) Minimum slope shall be sufficient to provide velocity of two feet per second when
flowing 1/4 full:
Size
(inches)
RCP
(n = 0.015)
RCP
(n = 0.013)
ACCMP
(n = 0.021)
12 0.0054 0.0110
15 0.0040 0.0080
18 0.0032 0.0060
21 0.0025 0.0050
24 0.0021 0.0042
30 0.0012 0.0031
36 0.00095 0.0024
42 0.00075 0.0019
48 0.00062 0.0018
54 0.00053 0.0014
60 0.00045 0.0012
72 0.00035 0.00098
(4) Maximum spacing of structures.
(a) On lines of diameters of 36 inches or less: 400 feet.
(b) On lines of diameters of 42 inches and greater: 500 feet.
(5) All reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) shall have gaskets. All trenches shall be covered
with six-mil (0.006 inch) polyethylene wrap.
§ 143-43 (RESERVED) § 143-43
93:317
Chapter 149
TAXATION
§ 149-1. Fiscal year adopted.
The Town adopts a uniform fiscal and tax year pursuant to the provision of
Section 7-382 of the General Statutes.
§ 149-2. Tax due date; installments.
The taxes of the Town shall become due and payable on July first of each
year; provided, however, that such taxes may be paid in two equal
semiannual installments, the first installment being payable on July first and
the second installment on January first following; and provided further, that
if any such first installment is not paid on or prior to August first, the whole
tax shall be presumed to have become due and payable on July first and bear
the interest prescribed by law from that date.
§ 149-3. Duties of Manager.
A. The Town Manager is authorized to make out and sign rate bills for the
collection of taxes, a duty performed by the Board of Selectmen prior to
the adoption of the Charter.
B. The Manager, with the approval of the Council, is authorized and
directed to discharge the powers and duties concerning abatement and
refund of taxes which are conferred by the General Statutes upon
Selectmen.
§ 149-4. Reserve fund.
Pursuant to Chapter 108 of the General Statutes and as recommended by
the Manager, a reserve fund is created to be known as the "Reserve Fund
For Capital and Nonrecurring Expenditures."
§ 149-5. Exemption for religious properties.
A. Pursuant to Section 12-81b of the Connecticut General Statutes, and
dwelling houses and land owned or held in trust for any religious
organization and used by its officiating clergymen, as defined in Section
12-81(15) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be
amended from time to time, shall be exempt from the payment of taxes
to the Town of Wethersfield as of the date of acquisition of said property
and shall be reimbursed for any taxes actually paid in advance at the
closing of said property to the grantor thereof on account of taxes paid
for a period subsequent to the acquisition date.
B. Any request for reimbursement and exemption shall be made, in writing,
to the Tax Assessor, accompanied by such documentation as shall be
deemed necessary to verify said request. Within 30 days after the receipt
of all requested documentation, the Town Council shall, by motion,
act upon said request for exemption and reimbursement. If approved,
the Tax Assessor shall issue a certificate of tax abatement to the Tax
§ 143-43 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 149-5
93:318
Collector and shall thereupon correct the rate book and/or tax bills
accordingly.
§ 149-6. Veterans exemptions.
The Town adopts the provisions of Section 12-81f of the General Statutes,
as amended by Public Act 84-486, providing that any veteran or surviving
spouse entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with
Subdivisions (19) and (22) of Section 12-81 shall be entitled to an additional
exemption from such tax in the amount of $1,000, subject to income
limitations.
§ 149-7. Exemptions for the handicapped and elderly.
A. The Town adopts the provisions of Public Act 85-165 and Public Act
85-294, providing that any blind person or disabled person entitled to
exemptions from property tax in accordance with Subdivisions (17) and
(55) of Section 12-81 of the General Statutes, respectively, shall be
entitled to additional exemptions from such tax in the amounts of $2,000
and $1,000, respectively, subject to income limitations.
B. Pursuant to Public Act 87-91, the Town of Wethersfield does hereby
provide property tax relief as the same is defined in Connecticut General
Statutes Section 12-129n, as amended by Public Act 87-91, with respect
to real property owned and occupied as a principal residence by
residents of Wethersfield who are eligible in accordance with applicable
federal regulations to receive permanent total disability benefits under
social security or have not been engaged in employment covered by
social security and accordingly have not qualified for benefits
thereunder but have become qualified for permanent total disability
benefits under any federal, state or local government retirement or
disability plan, including the Railroad Retirement Act and any
government-related teacher's retirement plan, in which requirements
with respect to qualifications for such permanent total disability benefits
are comparable to such requirements under social security.
C. Pursuant to said Connecticut General Statutes Section 12-129n, the
Town of Wethersfield does hereby also provide property tax relief with
respect to real property owned and occupied as their principal residence
by residents of the Town of Wethersfield who are 65 years of age and
over, or whose spouses living with them are 65 years of age, or who are
60 years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer qualified
in the Town of Wethersfield under Connecticut General Statutes Section
12-129n, as amended, at the time of his death, or with respect to real
property on which such residents or their spouses are liable for taxes
under Connecticut General Statutes Section 12-48.
D. Such tax relief shall be provided to those eligible persons under either
Subsection B or C, provided that such residents or their spouses have
been taxpayers of the Town of Wethersfield for one year immediately
preceding their receipt of tax benefits under Subsections B through F
hereof and meet the requirements of the Town with respect to maximum
income allowable during the calendar year for the tax relief provided for
in Subsections B through F hereof. No such property tax relief, together
§ 149-5 (RESERVED) § 149-7
93:319
with any relief received by any such resident under the provisions of
Sections 12-129b and 12-129c, 12-129h45 or 12-170aa shall exceed in the
aggregate 75% of the tax which would, except for said sections 12-129b
and 12-129c, 12-129h46 or 12-170aa and this section, be laid against the
taxpayer.
E. Subsections B through F hereof shall be applicable to the assessment
year commencing October 1, 1987, and each assessment year thereafter.
F. Incorporated by reference thereto are all of the other applicable
provisions of Connecticut General Statutes Section 12-129n, as amended
by Public Act 87-91.
§ 149-8. Abatements for low- and moderate-income housing.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
LOW- AND MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing, the
construction or rehabilitation of which is aided or assisted in any way
by any federal or state statute, which housing is subject to regulation
or supervision or rents, charges or sale prices and methods of operation
by a governmental agency under a regulatory agreement or other
instrument which restricts occupancy of such housing to persons or
families whose incomes do not exceed prescribed limits, and shall be
deemed to include the property on which such housing is situated.
OWNER — A person or persons, partnership, joint venture or
corporation who or which has executed or will execute a regulatory
agreement or other instrument with a governmental agency which limits
occupancy of the low- and moderate-income housing owned or to be
owned by such person or persons, partnership, joint venture or
corporation to persons or families whose incomes do not exceed
prescribed limits.
B. Contracts for abatement.
(1) The Town Council may, by a majority vote, enter into contracts for
the Town with owners of low- and moderate-income housing granting
abatement, in whole or in part, of the real property taxes on such
housing, provided that such abatement need not be conditioned upon
receipt of state reimbursement to the Town for such abatement and
provided further that each such contract shall require that the owner
apply the money equivalent of the taxes so abated to one or more of
the following specified purposes:
(a) To reduce rents below the levels which would be achieved in the
absence of abatement;
(b) To improve housing quality and design;
(c) To effect occupancy by persons and families of varying income
levels, within prescribed limits; or
(d) To provide necessary related facilities.
45.Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 12-129h was repealed by P.A. 99-89, § 9, effective 6-3-1999.
46.Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 12-129h was repealed by P.A. 99-89, § 9, effective 6-3-1999.
§ 149-7 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 149-8
93:320
(2) The amount of such abatement shall be established in each such
contract, giving due consideration to the purpose or purposes to
which the money equivalent of the taxes so abated is to be applied.
C. Term. The abatement shall become effective on the date specified in the
contract between the Town and the owner of low- and moderate-income
housing, and said contract shall specify whether or not any prepaid taxes
shall be refunded to the owner. The term of abatement shall extend
for the remainder of the fiscal year in which such abatement becomes
effective and may continue for a period not to exceed 39 consecutive
fiscal years thereafter, provided that such abatement shall terminate at
any time when the property for which tax abatement had been granted
is not used solely for low- and moderate-income housing.
D. Valuation. For the purpose of determining the amount of taxes to be
abated as aforesaid, the present true and actual value of low- and
moderate-income housing on which rents and carrying charges are
limited by regulatory agreement with or otherwise regulated by the
federal or state government or department or agency thereof shall be
based upon and shall not exceed the capitalized value of the net rental
income of such housing, provided that for the purposes of this section,
"net rental income" shall mean gross income as limited by the schedule
of rents or carrying charges, less reasonable operating expenses and
property taxes.
E. State assistance. The Town of Wethersfield may, by a majority vote of the
Town Council, enter into contracts with the state for financial assistance
by the state in the form of reimbursement for all or any part of the tax
abatement granted to an owner of low- and moderate-income housing in
accordance with this section, but the entering into of such a contract for
financial assistance need not be a condition of any tax abatement.
§ 149-9. Abatements for First Church Housing Corporation.
A. The Town of Wethersfield hereby abates up to 100% of the ad valorem
taxes applicable to the following described property for a period of
not more than 40 consecutive years, provided that the final amount of
abated taxes shall be determined by a contract entered into pursuant to
the terms of Subsection B hereof, subject to ratification by vote of the
Town Council: All land and buildings owned by First Church Housing
Corporation and used by said corporation for moderate-income elderly
housing, said housing being located on a parcel of land of approximately
five acres in the Town of Wethersfield, situated between Wells Road,
Wolcott Hill Road, Belcher Road, Emerson Street and Savage Road.
B. The Town Manager is hereby authorized, directed and empowered to
execute in the name of and on behalf of the Town of Wethersfield a tax
abatement contract with the First Church Housing Corporation, which
contract shall be in conformity with § 149-8B through D enacted by the
Town of Wethersfield, with the First Church Housing Corporation.
§ 149-10. Exemptions for buildings with certain heating and cooling
systems.
§ 149-8 (RESERVED) § 149-10
93:321
A. Extent of exemptions; period of time applicable. Pursuant to Section
12-81(56) of the Connecticut General Statutes, any building or addition
to a building, the construction of which is commenced on or after the
effective date of this section (enacted May 16, 1977) and before October
1, 1991, which is equipped with a solar-energy heating or cooling system
shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of the amount by which
the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with such solar
heating or cooling system exceeds the assessed valuation of such real
property equipped with a conventional heating or cooling system,
exclusive of any portion of such system related to solar energy, provided
that this exemption shall only apply to the first 15 assessment years
following the construction of such building or addition.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, "solar-energy heating or cooling
system" means equipment, including windmills and waterwheels, which
provides for the collection, transfer, storage and use of incident solar
energy for water heating, space heating or cooling which, absent such
solar energy system, would require a conventional energy resource,
such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity, and which meets
standards established by regulation by the Commissioner of Planning
and Energy Policy for the State of Connecticut.
C. Time limit for filing. Any person who desires to claim the exemption
provided in this section shall file with the Assessor for the Town of
Wethersfield, within 30 days following the annual assessment date,
written application claiming such exemption on a form as prescribed
by the State Tax Commissioner. Failure to file such application in said
manner and form within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a
waiver of the right of such exemption for the assessment year.
§ 149-10.1. Abatement for renewable energy sources. [Added
6-5-2006]
A. Pursuant to § 12-81(57) of the Connecticut General Statutes, any Class
I renewable energy source, installed for the generation of electricity
for private residential use, shall be exempt from taxation provided such
installation occurs on or after the effective date of this section and before
October 1, 2020. Such Class I renewable energy source shall be exempt
only to the extent of the amount by which the assessed valuation of
such real property equipped with such Class I renewable energy source
exceeds the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with a
conventional energy source. Such exemption shall only apply to the first
15 assessment years following construction of such building or addition.
B. As used in this section, "Class I renewable energy source" shall have the
meaning contained in Connecticut General Statutes § 16-1(26), as it is
now or may be amended.
C. Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this
subsection shall file with the assessor for the Town of Wethersfield,
within 30 days following the annual assessment date, written application
claiming such exemption on a form as prescribed by the Tax Assessor.
Failure to file such application in said manner and form within the time
§ 149-10 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 149-10.1
93:322
limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right to such exemption
for the assessment year.
§ 149-11. Abatement for Cerebral Palsy Housing, Inc.
A. The Town of Wethersfield hereby abates 100% of the ad valorem taxes
applicable to the following described property for a period of not more
than 40 consecutive years beginning with the October 1, 1981, Grand
List: all land and buildings owned by Cerebral Palsy Housing, Inc., and
used by said corporation for moderate-income handicapped housing,
said housing being located on a parcel of land of approximately 2.515
acres in the Town of Wethersfield, situated between Maple Street and
Mill Woods Park and known as Lasher Court.
B. The Town Manager is hereby authorized, directed and empowered to
execute in the name of and on behalf of the Town of Wethersfield a tax
abatement contract with Cerebral Palsy Housing, Inc., which contract
shall be in conformity with § 149-8.
§ 149-12. Abatement for American Hellenic Educational Progressive
Association, Inc. (AHEPA 58 Inc.).
A. The Town of Wethersfield hereby abates the ad valorem taxes applicable
to the following described property to the amount of $6,150 per year for
a period of not more than 40 consecutive years: all land and buildings
owned by the American Hellenic Educational Progressive Association,
Inc. (AHEPA 58 Inc.), used by said corporation for moderate-income
elderly housing, and known as the AHEPA Anthan Hale Senior Center,
said housing being located on a parcel of land of approximately 1.44
acres in the Town of Wethersfield, situated on the Berlin Turnpike.
B. The Town Manager is hereby authorized, directed and empowered to
execute in the name of and on behalf of the Town of Wethersfield a
tax abatement contract with AHEPA 58 Inc., which contract shall be in
conformity with § 149-8.
§ 149-13. (Reserved)47
§ 149-14. Exemption for ambulance-type motor vehicles;
definitions.
A. There is hereby created, pursuant to Section 12-81c of the Connecticut
General Statutes, an exemption from personal property taxation for any
ambulance-type motor vehicle which is used exclusively for the purpose
of transporting any medically incapacitated individual, except any such
vehicle used to transport any such individual for payment. For purposes
of this section:
AMBULANCE-TYPE VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle specially equipped
or modified in a significant way for the purpose of transporting medically
incapacitated individuals, including but not limited to the inclusion of
special hand controls, lifts, ramps, the equipping of stretchers or other
47.Editor's Note: Former § 149-13, Abatement for Mitchell School Associates Limited
Partnership, amended 9-4-1990, was repealed 4-7-2008.
§ 149-10.1 (RESERVED) § 149-14
93:323
special seating and significant modifications to accommodate medical
equipment such as oxygen or mechanical respirators.
USED EXCLUSIVELY — The vehicle is used and devoted primarily and
inherently for the purpose of transporting medically incapacitated
individuals and does not mean vehicles partly for transporting medically
incapacitated individuals and partly for other purposes.
B. Procedure for obtaining exemption. Any owner of any such motor vehicle
used for the purposes as stated in this section shall apply to the
Assessor's office of the Town of Wethersfield for such personal property
tax exemption. The Assessor's office shall determine whether or not said
motor vehicle has been adapted and/or modified and that it will be used
exclusively for the purpose of transporting a medically incapacitated
individual for no payment.
C. Applications for such exemptions must be filed annually with the
Assessor's office not later than 30 days following the assessment date
with respect to which such exemption is claimed or for vehicles
purchased on or after October 2 or on or before July 31 of the assessment
year for which such exemption is requested, not later than 30 days after
such purchase or modifications have been made to the owner's existing
vehicle.
§ 149-15. Exemption for totally disabled veterans. [Added 4-4-1994;
8-6-2001]
A. Property tax exemptions as provided by § 12-81(21)C of the Connecticut
General Statutes, for veterans who served in the Army, Navy, Marine
Corps, Coast Guard or Air Force of the United States and who have
received financial assistance for specially adapted housing under the
provisions of Section 801 of Title 38 of the United States Code are
authorized and directed to be granted by the Assessor of the Town, upon
satisfactory proof of claim verified by the Veterans Administration.
B. Said exemption shall also be allowed on such housing unit owned by
the surviving spouse of said veteran while such spouse remains a widow
or widower; or upon the termination of any subsequent marriage of
such spouse by dissolution, annulment or death; or by such veteran and
spouse while occupying such premises as a residence.
§ 149-16. Tax on unregistered motor vehicles. [Added 8-17-1998]
The Town hereby adopts the provisions of Subsection (a) of Section 12-71b
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended by Public Act 98-261,
providing that any person who owns a motor vehicle which is not registered
with the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles on the first day of October in
any assessment year and which is registered subsequent to said first day
of October but prior to the first day of August in such assessment year
shall be liable for the payment of property tax with respect to such motor
vehicle in the Town where such motor vehicle is subject to property tax, in
an amount as hereinafter provided, on the first day of January immediately
subsequent to the end of such assessment year. The property tax payable
with respect to such motor vehicle on said first day of January shall be in the
§ 149-14 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 149-16
93:324
amount which would be payable if such motor vehicle had been entered in
the taxable list of the Town where such motor vehicle is subject to property
tax on the first day of October in such assessment year if such registration
occurs prior to the first day of November. If such registration occurs on or
after the first day of November but prior to the first day of August in such
assessment year, such tax shall be a pro rata portion of the amount of tax
payable if such motor vehicle had been entered in the taxable list of such
Town on October 1 in such assessment year to be determined by a ratio,
the numerator of which shall be the number of days from the date of such
registration, including the day on which the registration occurs, to the first
day of October next succeeding, and the denominator of which shall be 365.
§ 149-17. Tax abatement for volunteer firefighters. [Added
5-15-2000; amended 5-5-2008]
A. The property taxes of each volunteer firefighter of the Wethersfield
Volunteer Fire Department who earns a "good year of service" under
the terms and requirements of the Town of Wethersfield Volunteer
Firefighter's Pension Plan in the preceding recorded year shall have
any real and/or motor vehicle taxes owed to the Town of Wethersfield
by such firefighter abated or they may elect a payment in cash in an
amount up to but not to exceed $1,000 per fiscal year for either option.
If the election is to have real and/or motor vehicle taxes abated then
any remaining amounts up the $1,000 limit may be paid in cash to the
firefighter. The cash payment may be subject to IRS and federal wage
laws and will be taxed as appropriate if paid in cash.
B. On or before the April 30th prior to each fiscal year, the Chief of
the Wethersfield Volunteer Fire Department shall present to the Tax
Assessor, a written, certified statement, which statement shall include
the name and address of said firefighter, and shall certify that said
firefighter has earned a "good year of service" under the terms and
requirements of the Town of Wethersfield Volunteer Firefighters Pension
Plan for the preceding recorded year.
C. Years of service shall not be deemed to have been interrupted by
department medical leave, by active military service with the United
States, or by injury resulting from participation in authorized firefighting
activities. When a person has served as a volunteer firefighter,
left such service, and then returned to volunteer fire-fighting duty, the
person shall not be eligible for the tax abatement until after he or
she has completed one "good year of service" under the terms and
requirements of the Town of Wethersfield Volunteer Firefighters Pension
Plan for the preceding recorded year.
D. The tax abatement under this section shall be applied against any real
property taxes owing to the Town of Wethersfield. However, if a
volunteer firefighter does not owe any real property taxes, or if any
balance of the $1,000 abatement remains after application to any real
property taxes, then the abatement or balance thereof shall be applied
against any motor vehicle taxes owing to the Town of Wethersfield and/
or the volunteer firefighter may elect a payment in cash in an amount up
to but not to exceed $1,000 per fiscal year for either option.
§ 149-16 (RESERVED) § 149-17
93:325
E. The Tax Collector and Assessor of the Town of Wethersfield shall
maintain a record of all taxes abated in accordance with this section.
F. The tax abatement under this section shall be applicable for any real
property or motor vehicle of a volunteer firefighter eligible for such
abatement whether such property is owned individually, jointly, or as
tenant in common with one or more other persons.
G. Any volunteer firefighter who reaches age 62 and has earned a minimum
of 20 "good years of service" as an active volunteer firefighter and
who retires in good standing from active service in the Wethersfield
Volunteer Fire Department shall continue to receive an abatement of up
to $1,000 per annum so long as they continue to reside and own property
in the Town of Wethersfield.
H. This section shall take effect and shall be applicable to taxes owing
beginning with taxes on the Grand List of October 1, 2008.
§ 149-18. Tax abatement for volunteer ambulance personnel.
[Added 6-19-2000]
A. The property taxes of each volunteer member of the Wethersfield
Volunteer Ambulance Association who is a resident Wethersfield and
who volunteers his or her services as an emergency medical technician,
paramedic or ambulance driver with the Town of Wethersfield and who
earns a "good year" under the terms and requirements of the
Wethersfield Volunteer Ambulance Association's Good Year Program in
the preceding recorded year shall have any real and/or motor vehicle
taxes owed to the Town of Wethersfield by such volunteer abated or they
may elect a payment in cash in an amount up to but not to exceed $1,000
per fiscal year for either option. If the election is to have real and/or
motor vehicle taxes abated then any remaining amounts up the $1,000
limit may be paid in cash to the volunteer. The cash payment may be
subject to IRS and federal wage laws and will be taxed as appropriate if
paid in cash.
B. In order to obtain a "good year" under the terms and requirements of the
Wethersfield Volunteer Ambulance Association's Good Year Program, a
volunteer member must volunteer an average of 36 hours per month and
a minimum of 432 hours per year; must attend 75% of monthly training
and/or meetings; and must remain current with all requirements so as to
uphold his or her certification with the State of Connecticut. [Amended
5-5-2008]
§ 149-19. Agreements regarding accommodations for physically
disabled persons. [Added 6-5-2006]
A. The Tax Assessor for the Town of Wethersfield may enter into a written
agreement with an owner of residential real property who agrees to
improve, rehabilitate or renovate such property in order to
accommodate physically disabled persons. The Assessor may, as part of
said agreement and in accordance with the provisions of Connecticut
General Statutes § 12-65g, fix the assessment on such property as of the
date of the agreement for a period of not longer than five years and
§ 149-17 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 149-19
93:326
to defer any increase in assessment attributable to such improvement,
rehabilitation or renovation during such period, provided:
(1) The agreement shall be approved by the Building Official of the Town
of Wethersfield;
(2) Such improvement, rehabilitation or renovation shall conform to the
applicable accessibility portions of the State Building Code and be
completed not later than three years from the date of the agreement
and, upon completion, shall be subject to inspection and certification
by the Wethersfield Building Official for conformity with the
applicable provisions of the Building Code and of the agreement;
(3) Such owner shall submit documentation of such physical disability
satisfactory to the Assessor and thereafter shall annually certify his
continued eligibility for the benefits of this section;
(4) Such owner shall not be in default, during any period covered by the
agreement, of any obligations owed to the Town of Wethersfield.
B. The provisions of this section shall apply only to owner-occupied, singlefamily
dwellings and to owner-occupied apartment buildings intended
for not more than four families.
C. The agreement shall terminate upon the earlier of the expiration of the
period fixed in the agreement, the failure of the owner to demonstrate
continued eligibility for the benefits of this section, or the sale or transfer
of the property.
D. As used in this section, the term "physically disabled" shall mean an
individual that has any chronic physical handicap, infirmity or
impairment, whether congenital or resulting from bodily injury, organic
processes or changes or from illness, including, but not limited to,
epilepsy, blindness, deafness or hearing impairment or reliance on a
wheelchair or other remedial appliance or device.
§ 149-20. Exemption for owners of high-mileage motor vehicles and
hybrid passenger cars. [Added 9-16-2008]
A. Exemption authorized. This section is adopted in accordance with the
authority granted by Section 19 of Public Act 07-242.
B. Exemption. The Town of Wethersfield hereby enacts a property tax
exemption for any high-mileage motor vehicle, as defined by
§ 12-412(110) of the Connecticut General Statutes, and for any hybrid
passenger car, as defined by § 12-412(115) of the Connecticut General
Statutes. The amount of the exemption shall be limited to $1,000 of the
assessed value of each such vehicle.
C. Application. An owner of a high-mileage motor vehicle or hybrid
passenger car registered in the Town of Wethersfield must apply for
this property tax exemption by filing an application with the Assessor
on or before the annual assessment date of October 1. The Assessor
is authorized to make rules and procedures to implement the above
exemption, including, but not limited to, requiring the applicant to
provide written proof as deemed sufficient by the Assessor to confirm
that the vehicle qualifies for the exemption.
D. Expiration. The property tax exemption provided by this section shall
become effective upon passage but shall expire on July 31, 2010, unless
§ 149-19 (RESERVED) § 149-20
93:327
prior to said date the Town Council, by ordinance, extends the expiration
date.
§ 149-21. Property tax exemption for Gold Star parents and
spouses. [Added 2-20-2018]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize the property tax
exemption allowed by Public Act 17-65, in accordance with all of the
terms and requirements of said Public Act, for any parent whose child
was killed in action, or the surviving spouse of a person who was killed
in action, while performing active military duty with the armed forces.
B. Exemption. Effective for assessment years commencing on or after
October 1, 2017, any parent whose child was killed in action, or the
surviving spouse of a person who was killed in action, while performing
active military duty with the armed forces, as defined in Subsection (a) of
Section 27-103 of the general statutes, which parent or surviving spouse
is a resident of Wethersfield, shall be entitled to an exemption from
property tax, provided such parent's or surviving spouse's qualifying
income does not exceed the sum of the maximum qualifying income
for individuals if unmarried, or jointly with spouse if married as set
forth in Section 12-81l of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended,
plus $25,000. The exemption provided for under this section shall be
applied to the assessed value of an eligible parent's or surviving spouse's
property in an amount up to 10% of such assessed value or $20,000,
whichever is greater.
C. Application for exemption and additional limitations.
(1) Any person claiming to be entitled to an exemption from taxation
under this section shall give notice to the Town Clerk that he or
she is entitled to such exemption and shall be required to file an
application, on a form prepared for such purpose by the Assessor, not
later than the assessment date with respect to which such exemption
is claimed.
(2) No Assessor, Board of Assessment Appeals or other official shall
allow such claim for exemption unless such parent or surviving
spouse has proved his or her right to such exemption and unless an
application and all required evidence in support thereof has been
filed in the office of the Town Clerk. Exemptions so proven shall take
effect on the next succeeding assessment day.
(3) The exemption provided for under this section shall be in addition
to any exemption to which an eligible parent or surviving spouse
may be entitled under Section 12-81 of the general statutes. No such
eligible parent or surviving spouse entitled to an exemption under
section 12-81f or 12-81g of the general statutes and this section shall
receive more than one exemption.
§ 149-20 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 149-21
93:328
Chapter 153
TREES AND SHRUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 139.
§ 153-1. Rationale; policy.
A. Trees are proven producers of oxygen, a necessary element for the
survival of mankind; trees reduce the carbon dioxide content of the
air and, in general, play a role in air purification; trees play a role
in neutralizing wastewater which passes through the ground from the
surface to groundwater tables and lower aquifers; trees stabilize soil and
play an important role in soil conservation, erosion control and flood
control; trees are an invaluable physical and psychological addition to
the Town, making life more comfortable by providing shade and cooling
both air and land, reducing noise levels and glare and breaking the visual
monotony of the development of the land with their beauty; and the
protection of trees within the Town of Wethersfield is not only desirable
but essential to the present and future health, safety and welfare of all
citizens of the Town of Wethersfield.
B. It is the policy of the Town of Wethersfield to regulate and control
planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in
the Town in order to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions
which may result in injuries to persons using the public areas and
public ways of the Town, to, promote and enhance the beauty of the
Town, to prevent damage to any public sewer, utility or water main,
street, sidewalk or other public property, to protect trees and shrubs
located in public areas from undesirable and unsafe planting, removal,
maintenance and protection practices and to guard all trees and shrubs
on public areas within the Town against the spread of disease or pests.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all trees and shrubs
presently or hereafter planted in or upon any public area and to all trees
and shrubs planted in or upon private premises which shall endanger
the life, safety or health of persons or property within the Town of
Wethersfield.
§ 153-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION — Include all operations of trimming,
pruning, spraying, injecting, fertilizing, treating, bracing, surgery and
cutting above or below ground.
PLANTING — The permanent placement of any tree or shrub above or
below ground.
§ 149-21 (RESERVED) § 153-2
93:329
PUBLIC AREA — Includes all public ways, parks and other lands owned or
leased by the Town.
PUBLIC WAY — Includes all public streets, roads, boulevards, alleys and
sidewalks.
REMOVAL — The actual physical removal or the effective removal through
damaging, poisoning or other direct or indirect action resulting in or likely
to result in the death of a tree.
TREES and/or SHRUBS — Include all woody vegetation presently or
hereafter planted on any public areas or private premises.
§ 153-3. Tree Warden.
A. The Town Tree Warden shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall
have all powers, duties and authorities ascribed to him/her as set out
in the Connecticut Public Shade Tree Statutes, particularly Connecticut
General Statutes Sections 23-58, 23-59, 23-60 and 23-65, as the same
may be amended, and this chapter.
B. In addition, the Town Tree Warden shall be empowered to issue permits
for the planting of trees or shrubs by private parties on public areas
or public ways so long as said permits are in accordance with the
Connecticut Public Shade Tree Statutes and the contents of this chapter.
§ 153-4. Shade Tree Commission.
A. There shall be a Shade Tree Commission which shall be composed of five
members appointed by the Town Council for staggered three-year terms
to serve as advocates for the choice and care of attractive trees. Initially,
one member shall be appointed for a term ending June 30, 1992; two
members shall be appointed for terms ending June 30, 1993; and two
members shall be appointed for a term ending June 30, 1994.
B. The requirements and duties of these members shall be:
(1) To have a working knowledge of the habitat, planting, growth, care
and placing of trees.
(2) To develop and maintain a working relationship with the Town Tree
Warden.
(3) To assist the Warden in assuring that an appropriate tree or trees are
planted in properly designated locations.
(4) To compose a list of desirable tree species appropriate to
Wethersfield.
(5) To serve voluntarily as contact persons for the Town Manager and
the Director of Physical Services.
(6) To serve as the Warden's assistants on occasions when contractors,
public utilities contractors or Town laborers are working in or
adjacent to Town trees.
(7) To ensure that the intent and provisions of this chapter are carried
out to the fullest extent possible.
§ 153-2 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 153-5
93:330
§ 153-5. Damage.
No person, company, utility or government agency shall, in any public area
or public way of the Town of Wethersfield, prune, remove, deface, cut,
paint, mark, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub, permit any
animal under their control to do so, permit any fire to injure any portion
of any tree or shrub or permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain or be
emptied on or about any tree or shrub. During construction operations, the
contractor shall erect suitable protective barriers around public trees and
shrubs which may be injured as a result of his/her activities.
§ 153-6. Fastening of materials prohibited.
No person shall fasten any sign, playbill, picture, notice, advertisement,
rope, wire, climbing spurs or other materials to, around or through any
public trees or shrubs except in an emergency, such as storms or accidents.
§ 153-7. Public utilities.
Public utility work affecting trees or shrubs shall be limited to the actual
necessities of the service of the company. Such work shall be reviewed by
the Town Tree Warden prior to being undertaken and such work shall be
done in a neat and professional manner. The Town Tree Warden shall, to the
extent possible, supervise the work performed.
§ 153-8. Authority of Tree Warden. [Amended 10-1-2007]
The Town Tree Warden shall have the authority to plant, remove, maintain
and protect trees and shrubs on all public areas and public ways or which
extend into or overhang the limits of all public areas and public ways as
may be necessary to ensure and preserve the symmetry and beauty of such
grounds and ways. The Town Tree Warden may consult with the Shade Tree
Commission in regard to the performance of his/her duties.
§ 153-9. Public nuisances.
Any tree or shrub or part thereof growing upon private or public property
which is interfering with the use of any public area, infected with infectious
plant disease or endangering the life, health or safety of persons or property
is declared a public nuisance. If the Town Tree Warden shall determine, with
a reasonable certainty, that any nuisance tree or shrub, as herein described,
or any part thereof exists in or upon any public area or public way, he/she
shall immediately cause it to be treated, trimmed, removed or otherwise
abated in such manner as to destroy or prevent the spread of the nuisance.
If the Town Tree Warden shall determine, with reasonable certainty, that
any nuisance tree or shrub, as herein described, exists in or upon any
private premises, he/she shall, in writing, notify the owner or tenant having
charge of such premises. Within 30 days after issuance of said notice, said
person shall cause the treatment, trimming or removal and destruction of
said nuisance tree or shrub as directed in the written notice. No damage
shall be awarded the owner for the destruction of trees or shrubs destroyed
§ 153-5 (RESERVED) § 153-9
93:331
pursuant to this chapter. In case the owner or tenant having charge of such
premises shall refuse or neglect to comply with the terms of the written
notice within 30 days after receiving it, the Town Tree Warden shall cause
the removal, treatment or trimming of said nuisance tree or shrub. The
expense thereof shall be charged to the owner of said premises on which
said tree or shrub is located and, with respect to the cost for removing
that portion interfering with any public area or public way, shall become a
lien on the property upon recordation of notice thereof on the Town land
records.
§ 153-10. Appeals. [Amended 10-1-2007]
A person who receives an order from the Town Tree Warden and objects
to all or a part thereof may, within 10 days of receipt of said notice, notify
the Shade Tree Commission, in writing, of the nature of the objection and
request a hearing thereon. Within 10 days of the receipt of such notice
of appeal, the Shade Tree Commission shall schedule a hearing before
said Commission or its designated subcommittee to hear the objection. The
hearing shall be held within 10 days of notice to the appellant. Within 10
days after such hearing, the Shade Tree Commission shall, in writing, notify
the appellant and the Town Tree Warden of its decision. The Town Tree
Warden shall be present at such hearing.
§ 153-11. Master Street Tree Plan. [Amended 9-4-2018]
There shall be a Master Street Tree Plan. The Master Street Tree Plan
shall consist of Townwide, street-by-street written evaluation of all space
and site factors which will aid in the determination of the tree species best
suited to a particular planting site in regard to growing habits, shape, form,
health, disease and pest resistance, conflicts with wires, lights, pavement,
traffic, pedestrians, sidewalks, environmental pollution, sewers and space
availability. The evaluation of the space and site factors and the species
selection for a particular street shall be made by the Town Tree Warden,
with the advice of the Shade Tree Commission. Any and all landscaping
plans submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be reviewed
by the Tree Warden.
§ 153-12. Arboricultural specifications and standards.
The following specifications and standards are hereby established for the
planting, trimming and removal of trees and shrubs in the public ways and
public places of the Town:
A. Planting.
(1) The Tree Warden, in consultation with the Shade Tree Commission,
shall develop a list of species suitable for planting below overhead
utility lines. No other species shall be permitted. Trees prohibited for
planting in public spaces shall be identified by the Commission.
(2) All trees to be planted will be not less than 1 1/2 inches in diameter
of trunk at six inches above ground level. [Amended 5-4-2009]
§ 153-9 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 153-12
93:332
(3) No tree shall be planted closer than two feet from the curbline
or outer line of the sidewalk, except by special permit from the
Tree Warden. All trees shall be planted at a spacing of between 40
and 60 feet from each other, depending on the species of the tree.
[Amended 10-1-2007]
(4) No tree shall hereafter be planted at or within 20 feet of an
intersection.
(5) Efforts will be made to install all new trees using good planting
practices to provide maximum survivability and longevity. [Added
9-4-2018]
B. Trimming.
(1) All trees and shrubs on public or private property which have
branches overhanging a public street shall have said branches
trimmed to a clearance height of 14 feet; all trees and shrubs on
public or private property which have branches overhanging a public
sidewalk shall have said branches trimmed to a clearance height of
10 feet. The Town Tree Warden may waive the provisions of this
subsection for newly planted trees if he/she determines they do not
interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any streetlight or
endanger public safety.
(2) All deadwood, stubs, broken branches, badly formed branches,
disease-infected and insect-infested branches and branches
interfering with public travel, lighting, existing buildings and traffic
signs shall be removed during the trimming operation, with
consideration given to the symmetry and beauty of the tree or shrub.
C. Removing. All public trees and shrubs which are marked for cutting
shall be completely removed from the growing site and disposed of in an
authorized manner. The stump shall be ground out to a depth suitable for
future planting of trees or turf. Before any town tree(s) may be removed,
parties must obtain approval from the Tree Warden. [Added 9-4-2018]
§ 153-13. Right of entry.
The Town Tree Warden or his/her representatives, after giving advance
notice to the owner or tenant having charge, shall have the authority
to enter upon private premises at reasonable times for the purposes of
examining and inspecting any suspected nuisance tree or shrub or
otherwise fulfilling their duties herein.
§ 153-14. Emergency tree removal.
When it is necessary to expedite the removal of damaged or destroyed
trees in the interest of public safety, health and general welfare, the Town
Manager may, by decree, suspend the requirements of this chapter.
§ 153-15. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2018]
Violation of § 153-5 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $100, or such greater amount as may be allowed by statute, and
such person shall be liable in a civil action for damages in accordance
§ 153-12 (RESERVED) § 153-15
93:333
with Section 52-560 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may
be amended. Violation of § 153-6 of this chapter shall be punishable by
a fine not to exceed $50, or such greater amount as may be allowed by
statute, and such person may be subject to such civil damages or criminal
penalties as may be prescribed by statute. Each unauthorized pruning,
removal, defacing, cutting, painting, marking or injuring of a tree protected
by this chapter or other act prohibited by §§ 153-5 and 153-6 of this chapter
shall be deemed a separate offense. Any and all tree(s) removed or killed
as a result of said damage shall be replaced at the expense of the person,
company, utility or government agency who removed or killed the tree(s).
§ 153-16. Repealer.
Former Town Code §§ 153-1, 153-2 and 153-3 relating to the preservation
and protection of all trees within the Town of Wethersfield48 are hereby
repealed.
§ 153-17. Interference with enforcement. [Added 10-1-2007]
No person shall unreasonable hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the
Town Tree Warden or his/her agents while engaged in the execution or
enforcement of this chapter.
Chapter 157
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boating — See Ch. 59.
Snowmobiles — See Ch. 134.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 139.
Inoperable or abandoned vehicles — See Ch.
160.
48.Editor's Note: Said sections comprised former Ch. 153, Trees and Shrubs, adopted as Secs.
7-1-1 through 7-1-3 of the Code of 1972.
§ 153-15 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 153-17
93:334
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 157-1. School crossing guards.
There shall be appointed employees to be known as "school crossing
guards" for the protection of schoolchildren crossing highways to and from
school. These guards, in such number as the Council shall direct, shall be
appointed as temporary employees by the Manager for such period of time
as he shall determine. Guards shall be under the jurisdiction and control of
the Chief of Police and shall perform such duties with respect to the safety
of schoolchildren at crossings as outlined by the Chief of Police. Each guard
shall have the powers of a police officer in the direction and control of traffic
at the crossing or crossings to which such guard is assigned. The Chief
of Police shall make rules for the conduct and duty hours of such guards,
subject to the approval of the Director of Safety.
§ 157-2. Conveyances restricted on certain streets.
No motor bus, motorcycle or motor vehicle, as such terms are defined
in Section 14-1 of the General Statutes, bicycle or any other type of
conveyance shall be operated between the time of sunset and the time of
sunrise on the following public streets in the Town:
A. Great Meadow Road east and south of the center line of the Putnam
Memorial Bridge.
B. First Lane.
C. Second Lane.
D. Elm Street east of the west right-of-way line of Connecticut Interstate
Route 91.
E. Elm Street extension.
§ 157-1 (RESERVED) § 157-2
93:335

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 157-3. Applicability. [Amended 12-6-2010]
The provisions of this article shall apply, except where specifically limited,
to any traveled way within the Town which is paved, plowed or otherwise
maintained by the Town or by the State of Connecticut, regardless of
whether such traveled way has been formally accepted as a public highway
by the Town.
§ 157-4. Parking situations prohibited. [Amended 12-6-2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle:
A. On any traveled way or any property owned, leased or controlled by
the Town where such parking is prohibited, limited or restricted by the
Legal Traffic Authority and posted with signs denoting such prohibition,
limitation or restriction.
B. For a period longer than allowed by posted signs.
C. More than 12 inches from a curb.
D. On the side of any traveled roadway opposite the direction of traffic flow.
E. Double or parallel with another vehicle on any traveled roadway.
F. Within 10 feet of a hydrant.
G. Within 25 feet of a stop sign, intersection, or traffic signal.
H. Within a posted loading and unloading zone.
I. On a public sidewalk.
J. So as to obstruct any public or private driveway.
K. In a marked bus stop.
L. In such a manner as will impede the free flow of traffic.
M. On a crosswalk.
N. Other than in a driveway that has a durable all-weather surface of
bituminous, concrete, brick, cement, crushed stone or other properly
bound pavement appurtenant to a residential building, between the
public sidewalk and the street, or, in the case of streets without
sidewalks, between the curb or edge of pavement and the boundary of
the Town or state right-of-way. Grassed lawn areas may not be utilized
for motor vehicle parking.
O. In any fire lane.
P. On any traffic control island or median that separates traffic on a
traveled way.
Q. In violation of any emergency parking ban.
R. After establishment of specially marked parking spaces for handicapped
persons, no person shall park a motor vehicle in such space unless a
handicapped person is either a passenger or occupant of the vehicle
and the Connecticut vehicle contains a designation issued by the
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles pursuant to the Connecticut General
Statutes, which designation shall be visible as per the Connecticut
General Statutes, or a handicapped designation issued by another
governmental authority.
S. Within 25 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
§ 157-3 (RESERVED) § 157-4
93:337
T. Upon any bridge or overpass.
§ 157-5. Night parking restrictions. [Amended 12-6-2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any public highway
(including any state or municipal highway or any traveled way as set forth
in § 157-3 herein) for any period of time longer than 30 minutes between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day. However, this prohibition
does not apply to physicians on call or emergency cases of any other nature.
Permission for all-night parking may be obtained from the Police Division in
unusual cases or when unusual conditions exist.
§ 157-6. Parking during snowstorms. [Amended 12-6-2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, park or leave any vehicle
on the traveled portion of a street or highway so as to impede normal
snowplowing operations and the free flow of traffic during snowstorms.
§ 157-7. Citations. [Amended 12-6-2010]
Whenever any vehicle is found parked in violation of any of the provisions
of this article, a police officer shall attach to such vehicle a citation to the
owner or operator thereof setting forth the fact that such vehicle has been
parked unlawfully.
§ 157-8. Presumption of ownership. [Amended 12-6-2010]
In any prosecution or proceeding for unlawful parking in violation of this
article, the registered owner of the vehicle so parked shall be presumed to
be the operator thereof.
§ 157-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-6-2010]
A. Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of this article,
any Wethersfield police officer may issue a citation for such violation,
which citation shall provide for a fine of not less than $25, payable to
the Town of Wethersfield, and except for violations of the handicapped
parking designation requirements which shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $75, payable to the Town of Wethersfield, remitted to the
Tax Collector within five days of the citation date. If any fine is not
paid within 10 days, a penalty in an amount equal to the fine shall
immediately become due and payable in addition to the original fine, and
a warrant may be issued for the arrest of the violator.
B. The registered owner of any vehicle parked in violation of this section
shall be presumed to be the operator at the time of the violation.
C. Any person cited and fined pursuant to this article may first appeal such
fine by way of the Police Department parking tag appeal process within
10 days of the issuance of such citation.
D. Any person who is not satisfied with the outcome of the Police
Department parking tag appeal process may appeal such fine as
§ 157-4 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 157-9
93:338
provided in Chapter 73, Article I (Citation Hearing Procedure), of the
Town Code of Ordinances. Effective date: February 1, 2011.
§ 157-10. Handicapped parking.
A. This section shall apply to all new and existing nonresidential sites that have
a parking area for 20 or more vehicles, including but not limited to shopping
centers, office buildings, commercial buildings, mercantile buildings,
warehouses, storage buildings, manufacturing buildings, convalescent homes,
schools and public buildings. In addition, the Traffic Authority may designate
handicapped parking spaces on Town roads which shall be of such size and
location as he may specify.
B. After establishment of specially marked parking spaces for handicapped
persons, no person shall park a motor vehicle in such space unless a
handicapped person is either a passenger or occupant of the vehicle and the
vehicle contains a designation issued by the commissioner of Motor Vehicles
pursuant to the General Statutes, which designation shall be visible as per the
Connecticut General Statutes, or a handicapped designation issued by other
governmental authority.
C. Number of spaces.
(1) On each site having parking spaces for at least 20 but not more than 25 spaces,
at least one space shall be specially designated and reserved for handicapped
parking. Additional spaces for handicapped parking shall be in accordance with
the following table:
Total Parking on Site
(spaces)
Required Number of Handicapped
Parking Spaces
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20
Plus, for each
100 over 1,000
1
(2) Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be located as close as possible to
elevators, ramps, walkways and entrances and shall be so located that the
handicapped person is not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked vehicles
to reach entrances, ramps, walkways and elevators.
(3) The exact location of the parking spaces shall be designated by the Town Traffic
Authority or his designee.
§ 157-9 (RESERVED) § 157-10
93:339
D. Each such space designated for handicapped parking shall be not less than 15
feet in width, including three feet of cross-hatch, unless the same would create
a nonconforming condition, in which event the existing parking stall width shall
be permitted. Each space shall be designated by above-grade signs with white
lettering against a blue background and shall bear the words: HANDICAPPED
PARKING; STATE PERMIT REQUIRED. Such signs shall be erected, installed
and maintained by and at the expense of the owner, operator, lessee or tenant
of said site and shall further indicate that unauthorized use of said space shall
subject the violator to a fine. If the signs and markings called for herein are not
installed within 30 days after written request by the Town Traffic Authority, the
Town may proceed to install the same and impose the costs thereof against the
owner of the site.
E. Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of this article, any
Wethersfield police officer may issue a citation for such violation, which citation
shall provide for a fine of not less than $50 payable to the Town of Wethersfield
and remitted to the Tax Collector within five days of the citation date. If any
fine is not paid within five days, a penalty in an amount equal to the fine shall
immediately become due and payable in addition to the original fine, and a
warrant may be issued for the arrest of the violator. [Amended 6-18-1990]
F. The registered owner of any vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be
presumed to be the operator at the time of the violation.
§ 157-10 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 157-10
93:340
ARTICLE III
Fire Lanes
§ 157-11. Establishment.
The Fire Marshal of the Town of Wethersfield may establish fire lanes
within his jurisdiction for the orderly access of fire and other emergency
equipment on premises of new and existing buildings and facilities to
ensure the reasonable safety of persons occupying or using said premises.
§ 157-12. Identifying and posting of lanes.
A. Fire lanes, as established by the Fire Marshal, shall be the driving
portions of the vehicle parking area and/or walkways designated to
accommodate emergency equipment on said premises.
B. Notice of establishment of fire lanes in accordance with § 157-11 shall
be served on the property owner, the Police Chief of the Town of
Wethersfield and the Traffic Authority of the Town of Wethersfield. Such
fire lanes, as established in accordance with § 157-11, shall be posted by
the owner of the property involved within 60 days of said notice and in
accordance with the instructions of the Fire Marshal.
§ 157-13. Fines for noncompliance.
Any property owner who fails to comply within the allotted time designated
in § 157-12 shall be fined $200 and shall suffer a penalty of $10 a day for
each day thereafter until the lane is posted.
§ 157-14. Prohibitions.
No vehicle shall be parked or standing within any established fire lane.
§ 157-15. Notice; towing.
Whenever any vehicle is found unattended or standing disabled in an
established fire lane, a police officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice
to the owner or operator thereof, setting forth that such vehicle has been
parked unlawfully; provided, however, that in an emergency, if such
unlawful parking constitutes a hazard or impedes the orderly access of
emergency equipment, the police officer or the chief fire officer in charge
may have the vehicle towed to another portion of the lot or area which is
not within a fire lane, all at the expense of the owner of such vehicle.
§ 157-16. Presumption of ownership.
In any prosecution or proceeding for unlawful parking in a fire lane, the
registered owner of the vehicle so parked shall be presumed to be the
operator thereof.
§ 157-17. Penalties for offenses.
A. The penalty for unlawful parking in a fire lane shall be a fine of not more
than $50. [Amended 6-18-1990]
§ 157-11 (RESERVED) § 157-17
93:341
B. Each person who violates § 157-14 shall, within five days of the time
when such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay to the Tax Collector
of the Town the penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation. The
failure of such person to make such payment within such time limit shall
render such person subject to prosecution, and such person may be fined
not to exceed $100.
§ 157-17 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 157-17
93:342
ARTICLE IV
Motor Scooters, Minibikes, Pocket Bikes and Bicycles With Helper
Motor
[Added 11-15-2004]
§ 157-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR SCOOTERS, MINIBIKES, POCKET BIKES and BICYCLES WITH A
HELPER MOTOR — Any wheeled device designed for the transport of one
or more persons which is powered by any type of motor, except:
§ 157-19. Enforcement.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of these ordinances, any person
who operates any motor scooter, minibike, pocket bike or bicycle with a
helper motor on any portion of any public or private street shown on the
Official Map of the Town, including the sidewalk area of any such street,
or any other public property, including schools, playgrounds and parks,
within the Town of Wethersfield, shall be fined $90.
B. Any person who rides as a passenger on any motor scooter operated in
violation of the above shall be fined $50.
C. Whenever any police officer observes any person in violation of this
article, he or she may detain such person for purposes of the
enforcement of this section and may remove such motor scooter to a
secure area pending a disposition of such property by court order or
otherwise by law.
§ 157-20. Hearing.
A. Any "motorcycle" or "motorized bicycle" as defined in state statute;
Any vehicle registered as a motor vehicle by the registrar of motor
vehicles or lawfully exempt from such registration;
B.
Any wheelchair by a person with physical disabilities or any similar
mobility-assisting device used or by a person whose ambulatory
mobility has been impaired by age, illness or physical ailment or
electric personal assistive mobility devices;
C.
Any self-propelled snowplows, snow blowers and lawn mowers when
used for the purposes for which they were designed and operated at
speeds not exceeding four miles per hour;
D.
Any bicycle with a helper motor or scooter which meets Federal
Department of Transportation and State Department of Transportation
guidelines for on-road transportation and whose owner's manual
specifically indicates an ability to be driven on public roads;
E.
F. Any vehicle owned or leased by the Town of Wethersfield.
§ 157-18 (RESERVED) § 157-20
93:343
A. Any person who receives a citation under this article may request a
hearing.
B. The Town Manager will designate a hearing officer in accordance with
Connecticut General Statutes, Section 7-152c.
C. Any cited person who wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation
may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines,
penalties, costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to the Town
Manager. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil
or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person
making the payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written
demand for a hearing within 10 days of the date of citation shall be
deemed to have admitted liability, and the Town Manager shall certify
such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer. The hearing
officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or
fees provided for by the applicable ordinances and shall follow the
procedures set forth in Connecticut General Statutes, Section 7-152c(f).
D. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less
than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of
notice. The hearing officer may grant a postponement or continuance for
good cause. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation
issued by the issuing official or policeman shall be filed and retained by
the Town Manager.
§ 157-20 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 157-20
93:344
ARTICLE V
Enforcement
[Added 12-6-201049]
§ 157-21. Enforcement procedure.
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 73, Article I, of the Code of the
Town of Wethersfield shall be followed.
49.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 2-1-2011.
§ 157-21 (RESERVED) § 157-21
93:345
Chapter 160
VEHICLES, INOPERABLE OR ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 99.
Nuisances — See Ch. 108.
Property maintenance and outdoor
storage — See Ch. 122.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 157.
§ 160-1. Declaration of nuisance.
The parking, indefinitely, of inoperable vehicles, as defined in this chapter,
is declared to constitute a nuisance detrimental to the community.
§ 160-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is currently not capable
of being started and safely and properly operated on the highway or which
does not bear a valid and current license plate.
§ 160-3. Permit required; application; contents.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, tenant, occupant or the owner of
property to park or permit to be parked any inoperable vehicle on any
unenclosed property within any zone and within 200 feet of any street
line or property line in the Town of Wethersfield without a permit as
provided in this chapter.
B. Application shall be made to the Chief Building Official of the Town
of Wethersfield within 48 hours after any inoperable vehicle has been
parked on any unenclosed property within the Town by filing on a form
furnished by the Chief Building Official a statement of the following:
(1) The address of the premises where the vehicle is to be parked.
(2) The name and address of the owner or person in control of the
premises and a statement attesting to his permission for such vehicle
to be parked and the date of such permission.
(3) The name and address of the registered owner of the inoperable
vehicle for which the permit is sought; the registration or title shall
be presented to the officer issuing the permit.
(4) A description of the inoperable vehicle for which a permit is sought
as to make, model, year of manufacture, last license issued and
condition which rendered it inoperable.
(5) The estimated length of time, not to exceed 60 days, for which the
permit is being requested in order to restore the vehicle to operating
condition.
(6) The signature of the applicant.
§ 157-21 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 160-4
93:346
§ 160-4. Permit issuance; posting.
The Chief Building Official may issue a permit based on a proper
application. Such permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed 60 days
from the date of application. A copy of such permit shall be posted inside
the vehicle for which it was issued by affixing to the windshield or window
so as to be readily visible at all times. Any permit may be renewed at the
discretion of the Chief Building Official for a period not to exceed 60 days by
filing a new application. No permit shall be transferable to any other person.
§ 160-5. Conditions of permit.
Every permit for storage of an inoperable vehicle on private property shall
be subject to the conditions that:
A. No safety hazard shall be created or maintained.
B. All broken glass or partially detached parts shall be either removed and
disposed of as rubbish or secured in a manner to prevent hazard.
C. The trunk or storage compartment shall be kept locked or otherwise
secured adequately to prevent possible entrapment of a child.
D. The wheels or tires shall not be removed from the vehicle except for
repairs.
E. The last issued license plates, if any, shall be kept on the vehicle.
F. The vehicle shall not be elevated or blocked in any unsafe manner.
G. All parts or components removed from the vehicle shall not be stored in
the open.
H. No waste oil or other fluid shall be allowed to flow on the ground or
pavement.
I. The vehicle may be parked only in the rear yard of residential property.
J. No violation of Chapter 167, Zoning, or any other applicable ordinance
or statute shall be created.
K. All information furnished by the applicant as required by § 160-3 is
essentially correct, and any false statement will be a violation of this
chapter.
L. The repair of vehicles of others is prohibited.
M. No more than one inoperable vehicle shall be permitted on any
premises.
§ 160-6. Permit revocation; notice.
Any permit issued under authority of this chapter may be revoked at the
discretion of the Chief Building Official when, in his opinion, a violation
of this chapter exists. Notice of such revocation shall be delivered to the
permittee or posted conspicuously on the vehicle, along with a notice to
cease storing said vehicle and to remove it to a proper storage or disposal
location. The permittee shall remove the vehicle within 10 days after
receiving said notice or after the notice is posted.
§ 160-4 (RESERVED) § 160-7
93:347
§ 160-7. Permit fees.
The Chief Building Official shall collect a fee of at the time of issuance of
such permit for storage of an inoperable vehicle or renewal thereof.
§ 160-8. Procedures for removal of vehicles.
A. Any inspector of the Motor Vehicle Department, any law enforcement
officer or any state police officer, upon discovery of any motor vehicle
apparently abandoned or a motor vehicle without proper registration,
whether situated within or without any highway of this state, shall
affix to such motor vehicle a notification sticker in a manner so as to
be readily visible. This notification sticker shall contain the following
information:
(1) The date and time the notification sticker was affixed to the motor
vehicle;
(2) A statement that pursuant to this section, if the motor vehicle is not
removed within 24 hours of the time the sticker was affixed, it shall
be taken into custody and stored at the owner's expense;
(3) The location and telephone number where additional information
may be obtained; and
(4) The identity of the affixing officer.
B. If the motor vehicle is not removed within such twenty-four-hour period,
the affixing department shall take such motor vehicle into its custody
and cause the same to be stored in a suitable place.
C. If the motor vehicle has no registration marker plates or invalid
registration marker plates and if such inspector or officer makes a
determination in good faith that the motor vehicle is apparently
abandoned, the market value of such motor vehicle in its current
condition is $100 or less and the motor vehicle is so vandalized, damaged
or in disrepair as to be unusable as a motor vehicle, title to such motor
vehicle shall, upon taking custody of such motor vehicle, immediately
vest in the Town of Wethersfield. Within 48 hours of the time that
such motor vehicle is taken into custody, the affixing department shall
notify the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles, in writing, of the vehicle
identification number and a description of the motor vehicle. Upon sale
or other disposition of the motor vehicle, the affixing department shall
give written notice by certified mail to the person who was the owner of
such motor vehicle at the time of abandonment, if known, which notice
shall state that the motor vehicle has been sold or otherwise disposed
of. The proceeds of the sale or disposition or the fair market value of
the motor vehicle in its current condition, whichever is greater, less the
towing and sale or disposal expenses and the amount of any fines due,
shall be paid to such person or his representatives, if claimed by him
or them within one year from the date of sale. If such balance is not
claimed within such period, it shall escheat to the Town. If the expenses
incurred by the municipality for towing and the sale or disposition of
such motor vehicle and any such fines exceed the proceeds of such sale
or disposition, such person shall be liable to the Town for such excess
amount.
§ 160-7 WETHERSFIELD CODE § 160-9
93:348
§ 160-9. Penalties for offenses.
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
violation. Any person violating this chapter shall be fined $100. Each act or
each day's continuation of a violation shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 160-10. Enforcement.
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 73, Article I, of the Code of the
Town of Wethersfield shall be followed.
Chapter 167
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alternates to Planning and Zoning
Commission — See Ch. 10, Art. X.
Design Review Advisory Committee — See Ch.
10, Art. XXVIII.
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 46.
Building construction — See Ch. 63.
Environmental standards — See Ch. 75.
Sprinkler systems and smoke detectors — See
Ch. 83, Art. I.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 99.
Massage parlors — See Ch. 102.
Noise — See Ch. 105.
Parkland dedications — See Ch. 111.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 122.
Construction requirements for Town-wide
radio coverage — See Ch. 127.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 143.
Inland wetlands and watercourses
regulations — See Ch. A181.
Appendix
Chapter A175
SPECIAL ACTS
Chapter A180
TOWN COUNCIL RULES OF PROCEDURES
§ A180-1. Organization meeting.
Each newly elected Council shall meet for organization in the Town Hall
at a time to be announced on the first Monday following the November
Election in each odd-numbered year. The meeting shall be called to order
by the Town Clerk, who shall administer the oath of office to all members,
provided that in the absence of the Town Clerk, the meeting may be called
to order and the oath administered by any citizen of Wethersfield authorized
§ 160-9 (RESERVED) § A180-1
93:349
by law to administer oaths. The Council shall then proceed to the election
of a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson to serve for the ensuing two years,
who may also be known respectively as the "Mayor" and the "Deputy Mayor"
(Charter, Sec. 304).
§ A180-2. Regular meeting. [Amended 7-16-2018]
There will be two types of regular meetings: a Regular Business Meeting
and a Regular Workshop Meeting. The Regular Business Meeting will be
held on the third Monday of each Month at 7:00 p.m. in the Town Council
Chambers unless otherwise determined by the Council. The Regular
Workshop Meeting will be held the first Monday of each Month at 7:00 p.m.
in the Town Council Chambers unless otherwise determined by the Council.
If a meeting is adjourned to a date, time, and place certain, a notice of
the same shall be conspicuously posted near the door of the meeting place,
stating the date, time and place of the adjourned meeting. The schedule of
regular meetings for the ensuring year shall be filed in the Town Clerk's
office as soon as possible after the organizational meeting.
§ A180-3. Special meeting.
Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Chairperson or by not
fewer than three members of the Council. If called by three members, each
shall advise the Town Clerk, in writing, by telephone or in person, to that
effect.
A. Notice of a special meeting shall be prepared by the Town Clerk, and a
copy shall be served personally upon each member of the Council and
the Town Manager or Acting Town Manager or left at their usual places
of abode not less than 24 hours before the time of the meeting. The
notice shall state the time and place of the meeting and the purpose for
which the meeting is called. A copy of said notice shall also be posted on
the Town Clerk's board at least 24 hours prior to the meeting.
B. At a special meeting, no matter not included in the notice shall be
considered.
C. The Town Clerk shall certify, upon the original copy of the notice filed
with the records of the Council, by whom the meeting was called and the
manner in which the notice was given to the members of the Council,
the Town Manager or Acting Town Manager and the posting on the Town
signpost.
§ A180-4. Public meetings and hearings.
A. No ordinance or resolution shall be adopted or appointment or removal
made except in a meeting of the Council open to the public (Charter, Sec.
305).
B. At least one public hearing, not less than five days' notice of which shall
be given by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the
Town and by posting on the Town Clerk's board, shall be held by the
Council before any ordinance or resolution shall be acted upon (Charter,
Sec. 308).
§ A180-1 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A180-4
93:350
C. Budget hearing. There shall be a public hearing at 7:00 p.m. on the third
Monday in April at a place to be determined by the Council, at least
five days' notice of which shall be given by publication in at least one
newspaper which has a general circulation in the Town and by posting on
the Town Clerk's board. At such hearing, any citizen or property owner
who desires it shall be entitled to be heard by the Council on the Town
and school budgets, and the hearing shall be recessed from day to day
until all such persons have been heard (Charter, Sec. 705), provided
that a notice of recess shall be conspicuously posted on the door of the
meeting place, stating the date, time and place of the recessed meeting;
provided, further, that any person who desires to speak at the subject
budget hearings shall initially be heard for no longer than 10 minutes.
After all persons who desire to speak have spoken at any one budget
hearing, those persons wishing to speak for a second time shall be
allowed to do so but shall not exceed 10 minutes. After all persons have
had a second opportunity to speak, any person may thereafter speak.
D. Public comment. [Amended 7-16-2018]
(1) Public comment sections at Regular Business Meetings are allowed
during each meeting for individual citizens' comments. During the
public comment, citizens may speak pertaining to any item on the
agenda or of concern to the Town.
(2) Public comment sections at Regular Workshop Meetings are allowed
during each meeting for individual citizens' comments.
(3) Each speaker shall limit his/her remarks to five minutes and shall be
heard only once. This time restriction may be enforced by a timing
device. If a speaker exceeds the time limitation, the Chair shall so
notify the speaker and allow the speaker 30 seconds for summation.
The Chair, at his/her discretion, may grant the speaker additional
time. If a large number of citizens wish to speak, in the discretion
of the Chair, the time limit may be reduced to three minutes to
accommodate the crowd, and still allow the Council to conduct its
business.
E. If the Council needs to make a decision or needs additional information,
the Council should direct the Manager to get the facts, information
and/or recommendations it needs to make an informed decision in the
interest of all Town citizens. Citizens are encouraged to submit
questions/concerns in writing.
F. Adjournment time: The Council establishes an adjournment time of
regular meetings of 11:00 p.m. If the adjournment time requires an
extension, it can be done via motion and a majority vote.
G. Town Council members shall be able to listen to Council meetings by
telephone; however, every effort should be made by members to be at
all meetings in person, and the use of telephones should only be used
on rare occasions. A meeting quorum can only be determined by the
members that are physically present in the meeting room. No votes shall
be allowed to be taken and no comments shall be made via a telephone.
The meeting will be held in a room open and accessible to members of
the public, using teleconferencing equipment that enables everyone in
§ A180-4 (RESERVED) § A180-4
93:351
the room to hear. Any printed materials, reports, graphs, etc., utilized by
the person phoning in must be available in the meeting room.
§ A180-5. Quorum.
The presence of five members shall constitute a quorum, but no ordinance,
resolution or vote, except a vote to adjourn or to fix the time and place of the
next meeting of the Council, shall be adopted by fewer than five affirmative
votes (Charter, Sec. 305).
§ A180-6. Executive sessions.
"Executive sessions" means a meeting of a public agency at which the public
is excluded for one or more of the following purposes:
A. Discussion concerning the appointment, employment, performance,
evaluation, health or dismissal of a public officer or employee, provided
that such individual may require that discussion be held at an open
meeting;
B. Strategy and negotiations with respect to pending claims or pending
litigation to which the public agency or a member thereof, because of
the member's conduct as a member of such agency, is a party until such
litigation or claim has been finally adjudicated or otherwise settled;
C. Matters concerning security strategy or the deployment of security
personnel, or devices affecting public security;
D. Discussion of the selection of a site or the lease, sale or purchase
of real estate by a political subdivision of the state when publicity
regarding such site, lease, sale, purchase or construction would cause
a likelihood of increased price until such time as all of the property has
been acquired or all proceedings or transactions concerning same have
been terminated or abandoned; and
E. Discussion of any matter which would result in the disclosure of public
records or the information contained therein described in subsection (b)
of section 1-210.50
§ A180-7. Chairperson.
A. The Chairperson or, absent a Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson shall
preside at all meetings. The Chairperson shall preserve order and
decorum and shall decide all questions of order without debate, except
at said Chairperson's request, but subject to appeal to the Council. The
Chairperson may speak and shall vote on all questions as is provided in
§ A180-14 of these rules. The Chairperson shall be an ex officio member
of all committees without the right to vote, except that the Chairperson
shall have the right to vote in those committees to which the Chairperson
is appointed a member.
B. In the absence of both the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson, the
Town Clerk may call the meeting to order, and the Council may choose
from its members a Chairperson Pro Tem who shall preside until the
Chairperson or Vice Chairperson appears.
50.Editor's Note: Refers to the FOIL statute: see C.G.S. § 1-210(b).
§ A180-4 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A180-7
93:352
C. The Chairperson or, absent a Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson shall
represent the Town as titular head of the government at meetings of
such officials representing other municipalities, ceremonies and public
gatherings and upon such other occasions as said presence in such
capacity may be required.
§ A180-8. Town Clerk.
The Town Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council, keep a journal of its
proceedings which shall be a public record and perform such other duties as
may be assigned by the Charter or by action of the Council or state statute
(Charter, Sec. 501).
§ A180-9. Town Manager.
The Town Manager shall attend all meetings of the Council with the right
to speak but not to vote and shall perform such other duties as may be
assigned by law or by the ordinances or resolutions of the Council (Charter,
Sec. 403).
§ A180-10. Committees.
The Council may, from time to time, appoint such standing and special
committees in the manner and for such purposes as the Council may
designate.
§ A180-11. Order of business. [Amended 7-16-2018]
A. Regular Business Meetings.
(1) Pledge of Allegiance.
(2) Recording of attendance by the Town Clerk.
(3) Public comments.
(a) Public.
(b) Council reports.
(c) Council comments.
(d) Town Manager's report.
(e) Town Clerk communications.
(4) Council action.
(a) Acceptance of resignations from boards and commissions.
(b) Appointments to boards and commissions.
(c) Approval of ordinances and resolutions as recommended at the
Regular Workshop Meeting.
(5) Unfinished business.
(6) Other business.
(7) Bids.
(8) Ordinances, resolutions and appointments for introduction.
(9) Minutes.
(10) Public comments.
(11) Executive Session (if required).
(12) Adjourn.
B. Regular workshop meetings.
§ A180-7 (RESERVED) § A180-11
93:353
(1) Pledge of Allegiance.
(2) Recording of attendance by the Town Clerk.
(3) Public comment.
(4) Public hearings on ordinances and resolutions.
(5) Presentations.
(6) Reports from boards and commissions.
(7) Discussion items.
(8) Action to refer workshop items to the Regular Business Agenda for
final action by the Town Council.
(9) Introduction of ordinances and resolutions.
(10) Public comment.
(11) Executive Session (if required).
(12) Adjourn.
C. Regular Workshop Meeting rules.
(1) Unless otherwise determined by Council, the only vote for a final
action on an item on the Regular Workshop Agenda will be to end
review of an item. The Council may also vote to create an ad hoc
committee or to refer a matter to an existing committee.
(2) The only other vote on an agenda item by the Town Council will be a
referral for final action to a Regular Business Meeting.
§ A180-12. Privilege of the floor.
A. Except when a member of the Council has or desires the floor, the Town
Manager shall have the privilege of the floor for the purpose of giving
information to the Council on business and affairs of the Town, and
the Town Attorney shall likewise have the privilege of the floor on the
introduction or interpretation of any existing or proposed ordinance or
resolution or on any question of legal procedure.
B. Except at a public hearing or as otherwise provided in these rules, no
person other than a member of the Council shall address the Council
except by the majority consent of not fewer than five of the members of
Council present.
§ A180-13. Motions.
A. When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated by the
Chairperson and then be in possession of the Council and subject to
amendment or withdrawal, except that withdrawal cannot be made
subsequent to a voted amendment without the consent of the Council.
B. When a motion is under debate, no further motion shall be received
except to adjourn, to recess, to table, for the previous question, to limit
or extend debate, to postpone to time certain, to refer to committee, to
amend or to postpone indefinitely, which motions shall have precedence
in the order indicated.
C. Motions to table, to postpone to time certain or to postpone indefinitely,
once having been decided, shall not be reconsidered at the same
meeting, whereas a motion to refer a matter to a committee can be
reconsidered only at the meeting of the vote. Any other motion can be
reconsidered only at the same or the next succeeding meeting of the
Council.
§ A180-11 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A180-13
93:354
D. Any motion to reconsider shall be in order only upon motion by a
member participating in the prevailing vote of the original motion, and
there shall be no reconsideration of the vote upon motion to adjourn, for
the previous question, or to reconsider.
§ A180-14. Voting.
The ayes and nays on each vote shall be recorded in the journal (Charter,
Sec. 305), thereby recording the vote of each Council member or
abstention.
§ A180-15. Introduction of ordinances and resolutions.
A. All ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced in written form
(Charter, Section 307).
B. For purposes of this section, introduction shall mean the presentation
in written form at any regular or special meeting of Council, either by
a member of Council or by the Town Clerk, who shall present those
ordinances and resolutions filed with the Town Clerk's office by a
member of Council at any time prior to the meeting. Upon introduction,
all ordinances and resolutions shall automatically be set for public
hearing at the next regular or special meeting of Council, subject to the
notice requirements being met (Charter, Sec. 307). The terms of this
section shall not apply to emergency ordinances.
C. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk immediately upon the introduction
of any ordinance or resolution to prepare at least 15 copies of such
proposed ordinance or resolution. One copy shall be retained in the Town
Clerk's office for public inspection and one copy posted on the Town
signpost (Charter, Sec. 307). The Town Clerk shall also promptly furnish
each member of the Council, the Town Manager and the Town Attorney
with a copy of such ordinance or resolution.
D. The copy of the proposed ordinance or resolution retained in the office
of the Town Clerk shall have endorsed thereon the name or names of
the member or committee introducing such document or filing the same
with the Town Clerk or have attached thereto the electors' petition, as
required under the Charter, Section 312, and at the end thereof, under
the caption "Statement of Purpose," shall contain a brief statement of
its purpose, which statement shall not be a part of the ordinance or
resolution. Where such document is introduced by electors' petition,
such copy shall be further endorsed by the Town Clerk, certifying that
the requirements of the Charter, Section 312, have been satisfied. The
statement of purpose and such endorsements shall be included on all
copies of the document to be prepared by the Town Clerk prior to the
final action taken on such document.
E. Before any ordinance shall be acted upon, it shall be reviewed by and
such corrections as may be necessary made therein by the Town
Attorney to ensure accuracy, clearness, conciseness and consistency of
text and phraseology as well as its constitutionality and consistency with
existing ordinances or statutes, and the copy of the ordinance upon
which final action is based shall bear the Town Attorney's endorsement
that such review has been made.
§ A180-13 (RESERVED) § A180-16
93:355
§ A180-16. Passage of ordinances and resolutions.
A. Notice of the passage of an ordinance or resolution shall be published
once in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town, and an
ordinance or resolution shall not become effective until 10 days after
such notice is published. An ordinance or resolution need not be
published in full but may be described by title or subject matter. The
foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency
ordinances (Charter, Sec. 308).
B. All ordinances and resolutions, when passed, shall be endorsed by the
Town Clerk indicating the date and method of its adoption, then
recorded in a book kept for that purpose and the original copy filed as a
permanent record (Charter, Sec. 308, modified).
§ A180-17. Emergency ordinances.
An emergency ordinance shall be only for the immediate preservation of
the public peace, health and safety, shall contain an explicit statement of
the nature of the emergency and shall be adopted by not fewer than six
affirmative votes in the Council, and in no event shall the annual budget or
any appropriation, except as hereinafter provided, constitute an emergency
ordinance. For the purpose of meeting an emergency, as herein defined,
or to prevent the breakdown of any essential service rendered by a
department, board, commission or agency of the Town, the Council, by
an affirmative vote of not less than six of its members, may appropriate,
notwithstanding any other provision of the Charter, a sum not to exceed
$100,000. (Charter, Sec. 310).
§ A180-18. Parliamentary and Charter authority.
The Council will conduct its meeting according to Robert's Rules of Order.
These rules may be revised as necessary, except that should any of these
rules be inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter, then the Charter
shall prevail.
§ A180-19. Suspension or amendment of rules.
A. Any of these rules may be suspended by the affirmative vote of not
fewer than five members of the Council, provided that such action is not
inconsistent with any provisions of the Charter.
B. Any amendment to these rules shall be submitted, in writing, at any
meeting of the Council and may be adopted by the affirmative vote of not
fewer than five members at a subsequent meeting of the Council.
§ A180-16 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A180-19
93:356
Chapter A181
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Illicit discharges and connections to
stormwater drainage systems — See Ch. 141,
Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 167.
Rules and procedures of Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission — See Ch. A182
§ A180-19 (RESERVED) § A180-19
93:357

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ A181-1. Title.
These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations of the Town of Wethersfield."
§ A181-2. Preparation of regulations; statutory authority.
These regulations have been prepared by the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission in accordance with the provisions of an Act
concerning Inland Wetlands and Watercourses, Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and authorized
by the Town Council of the Town of Wethersfield in an ordinance adopted on
December 18, 1972.
§ A181-3. Permit issuance.
Pursuant to said General Statutes, the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission shall issue, issue with modifications or deny permits for all
regulated activities within the Town.
§ A181-4. Soil erosion and sedimentation plan.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any
application for development when the disturbed area of such development
is cumulatively more than 1/2 acre.
§ A181-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, Sections 22a-36 to
22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
AGENCY — The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town
of Wethersfield.
BOG — A poorly drained area containing an accumulation of organic
material and characterized by an association of plants recognized as bog
species.
CERTIFICATION — A signed, written approval by the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission that the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
as presented complies with minimum acceptable standards established in
the publication entitled "2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control," as amended.
CERTIFICATION AUTHORITY — Under §§ 143-22 and 143-24 and 143-25
of the Wethersfield Subdivision Regulations and Section 6.6 of the
Wethersfield Zoning Regulations, the responsibility for all Soil Erosion and
§ A181-1 (RESERVED) § A181-5
93:359
Sediment Control Plans rests with the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission of the Town of Wethersfield.
CLEAR-CUTTING — The harvest of timber products in a fashion which
removes all species of trees down to a two-inch diameter at breast height.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — An area designated by the Agency as
having significant value to the regulated wetlands, watercourses or
habitats. Such an area shall be designated and a conservation easement
covenant placed on the land records as a deeded easement that preserves
land or inland wetlands or watercourses predominately in their natural,
scenic or open condition or in agricultural, farming, forest or open space
use. For an example of a typical easement, see Appendix D attached
thereto.51
CONTINUAL FLOW — A flow of water which persists for an extended period
of time; this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the
low flow period of the annual hydrological cycle, June through September,
but it recurs in prolonged succession.
DEPOSIT — Includes, but shall not be limited to, fill, grade, dump, place,
discharge or emit.
DESIGNATED AGENT — The individual designated as the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Commission Coordinator to carry out its functions and
purposes.
DISCHARGE — The emission of any water, substance or other material
into regulated areas of the Town, whether or not such substance causes
pollution.
DISTURBED AREA — An area where the ground cover is destroyed or
removed such that cumulatively more than 1/2 acre is affected.
DISTURBING THE NATURAL INDIGENOUS CHARACTER OF THE LAND
— Any activity that will significantly disturb a regulated area by reason
of deposition or removal of materials; cause the alteration or obstruction
of waterflow; clear-cutting; or result in the pollution of wetlands or
watercourses of the Town.
EXECUTIVE SUBCOMMITTEE — A three member subcommittee consisting
of the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Commission (or their designee)
and the Designated Agent of the Commission.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
EXEMPTION(S) — A single- or duplex-family dwelling which is not part of
a subdivision of land approved after January 1, 1986, shall be exempt from
these soil erosion and sediment control regulations.
51.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A181-5 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-5
93:360
FARMING — Using any tract of land for growing crops, raising livestock or
other agricultural use.
FEASIBLE — Able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound
engineering principles.
GARDENING — The tilling of soil, planting, cultivating and harvesting of
vegetable matter.
GRAZING — Using any tract of land to feed or supply farm animals with
grass or pasture, to tend farm animals or feeding or growing silage and
herbage.
HARVESTING OF CROPS — Gathering plants or animals or plant or animal
products which have been grown to be harvested.
LICENSE — The whole or any part of a permit, certificate of approval or
similar form of permission which may be required of any person by the
provisions of these regulations or the Act.
MARSH — An area normally covered with shallow water or aquic moisture
regime, subject to seasonal variations and containing an association of
herbaceous, soft-stemmed plants recognized as marsh vegetation.
MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — A practice, procedure, activity, structure or
facility designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental
damage or to maintain or enhance existing environmental quality.
MATERIAL — Any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including
but not limited to soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud,
debris, sand, refuse or waste.
MAINTENANCE (related to drainage pipes) — The removal of accumulated
leaves, soil, and other debris whether by hand or machine, while the pipe
stays in place, generally within 15 feet of the pipe end.
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut.
NURSERY — Land used for propagating trees, shrubs or other plants for
transplanting, sale or for use as stock for grafting.
PERMIT — A decision letter and an official form that states the nature of
the permitted activity, duly signed by an authorized agent of the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal
corporations, government agencies or subdivisions thereof.
POLLUTION — Contamination or the harmful thermal effect or the
rendering unclean or impure of any regulated areas located in the Town by
reason of any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein by
any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come
in contact with any waters.
PRUDENT — Economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social
benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity; provided cost
§ A181-5 (RESERVED) § A181-5
93:361
may be considered in deciding what is prudent and further provided a mere
showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent.
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Any operation within, or use of a regulated area,
or which may have an effect upon a regulated area, involving removal or
deposition of material or causing any obstruction, construction, alteration
or pollution of such wetland or watercourse therein, except as otherwise
indicated in Article II and § 96-11 of these regulations.
REGULATED AREA — All areas within the Town of Wethersfield containing
inland wetlands and/or watercourses, as defined in these regulations or the
Connecticut General Statutes, those areas stream-ward of established local
encroachment lines, and those areas which lie at or below the limits of the
one-hundred-year flood, as defined by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency Flood Insurance Study, revised February 1982. "Regulated Areas"
are generally shown on the maps entitled "Official Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map," CGS Topographic Series, Wethersfield, dated July 1,
1986 and as hereinafter revised or amended. In each instance, however,
the actual type of soil or character of the area, or elevation of the land for
floodplain delineation, as determined by the Inland Wetlands Commission or
its designated agent, shall determine the Regulated Area.
REMOVE — Includes but shall not be limited to draining, excavating,
mining, digging, dredging, sucking, clear-cutting of timber, bulldozing,
drag-lining or blasting.
RENDERING UNCLEAN OR IMPURE — Any alteration of the physical,
chemical or biological properties of any of the waters of the Town or State
of Connecticut, including but not limited to change in color, odor, turbidity
or taste.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, either mineral or organic, that was in
suspension, transported or otherwise removed from its site or origin by
erosion and deposited away from its site of origin.
SIGNIFICANT IMPACT or MAJOR EFFECT — Any activity, including but
not limited to the following activities which may have a major effect or
significant impact:
Any activity involving a deposition or removal of material that will or
may have a significant impact or major effect on the regulated area or
on another part of the inland wetland and watercourse system.
A.
Any activity that substantially changes, alters, or inhibits the natural
channel or dynamics of a regulated area or watercourse system.
B.
Any activity that substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an
inland wetland or watercourse to support desirable biological life,
prevent flooding, supply water, assimilate waste, facilitate drainage,
and/or provide recreation and open space.
C.
Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause
substantial turbidity, siltation, or sedimentation in a regulated area.
D.
§ A181-5 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-5
93:362
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A scheme that
minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and
includes but is not limited to the minimum standards established in the
publication entitled "2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control," as amended.
SOIL SCIENTIST — An individual duly qualified in accordance with
standards set by the Federal Office of Personnel Management.
SWAMP — An area with a water table at or near the surface of the ground
throughout most of the year and containing vegetation dominated by an
association of trees and/or shrubs recognized as swamp species.
TOWN — The Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut.
WASTE — Sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive,
which may pollute or tend to pollute any regulated areas of the Town.
WATERCOURSE(S) — Rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds,
marshes, swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial,
vernal or intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated
pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut
General Statutes. Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a
defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more
of the following characteristics: a) evidence of scour or deposits of recent
alluvium or detritus, b) the presence of standing or flowing water for a
duration longer than a particular storm incident, and c) the presence of
hydrophytic vegetation.
WETLAND(S) — Land, including submerged land, not regulated pursuant
to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended, which consists of any of the soil types designated
as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and/or floodplain by the
National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time,
by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA). Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated
sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by
the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.
Any activity that causes a substantial diminution of flow of a natural
watercourse, or groundwater levels of the regulated area.
E.
Any activity that causes or has the potential to cause pollution of a
wetland or watercourse.
F.
Any activity which creates conditions which may adversely affect the
health, welfare or safety of any individual of the community.
G.
Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse
areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
H.
§ A181-5 (RESERVED) § A181-5
93:363

ARTICLE II
Permitted Uses as of Right and Nonregulated Uses
§ A181-6. Uses permitted by right.
The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and
watercourses as of right:
A. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm
ponds of three acres or less, essential to the farming operation, and
activities conducted by, or under the authority of, the Department of
Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse
restoration or enhancement, or mosquito control. The provisions of this
subdivision shall not be construed to include road construction or the
erection of buildings not directly related to the farming operation;
relocation of watercourses with continual flow; clear-cutting filling or
reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow; clearcutting
of timber except for the expansion of agricultural crop land; the
mining of topsoil, peat, sand, gravel or similar material from wetlands or
watercourses for the purposes of sale.
B. A residential home on a subdivision lot approved by the Town of
Wethersfield Planning and Zoning Commission as of July 1, 1974 (the
original adoption of local wetland regulations), provided that the
building permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987. The applicant
shall be prepared to document the validity of said right by providing
a certified copy of the building permit and approved site plan showing
proposed and existing topographic contours, houses and well locations,
septic systems, driveways, approval dates or other information.
C. Boat anchorage or mooring, not to include dredging or dock
construction.
D. Uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of a residential
property, such property being the largest minimum residential lot size
permitted anywhere in the Town, and containing a residence. Incidental
uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping
but may not include removal or deposition of substantial amounts of
material from or into a wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration
of a watercourse.
E. Construction and operation by water companies, as defined in Section
16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, or by municipal water supply
systems, as provided for in Chapter 102 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, of dams, reservoirs, and other facilities necessary to the
impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public
water supplies, except as provided in Section 22a-401 through 22a-410
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
F. The Agency shall exempt from all provisions of the rules and regulations
of the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Commission any maintenance
or repair, within original specifications, of existing public utilities
conducted within public rights-of-way and easements by the Town of
Wethersfield. Improvements conducted within public rights-of-way and
easements which are within inland wetlands and watercourses by the
Town of Wethersfield shall be deemed regulated activities.
§ A181-6 (RESERVED) § A181-7
93:365
§ A181-7. Nonregulated uses.
The following operations and uses shall be permitted as nonregulated uses
in regulated areas, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous
character of the land and wildlife:
A. Construction on a site where no activity is to occur on or near a
regulated area. Permission for such construction may be granted without
appearing before the Commission by following the waiver provisions
outlined in § A181-22A, Declaratory ruling.
B. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife. Such
operations or use may include, but is not limited to, minor work to
control erosion, or to encourage proper fish, wildlife, or silviculture
management practices.
C. Outdoor recreation, including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field
trials, nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving,
camping, boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing, cross country
skiing, and shell fishing where otherwise legally permitted and
regulated.
§ A181-7 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-7
93:366
ARTICLE III
Licensing of Activities
§ A181-8. License required for certain activities.
Subject to the provisions of Article II and this article, regulated activities
affecting inland wetlands and watercourses within the Town are prohibited
except as they may be licensed by the Agency.
§ A181-9. Regulated activities.
The Agency shall regulate only those activities which include removing of
material from, depositing material in, constructing, obstructing or polluting
a regulated area.
§ A181-10. Copies of regulations to be available.
Copies of these regulations required for the protection and preservation of
inland wetlands and watercourses, and erosion and sediment control of the
Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut, as well as permit applications, and the
map of regulated areas entitled "Official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Map, Wethersfield, July 1986," shall be available for inspection in the offices
of the Engineering Division, Wethersfield Town Hall, Town of Wethersfield,
Connecticut, during normal business hours.
§ A181-11. Activities regulated by state.
The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall regulate activities in
or affecting wetlands or watercourses subject to the following jurisdiction:
any permit decision or order issued by the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection shall be binding upon the Agency as to those matters within
the jurisdiction of the Commissioner of Environmental Protection. The
Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction
over regulated activities and other activities in or affecting wetlands or
watercourses undertaken by any department, agency or instrumentality of
the State of Connecticut, except any local or regional board of education,
pursuant to Section 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut General Statutes.
A. Construction and modification of any dam, pursuant to Sections 22a-401
and 22a-411 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
B. Construction or placement of any obstruction within stream channel
encroachment lines, pursuant to Sections 22a-342 to 22a-349a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
C. Construction or placement of any structure or obstruction within tidal,
coastal and navigable waters, pursuant to Sections 22a-359 to 22a-363
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
D. Diversion of water in excess of 50,000 gallons per day or any surface
waters of the state where the tributary watershed area above the point
of diversion is 100 acres larger pursuant to Sections 22a-365 through
22a-378 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ A181-8 (RESERVED) § A181-11
93:367
E. Discharges into waters of the state, pursuant to Section 22a-430 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
F. Discharges of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and
watercourses of the state pursuant to Section 401 of the Federal Clean
Water Act, as amended, for activities regulated by the United States
Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water
Act.
G. All regulated activities undertaken by any department, agency or
instrumentality of the State of Connecticut.
§ A181-12. Boundary amendments.
The Agency shall establish or amend area boundary maps only in
accordance with the procedures of Section 22a-42 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended. Such maps are on file in the office of the
Engineering Division, and titled "Official Inland Wetlands and Water
Courses Map," dated July 1986.
§ A181-13. Disputed designations.
Wetlands and watercourses are defined in § A181-5 of these regulations:
A. If any person disputes the designation or failure to designate any
wetland or watercourse as a regulated area, such person may be
required to produce such information as the Agency deems necessary to
permit an informed decision.
B. To meet the burden of proof for wetlands exemption under Subsection
A, the petitioner may be directed to present documentation by a soil
scientist that the wetland in question or a portion of it does not have a
soil type classified by the National Cooperative Soils Survey as poorly
drained, very poorly drained, alluvial, or floodplain.
C. To meet the burden of proof for exemption under Subsection A of a
swamp, bog or marsh, or regulated area, the petitioner may be directed
to present documentation by a professional biologist, ecologist,
hydrologist, or botanist, who is competent in plant identification or
wetland ecology classification systems and/or geology and hydrology,
that the area in question does not contain botanical species or
hydrogeology or geologic condition as a swamp, bog or marsh.
§ A181-11 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-13
93:368
ARTICLE IV
Application Requirements
§ A181-14. Application submission.
No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first
obtaining a permit for such activity from the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission of the Town of Wethersfield.
A. Applications must be submitted five business days prior to regularly
scheduled meeting of the Agency in order to be included on the meeting
agenda. The application shall be formally received only at a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Agency.
B. No application shall be deemed complete unless it shall be in such form
and contain such information as the Agency deems necessary for fair
determination of the issues. The Agency shall inform all applicants of
such necessary information without delay.
C. The information required by the Agency shall be furnished in sufficient
copies to permit the Agency to carry out its duties under these
regulations. In no case will fewer than 15 copies be accepted for a final
review of an application proposal.
D. All information submitted in the application shall be considered factual,
and, in the case of anticipated activity, if shall be considered binding.
A failure on the part of the applicant or any of the applicant's agents
to provide correct information or performance exceeding the levels of
anticipated activity may be sufficient grounds for the revocation of any
permit issued under these regulations and/or for penalties to be
imposed.
§ A181-15. Contents of application.
All applications shall include the following information, in writing, and shall
be on a form provided by the Agency, available from the office of the Town's
Engineering Division:
A. The applicant's name, home and business addresses, and telephone
numbers.
B. The owner's name (if not the applicant), home and business addresses,
telephone numbers and written consent to the proposed activity set
forth in the application and written consent from the owner to file the
application.
C. The applicant's interest in the land.
D. The geographical location of the property affected by the proposed
activity, including a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow
identification of the property on the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Map.
E. The purpose and description of the proposed activity and proposed
erosion and sedimentation controls and other management practices
and mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of
issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity including, but not
limited to, measures to:
(1) Prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage,
§ A181-14 (RESERVED) § A181-15
93:369
(2) Maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or
(3) In the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create
productive wetland or watercourse resources.
F. Alternatives considered by the applicant and why the proposal to alter
wetlands as set forth in the application was chosen.
G. A site plan showing existing and proposed conditions in relation to
wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities
associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed activity which
are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may
have an impact on wetlands or watercourses.
H. Assurance, by written certification of a professional engineer registered
to practice in the State of Connecticut, that the flood-carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion of any floodway is maintained.
I. The Agency will notify adjacent communities when an applicant
petitions to relocate or alter a floodway when such floodway exists
across the Town line or the Town of Wethersfield. The applicant will
notify the State Coordinator's office and the Federal Insurance
Administration prior to any relocation or alteration of a floodway and
submit copies of such notification to the Agency.
J. Names and mailing addresses of adjacent landowners.
K. A statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the
information provided in the application and is aware of the penalties
for obtaining a permit through deception or through inaccurate or
misleading information;
L. Authorization for the members and Designated Agents of the Agency to
inspect the subject land, at reasonable times, both before and after a
final decision has been issued;
M. Any other information the Agency deems necessary to the
understanding of what the applicant is proposing; and
N. Submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule
established in the Appendix of these regulations.52
O. If the proposed activity involves a significant impact activity as
determined by the Agency, additional information, based on the nature
and anticipated effects of the activity, including but not limited to that
outlined in § A181-24, is required.
§ A181-16. Notification of other municipalities.
A. When an application to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated
activity upon an inland wetland or watercourse is filed and any portion
of such wetland or watercourse is within 500 feet of the boundary
of another municipality, the applicant shall give written notice of the
application by certified mail, return receipt requested, on the same day
to the inland wetlands agency of such other municipality.
B. The Agency shall, in accordance with PA 87-307,53 notify the Clerk of any
adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application to conduct a
regulated activity when:
52.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
53.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 8-7d.
§ A181-15 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-16
93:370
(1) Any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is
proposed is located within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining
municipality;
(2) Traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use
streets within the adjoining municipality to directly enter or exit the
site;
(3) Sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through
and significantly impact the sewage or drainage system within the
adjoining municipality; or
(4) Water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other
municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
C. Notice of the pendency of such application shall be made by registered
mail and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the
application.
§ A181-17. Date of receipt.
The date of official receipt of any application shall be the day of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency immediately following the day
of submission to the Agency, or 35 days after such submission, whichever is
sooner.
§ A181-18. Additional information.
At any time during the review period, the Agency may require the applicant
to provide additional information about the regulated area or regulated
activity which is the subject of the application or wetlands or watercourses
affected by the regulated activity.
§ A181-19. Filing of evidence.
If a public hearing is to be held on any application for a permit, all
documentary evidence in support of the application shall be filed with the
Agency and available for public inspection prior to the hearing or any
reconvening thereof.
§ A181-20. Public inspection.
All applications shall be open for public inspection.
§ A181-21. Incomplete applications.
Incomplete applications may be denied.
§ A181-22. Permitted operations; waivers.
A. Declaratory ruling. To carry out the purpose of this section, any person
proposing to carry out a permitted or nonregulated operation or use
within a regulated area shall, prior to commencement of such operation
or use, notify the Agency by completing an application form and
sufficient information to enable a proper determination that the
§ A181-16 (RESERVED) § A181-22
93:371
proposed activity and use is permitted or nonregulated use of the
regulated area, as defined in § A181-5 of these regulations.
B. Waiver provisions may be made by two of the following three
representatives of the Wethersfield Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission Executive Subcommittee: The Chairperson, the Vice
Chairperson of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses or the
Watercourses Designated Agent. Two of the three may rule that the
proposed activity is or is not a regulated activity and determine if a full
permit procedure is required. Such ruling shall be in writing and shall
be made no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting. Two of
the three representatives for the Commission may make such a ruling
on behalf of the Commission at any time. The Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Designated Agent shall submit to the Commission a
description of any waiver authorized under the provisions of this
subsection at the next regularly scheduled meeting. Initiation of the
permitted use or operation shall be within one year of any ruling
pursuant to this section and shall expire in one year from the date of
issuance unless otherwise extended by the Agency.
§ A181-23. Summary ruling.
A. If the Agency finds that a proposed activity is a regulated activity not
involving significant impact or major effect on the regulated areas, as
defined in § A181-5 of these regulations, it may allow the activity with
or without conditions after initial review. In order to grant a permit at
this stage, the Agency (after full review of the considerations set forth in
§§ A181-24 and A181-25 of these regulations and other pertinent factors)
shall issue an opinion presenting the reasons for granting the permit
with or without conditions.
B. The Agency may issue a permit without a public hearing provided no
petition provided for in § A181-24 is filed with the agency not later than
14 days after the date of receipt of such application.
§ A181-24. Plenary ruling.
If the proposed activity involves a significant activity as defined in § A181-5
of these regulations, additional information as outlined in § A181-15, based
on the nature and anticipated effects of the activity, including, but not
limited to the following:
A. Site plan for the proposed use or operation showing the property that
will be affected, indicating existing and proposed conditions, wetland
and watercourse boundaries, land contours, boundaries of land
ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses
and other pertinent features of the development drawn by a licensed
surveyor, professional engineer or architect registered in the State of
Connecticut or in an adjoining state, or by such other person acceptable
to the Agency.
B. Engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully
describe the proposed project and any filling, excavation, drainage or
hydraulic modifications to watercourses.
§ A181-22 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-24
93:372
C. Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by
the National Cooperative Soils Survey by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service of the USDA.
D. A description of the ecological communities and functions of the
wetlands or watercourses involved with the application and the effects
of the proposed regulated activities on these communities and wetland
functions.
E. A description of how the proposed activity will change, diminish, or
enhance the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or
watercourses involved in the application and with each alternative.
F. Analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material.
G. Management practices which would mitigate the impact of the proposed
activity.
H. In the case of any application which is subject to the notification
provisions of § A181-16A(1) of these regulations, a public hearing shall
not be conducted if the Clerk of the adjoining municipality(s) has not
received notice of the pendency of the applications.
§ A181-25. Public hearings.
A. The Agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the
Agency determines that the proposed activity may have a significant
impact on wetlands or watercourses, or a petition signed by at least 25
persons requesting a hearing is filed with the Agency not later than 14
days after the date of receipt of such application or the Agency finds
that a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public
interest. Such hearing shall be held no later than 65 days after the
receipt of such application.
B. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open
for public inspection. Any person may appear and be heard at any public
hearing.
(1) All public hearings shall commence no later than 65 days after
receipt of the application.
(2) Notice of hearings shall be published at least twice at intervals of
not less than two days, the first not more than 15 days and not fewer
than 10 days, and the second, not less than two days before the date
set for the hearing, in a newspaper having a general circulation in
the Town.
(3) All applications, maps, and documents relating to this public hearing
shall be open for public inspection in the office of the Engineering
Division. Notice of the hearing shall be sent by the Agency to the
applicant and to owners of record of abutting land provided by the
applicant, no less than 15 days prior to the day of the hearing.
(4) Where possible, public hearings shall be completed in a single
session. The Agency shall complete the public hearing within 35
days of the commencement of the public hearing. The Agency shall
act upon the application within 65 days after the completion of
the public hearing. However, the hearing may be continued where
necessary for the full development of evidence or for the full
adequate participation of the parties, or for such other substantial
§ A181-24 (RESERVED) § A181-25
93:373
purposes. The applicant may consent to extend the time frame for
any of the steps, but the total of all extensions together cannot
exceed 65 days. In no case shall continuances be used as a device for
delay.
§ A181-26. Permit fees.
A. The Agency shall collect permit fees by check or money order at time
of application to the Agency, to help defray the costs and expenses of
carrying out its duties under these regulations. The application fee is
not refundable. Boards, Commissions, Councils and Departments of the
Town of Wethersfield are exempt from all fee requirements.
B. Application fees shall be based on the fee schedule included in the
Appendix.54
§ A181-27. Considerations for decision.
A. Due consideration shall be given to any reports from staff, other boards
or commissions and/or federal or state agencies, including the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, the Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection, and the Flood Insurance Study, Town of
Wethersfield, latest revision, by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development Federal Insurance Administration, and
the Wethersfield Watershed Management Study, by Milone &
MacBroom.
B. Additional requested information.
C. All relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to the
following:
(1) Criteria for decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of
Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General
Statutes, including matters relating to regulating, licensing and
enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into
consideration all relevant facts and circumstances, including but not
limited to:
(a) The environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on
wetlands or watercourses;
(b) The applicant's purpose for, and any feasible and prudent
alternatives to, the proposed regulated activity which
alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to
wetlands or watercourses;
(c) The relationship between the short term and long term impacts
of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses
and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity
of such wetlands or watercourses;
(d) Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse
resources which would be caused by the proposed regulated
activity, including the extent to which such activity would
foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such
resources, and any mitigation measures which may be
54.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A181-25 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-27
93:374
considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity
including, but not limited to, measures to:
[1] Prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental
damage,
[2] Maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or
[3] In the following order of priority: restore, enhance and
create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
(e) The character and degree of injury to, or interference with,
safety, health or the reasonable use of property which is caused
or threatened by the proposed regulated activity; and
(f) Impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or
watercourses outside the area for which the activity is proposed
and future activities associated with or reasonably related to,
the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the
proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on
wetlands or watercourses.
(2) In the case of an application which received a public hearing
pursuant to a finding by the Agency that the proposed activity may
have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a permit
shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the record
that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making
this finding the Agency shall consider the facts and circumstances
set forth in § A181-27. The finding and the reasons therefor shall be
stated on the record in writing. In the case of an application which
is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible and
prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have
less adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the Agency shall
propose on the record in writing the types of alternatives which
the applicant may investigate provided this subsection shall not be
construed to shift the burden from the applicant to prove that the
applicant is entitled to the permit or to present alternatives to the
proposed regulated activity.
D. For purposes of this section, 1) "wetlands or watercourses" includes
aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses,
and 2) "habitats" means areas or environments in which an organism or
biological population normally lives or occurs.
E. A municipal inland wetlands agency shall not deny or condition an
application for a regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or
watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic, plant, or
animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical
characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
F. Measures which would mitigate the impact of the proposed activity and
may be imposed as conditions of the permit. Such measures include
the availability of further technical improvements or safeguards which
could feasibly be added to the plan or action to avoid the reduction of
the natural capacity of the wetlands or watercourse to support desirable
biological life, prevent flooding, supply water, control sedimentation
and/or prevent erosion, assimilate wastes, facilitate drainage, and
provide recreation and open space.
§ A181-27 (RESERVED) § A181-27
93:375
G. In the case of any application which has received a public hearing, a
permit shall not be issued unless the Agency finds that a feasible and
prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding, the Agency
shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in this section of
these regulations. This finding and the reasons therefore shall be stated
on the record in the decision of the Agency. A permit shall not be issued
unless the Agency finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and
prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding the Agency
shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in § A181-27. The
finding and the reasons therefor shall be stated on the record in writing.
H. In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the
Agency shall base its decision on the record of that hearing.
Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing record shall
not be considered by the Agency in its decision. A conclusion that
a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist does not create a
presumption that a permit should be issued. The applicant has the
burden of demonstrating that his application is consistent with the
purposes policies of these regulations and Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ A181-28. Grant or denial of permit.
A. The Agency may grant the application as filed; grant it upon such terms,
conditions, limitations or modifications necessary to carry out the
purposes of the Act; or deny it.
B. The Agency, or two of three Executive Subcommittee members acting
pursuant to § A181-22 of these regulations, may, in accordance with
these regulations, grant the application as filed or grant it upon other
terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity
designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the
application. Such terms may include any reasonable measures which
would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which would:
(1) Prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage,
(2) Maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or
(3) In the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create
productive wetland or watercourse resources.
§ A181-29. Permit process.
A. No later than 65 days after receipt of an application, the Agency may
hold a public hearing on such application. The hearing shall be
completed within 35 days of its commencement, and action shall be
taken on applications within 65 days after completion of a public
hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on
applications within 65 days from the date of receipt of the application.
(See §§ A181-14A and A181-25.)
B. The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its
decision and, in the case of any public hearing, such decision shall be
based fully on the record of such hearing and shall be in writing.
C. The agency shall notify the applicant and any named parties to the
proceeding of its decision within 15 days of the date of the decision
§ A181-27 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-29
93:376
by certified mail, and the Agency shall cause notice of its order in the
issuance or denial of the permit to be published in a newspaper having
circulation in the Town wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies.
D. If an activity authorized by the inland wetland permit also involves
an activity or project which requires zoning or subdivision approval,
a special zoning permit, variance or special exception, a copy of the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission's decision report on
the application shall be filed with the Town of Wethersfield Planning
and Zoning Commission within 15 days of the date of the decision.
This subsection does not apply to certification of sediment and erosion
control plans.
E. If the Agency denies the permit "without prejudice" or if it grants a
permit with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, the applicant
may attempt to modify the proposal to the Agency's satisfaction. The
Agency shall determine whether the proposed modification requires the
filing of a new application. The rejection of a modified or corrected
application by the agency shall be equivalent to the denial of an
application for the purposes of appeal.
F. If the Agency denies a permit "with prejudice", the application shall not
be resubmitted for one-year following the date of such denial.
G. Permits shall be subject to the following time limits:
(1) Any permit issued by the Agency shall be valid for five years
provided the Agency may establish a specific time period within
which any regulated activity shall be conducted.
(2) Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed
with the Agency in accordance with Article IV of these regulations
at least 65 days prior to the expiration date of the permit. Any
application to renew or amend such an existing permit shall contain
the information required under § A181-15 of these regulations
provided:
(a) The application may incorporate the documentation and record
of the prior application by reference;
(b) The application shall describe the extent of work completed at
the time of filing and the schedule for completing the activities
authorized in the permit;
(c) The application shall state the reason why the authorized activity
was not initiated or completed within the time specified in the
permit;
(d) The application shall describe any changes in facts or
circumstances involved with or affecting wetlands or
watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was issued;
(e) The Agency may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept
an untimely application to renew such permit if the authorized
activity is ongoing and allow the continuation of work beyond
the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to
be renewed and the public interest or environment will be best
served by not interrupting the activity.
(3) Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request
of the permit holder unless the Agency finds that there has been a
§ A181-29 (RESERVED) § A181-29
93:377
substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit
application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with
regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued
provided no permit may be valid for more than 10 years.
H. If the activity authorized by the inland wetland permit also involves an
activity or project which requires zoning or subdivision approval, special
permit, variance or special exception, no work pursuant to the wetland
permit may begin until all other such approvals are obtained.
I. The Agency may delegate to its Executive Subcommittee the authority
to approve or extend an activity that is not located in a wetland or
watercourse when such Executive Subcommittee finds that the conduct
of such activity would result in no greater than a minimal impact on
any wetlands or watercourses. Requests for such approval shall be made
on a form provided by the Agency and shall contain the information
listed under § A181-15 of these regulations and any other information
the Agency may reasonably require. Notwithstanding the provisions
for receipt and processing applications prescribed in these regulations,
such Executive Subcommittee may approve or extend such an activity at
any time.
§ A181-29 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-29
93:378
ARTICLE V
Appeals
§ A181-30. Appeals procedure.
Any person aggrieved by any regulation, order, decision or action by the
Agency pursuant to these regulations may appeal to the Superior Court in
and for the county where the land affected is located within 15 days after
publication of such regulation, order, decision or action. All appeals shall
follow the procedure outlined in Section 22a-43 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
§ A181-31. Notification of Commissioner.
The Agency shall notify the Commissioner of Environmental Protection of
any such appeals and enclose a copy of the regulation, order, decision or
action upon which it is based. The notification shall be on a form supplied by
the Commissioner and be forwarded within 15 days of the commencement
of such appeal action.
§ A181-30 (RESERVED) § A181-31
93:379

ARTICLE VI
Other Permits and Licenses
§ A181-32. Obtaining additional permission.
Nothing in these regulations shall obviate any requirement for the applicant
to obtain any other assent, permit or license required by law or regulation
of the government of the United States, the State of Connecticut or any
political subdivision thereof. The obtaining of such assents, permits or
licenses is solely the responsibility of the applicant.
§ A181-32 (RESERVED) § A181-32
93:381

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ A181-33. Stipulations of permit application.
Application for a permit shall constitute permission for and consent to
Agency inspections of the site of proposed activity at any reasonable time
before or after the granting of a permit. The owner, applicant or their agent
shall have the permit readily available and shall produce it for inspection by
the Agency's representative upon request. The Agency shall be authorized
to seek such necessary court orders as will permit it to inspect land
whereon the Agency has probable cause to believe that a regulated activity
is in progress and for which no application has been filed.
§ A181-34. Actions upon violations.
A. If the Agency finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any
activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act, Sections
22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, or any of the regulations of this Agency or if any applicant has
not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in a permit or
has exceeded the scope of the work as set forth in the application, the
Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
(1) Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility
or condition to immediately cease such activity or to correct such
facility or condition. Within 10 days of the issuance of such order, the
Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to
be heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect.
The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and
within 10 days of the completion of the hearing, notify the person,
by certified mail, that the original order remains in effect, that the
revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The
Agency shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper having
general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be
effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Agency
affirms, revises or withdraws the order. The issuance of an order
pursuant to this section shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to
Section 22a-44(b) of the General Statutes, as amended.
(2) Suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not
complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the
permit or has exceeded the scope of the work as set forth in the
application plans. Prior to revoking any permit, the Agency shall
issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants
the intended action. At the public hearing the permittee shall be
given an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its permit
and any and all requirements for the retention of the permit. The
permittee shall be notified of the Agency's decision to suspend,
revoke or maintain a permit by personal service or certified mail
within 15 days of the date of its decision. The agency shall publish
§ A181-33 (RESERVED) § A181-34
93:383
notice of the suspension or violation in a newspaper having general
circulation in the Town.
(3) Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity
or maintaining such facility or condition, stating the nature of the
violation, the jurisdiction of the Agency, and prescribing the
necessary action and steps to correct the violation, including,
without limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourse.
(4) In addition to any other remedy allowed by law, any person who
violates any provision of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1000.
Issuance of such fines shall be in accordance with the procedures
established in Town ordinances, including the citation hearing
process. (See Attachments.)55
B. The Agency may request that the person appear at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity
and/or provide a written reply to the notice or filing a proper application
for the necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in
a notice of violation may result in issuance of the order provided in
Subsection A(1) of this section or other enforcement proceedings as
provided by law.
55.Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included at the end of this chapter. See also Ch. 73,
Enforcement, Art. II, Zoning and Wetlands Regulations.
§ A181-34 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-34
93:384
ARTICLE VIII
Bonds and Insurance
§ A181-35. Bonds.
A. The applicant upon approval of the license and at the discretion of the
Agency, may be required to file a performance bond in an amount and
with sureties and in a form approved by the Agency.
B. The bond and sureties shall be conditioned on compliance with all
provisions of these regulations and conditions imposed on permit
approval.
§ A181-36. Insurance.
The applicant may be required to certify that the applicant has public
insurance against liability which may result from the proposed operation
or use covering any and all damages which might occur within two years
of completion of such operations, in an amount to be determined by the
Agency commensurate with the projected operation.
§ A181-35 (RESERVED) § A181-36
93:385

ARTICLE IX
Conflict and Severance
§ A181-37. Greater restrictions to govern.
A. If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the
provision which imposes the most stringent standards for the use of
wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of any word,
clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of
these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part which can
be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
B. If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the
provisions of the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern.
§ A181-38. Regulations to control over maps.
Where there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and
the boundaries set forth on any map now or hereinafter adopted, the
provisions of the regulations shall control.
§ A181-37 (RESERVED) § A181-38
93:387

ARTICLE X
Conformity with State Regulations; Actions of Commissioner
§ A181-39. Regulations to be submitted.
All regulations, including regulated area boundary maps, promulgated or
amended by the Agency, pursuant to the Act shall be submitted to the
Commissioner not later than 10 days after their adoption.
§ A181-40. Notice of nonconformance; actions.
In the event that the Commissioner shall find any part of the Agency's
regulation not in conformity, the Commissioner shall issue a notice of
nonconformance which shall include:
A. The reasons for holding any part to be nonconforming.
B. The section or sections whose operation and effect shall be suspended
until they shall be amended and resubmitted.
C. The extent to which the Commissioner shall exercise jurisdiction over
the municipal wetlands and watercourses for their protection in the
interval between the issuance of a notice on nonconformance and the
resubmission of amended regulations, including boundary maps.
§ A181-41. Regulations for nonconformance.
A. The Agency shall, pursuant to the provisions for adopting and amending
regulations contained in the Act, initiate proceedings to amend such
nonconformance.
B. Upon disapproval of any regulations, the Commissioner shall assume
jurisdiction over those portions of the regulations as may be necessary
to assure continuity of wetlands and watercourse regulation in the Town.
This jurisdiction shall cease upon approval of the regulations by the
Commissioner.
C. Failure of the Commissioner to issue a notice of nonconformance within
60 days of the receipt of such regulations, maps, or amendments shall be
taken as approval of such regulations.
§ A181-42. Written approval required.
If municipal regulations were not submitted to and granted approval by
the Commissioner in a preliminary form prior to adoption, they shall not
become effective until granted final written approval by the Commissioner.
§ A181-39 (RESERVED) § A181-42
93:389

ARTICLE XI
Amendment Procedure
§ A181-43. Regulations for amendments.
These regulations and inland wetlands and watercourses boundary maps
may be amended, changed or repealed at any time by majority vote of the
Agency after the procedure outlined for the establishment of regulations
and boundaries pursuant to Section 22a-42 of the General Statutes, as
amended.
§ A181-44. Petition for change.
All petitions requesting a change in the regulations or boundaries of
regulated areas shall be submitted, in writing, on a form provided by the
Agency, a copy of which is included as an Appendix.56 In addition, the
applicant shall pay a fee according to the Schedule of Fees in an Appendix,
to help defray the cost and expenses of advertising. Such petition shall
be considered at a public hearing in the manner prescribed in the Act for
the establishment of regulations and boundaries. A copy of the proposed
regulation or boundary change shall be filed in the Town Clerk's office for
public inspection at least 10 days before such hearing. Such public hearing
shall be held within 65 days after receipt of such petition. The applicant
shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing by certified mail
no fewer than 10 days prior to the hearing. The Agency shall complete
the public hearing within 35 days. The Agency shall act upon the changes
requested within 65 days after the completion of the hearing. The petitioner
may consent to extension of the periods provided in this section for holding
hearings and for adoption or denial of the requested change, but the total
of all extensions together cannot exceed 65 days, or the petitioner may
withdraw the petition.
56.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A181-43 (RESERVED) § A181-44
93:391

ARTICLE XII
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Certification
§ A181-45. Submission of plan.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any
application for development when the disturbed area of such development
is cumulatively more than 1/2 acre.
§ A181-46. Eligibility for certification; contents of plan.
A. To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan
shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion
and sedimentation and reduce the danger from stormwater runoff on the
proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles,
methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the "2002
Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control," as
amended.
B. Said soil erosion and sediment control plan shall include, but not be
limited to:
(1) A narrative describing:
(a) The development.
(b) The schedule for grading and construction activities including;
[1] The start and completion dates.
[2] The sequence of grading and construction activities.
[3] The sequence for installation and/or application of soil
erosion and sediment control measures.
[4] The sequence for final stabilization of the project site.
(c) The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment
control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(d) The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment
control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(e) The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil
erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater
management facilities.
(f) The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil
erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater
management facilities.
(2) A site plan at a sufficient scale to show the following:
(a) The location of the proposed development and adjacent
properties.
(b) The existing and proposed topography, including soil types,
wetlands, watercourses and water bodies.
(c) The existing structures on the project site, if any.
(d) The proposed area alterations, including cleared, excavated,
filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads
and, if applicable, new property lines.
(e) The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion
and sediment control measures and stormwater management
facilities.
(f) The sequence of grading and construction activities.
§ A181-45 (RESERVED) § A181-46
93:393
(g) The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion
and sediment control measures and stormwater management
facilities.
(h) The sequence for final stabilization of the development site.
(3) Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the
applicant or requested by the Agency or its Designated Agent.
§ A181-47. Issuance or denial of certification.
A. The Agency shall either certify that the soil erosion and sediment control
plan, as submitted, complies with the requirements and objectives of
this regulation or deny certification when the soil erosion and sediment
control plan does not comply with these regulations. Nothing in these
regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the
approval of any application under Chapters 124, 124A or 126 of the
General Statutes.
B. Prior to certification, any soil erosion and sediment control plan
submitted to the municipality may be reviewed by the County Soil and
Water Conservation District, which may make recommendation
concerning such plan, provided that such review shall be completed
within 30 days of the receipt of such plan.
§ A181-48. Conditions.
A. Conditions relating to soil erosion and sediment control. Site
development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control
plan is certified and the control measures and facilities in the certified
soil erosion and sediment control plan which are scheduled for
installation prior to site development are installed and functional. If
any such site development is begun prior to the time that such predevelopment
control measures and facilities as required under such
certified plan are installed and functional and such site development
continues after written notice is provided to the permittee under such
certified plan or such permittee's designated agent advising of the
failure to comply with the certified plan, the Agency may suspend or
revoke its certification of such certified plan.
B. Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall
be installed as scheduled according to the certified soil erosion and
sediment control plan.
C. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in maintained in
effective condition to ensure the compliance of the certified soil erosion
and sediment control plan.
§ A181-49. Monitoring and inspection.
Inspections may be made by the Agency or its designated agent during
development to ensure compliance with the certified soil erosion and
sediment control plan and that control measures and facilities are properly
performed or installed and maintained. The Agency, the Designated Agent,
or and any agent designated by the Agency or Agent to make inspections
shall be allowed to access the project site at any time.
§ A181-46 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-50
93:394
§ A181-50. Amendments to plan.
A. Minor amendments to a certified soil erosion and sediment control plan
may be approved by the Agency's designated agent, provided that the
proposed amendment:
(1) Involves the replacement of inadequate or failed control materials or
devices with those determined to be more effective by the designated
agent.
(2) Does not adversely change an approved restoration schedule.
(3) Is not a substantial redesign of the soil erosion and sediment control
plan or narrative, in the Designated Agent's opinion.
B. The permittee or the Agency's designated agent may petition the Agency
for substantial amendments to the certified soil erosion and sediment
control plan.
§ A181-51. Model signature block.
Certification
To verify "certification," as defined in soil erosion and sediment control
regulations:
It is hereby certified that this soil erosion and sediment control plan
is in compliance with §§ 143-22, 143-24 and 143-25 of the Wethersfield
Subdivision Regulations and § 6.6 of the Wethersfield Zoning Regulations,
as applicable, and that the minimum standards established in the
Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control are satisfied.
The permittee under this plan is responsible for ensuring compliance with
this plan. The Town of Wethersfield shall not be held liable for improper
installation, lack of maintenance or other neglect on behalf of the
permittee.
____________________________________
Chairperson
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission
§ A181-50 (RESERVED) § A181-51
93:395

ARTICLE XIII
Violations and Citations
§ A181-52. Authorization to issue citations.
A. The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Enforcement Officer, designated
in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, Section 22a-44, and
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of
Wethersfield, or any police officer of the Town of Wethersfield
(hereinafter referred to as "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Enforcement Officer") is authorized to issue citations for violations of
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of
Wethersfield ("Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations") to the
extent and in the manner provided by this article.
B. A citation may be issued for those violations specified in § A181-53 of this
chapter. The fines set forth in this article shall be in addition to, and not
in lieu of, any other penalties or remedies allowed by law.
§ A181-53. Schedule of fines and violations.
The fine for each such citation shall be in accordance with the following
schedule:
Nature of Violation Amount of Fine
Clear-cutting $500
Placement of material in a regulated area $500
Violation of plans, conditions or other elements of an
approved inland wetlands and watercourses permit
$500
Violation of any element of an approved erosion and
sedimentation control plan
$150
Conduct, without the issuance of an inland wetlands
and watercourses permit, of any other regulated
activity in a regulated area not listed above
$150
§ A181-54. Uncontested payment of citation.
Any person receiving such a citation shall be allowed a period of 60 days
from his or her receipt of the citation to make an uncontested payment of
the fine specified in the citation to the Treasurer. If the citation has been
sent by regular mail pursuant to the provisions of § A181-52 of this chapter,
the day of receipt of the citation shall be deemed to be three business days
after the day of mailing of the citation.
§ A181-55. Procedure to contest citations.
A. If a person who has been issued a citation does not make uncontested
payment of the fine specified in the citation to the Town Clerk within
the time allowed under § A181-54 of this chapter, the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Enforcement Officer shall send a notice to the person
cited, informing such person:
§ A181-52 (RESERVED) § A181-55
93:397
(1) Of the allegations against him or her and the amount of the fines;
(2) That the person cited may contest liability before a Hearing Officer
appointed by the Town Council, as provided in § A181-56 of this
chapter, by delivering, in person or by mail, within 10 days of the
date of the notice, a written demand for a hearing;
(3) That if the person cited does not demand such a hearing, an
assessment and judgment shall be entered against him or her; and
(4) That such judgment may issue without further notice.
B. If the person who is sent notice pursuant to the preceding subsection
wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he or she may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fine, either in person or
by mail, to the Town Clerk. All fines shall be made payable to the Town
Clerk of the Town of Wethersfield. Such payment shall be inadmissible
in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such
person or other person making the payment. Any person who does not
deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within 10 days of the date
of the notice described in Subsection A of this section shall be deemed
to have admitted liability, and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Enforcement Officer shall certify to the Hearing Officer that such person
has failed to respond. The Hearing Officer shall thereupon enter and
assess the fines provided for this article and shall follow the procedures
set forth in Subsection E of this section.
C. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less
than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of
notice, provided that the Hearing Officer shall grant, upon good cause
shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement
or continuance. The presence of the issuing official or police officer
shall be required at the hearing if requested by the person who was
issued the citation. A person wishing to contest liability shall appear at
the hearing and may present evidence in his or her behalf. The Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Enforcement Officer may present evidence
on behalf of the municipality. If the person who received the citation
fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may enter an assessment by default
against him or her upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the
applicable provisions of the Wetlands Regulations. The Hearing Officer
may accept written information by mail from the person who received
the citation and may determine thereby that the appearance of such
person is unnecessary. The Hearing Officer shall conduct the hearing in
the order and form and with such methods of proof as he or she deems
fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence
shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath
or affirmation. The Hearing Officer shall announce his or her decision at
the end of the hearing. If the Hearing Officer determines that the person
who received the citation is not liable, the Hearing Officer shall dismiss
the matter and enter that determination in writing accordingly. If the
Hearing Officer determines that the person who received the citation
is liable for the violation, the Hearing Officer shall forthwith enter and
assess the fines against such person as provided by this article.
§ A181-55 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-55
93:398
D. Any person who files an appeal to the Wethersfield Zoning Board of
Appeals pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, § 8-6, which appeal
contests the interpretation of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations employed by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Enforcement Officer in the subject citation, shall not be excused from
requesting a hearing in accordance with Subsection C hereinabove. The
filing of an appeal to the said Board without also requesting a hearing
hereunder shall not stay, defeat or negate the procedures and penalties
prescribed by this article, except as provided in this subsection. The
hearing set forth in the preceding subsection shall proceed, and the
Hearing Officer shall make a determination as to liability of the person
who received the citation, based upon the facts as determined at that
hearing, and assuming the validity of the interpretation of the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations as determined by the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Enforcement Officer. However, the Hearing
Officer shall not enter and assess the fines provided by this article unless
and until a final, unappealable decision of the said Zoning Board of
Appeals has been rendered upholding the interpretation of the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations as employed by the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Enforcement Officer. In the event that such
a final, unappealable decision of the said Zoning Board of Appeals has
been rendered overturning the interpretation of the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Regulations as employed by the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Enforcement Officer, the Hearing Officer shall dismiss the
matter and enter that determination accordingly.
E. If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the Hearing Officer
shall send by first-class mail a notice of the assessment to the person
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months
after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the
Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area 15, together with an
entry fee of $8. Further proceedings may then be held pursuant to the
applicable provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes.
F. A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to
this section may appeal within 30 days of the mailing of notice of
such assessment in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes,
§ 7-152c(g).
§ A181-56. Appointment of Hearing Officers.
The Town Council shall appoint one or more citation Hearing Officers to
conduct the hearings provided by this article. Neither the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Enforcement Officer, the Building Inspector, nor any
employee of the Town of Wethersfield exercising zoning authority may be
appointed as a Hearing Officer pursuant to this article.
§ A181-57. Severability.
In the event that any part or portion of this article is declared invalid for
any reason, all other provisions of this article shall remain in full force
and effect. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in
§ A181-55 (RESERVED) § A181-57
93:399
conflict with a provision of any other provision of law, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people of the Town of Wethersfield shall prevail.
§ A181-58. Applicability.
This article of this chapter shall not apply to citations issued by Town
enforcement officers for violation of state statutes. The provisions of this
article shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other codes,
ordinances or regulations of the Town of Wethersfield.
§ A181-57 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A181-58
93:400
Chapter A182
RULES AND PROCEDURES OF INLAND WETLANDS AND
WATERCOURSES COMMISSION
§ A182-1. Purpose and authorization.
The objectives and purposes of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission of Wethersfield are those set forth in the Connecticut General
Statutes, and those powers and duties delegated to the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Commission in the aforementioned Statutes and by the
"Ordinance Establishing an Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission"
within the Town of Wethersfield, approved on June 24, 1974.
§ A182-2. Title.
the Commission shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission," and may hereafter be referred to as he "Commission."
§ A182-3. Office of agency.
The office of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission shall be at
Wethersfield Town Hall where all Commission records will be kept. Copies
of all official documents, records, maps, etc., will be filed or recorded in the
office of the Town Engineer when required.
§ A182-4. Membership.
The membership and terms of office shall be as specified in the above stated
ordinance establishing the Commission, and the aforementioned General
Statutes.
§ A182-5. Officers and their duties.
A. The officers of the Commission shall consist of a Chairman and a Vice
Chairman.
B. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the
Commission and shall have the duties normally conferred by
parliamentary usage on such officers. The Chairman shall have the
authority to appoint committees, call special meetings, and generally
perform other duties as may be prescribed in these rules and
procedures.
C. The Chairman shall be one of the Commission members. He/she shall
have the privilege of discussing all matters before the Commission and
of voting thereon. It is the responsibility of the Chairman to assure
a "Public Comments" item on the monthly agenda, that such Public
Comments be limited as to time and to issues unrelated to those matters
otherwise scheduled for Public Hearing.
D. The Vice Chairman shall act for the Chairman in his/her absence and
have the authority to perform the duties prescribed for that office. He/
she shall be a Commission member.
§ A181-58 (RESERVED) § A182-5
93:401
E. The Town staff shall keep the minutes and records of the Commission
and, shall prepare the agenda of regular and special meetings under the
direction of the Chairman, provide notice of all meetings to Commission
members; arrange proper and legal notice of hearings; attend to
correspondence of the Commission, and such other duties as are
normally carried out by a Clerk.
§ A182-6. Election of officers.
A. An annual organization meeting shall be held the first meeting after July
first, at which time officers will be elected and rules and procedures
reviewed and be made a part of the annual meeting. Officers may be
elected by a majority vote of members present.
B. Nominations shall be made from the floor at the annual organization
meeting and elections of the officers specified in § A182-5A shall follow
immediately thereafter.
C. A candidate receiving a majority vote of the members present shall be
declared elected and shall serve for one year or until his/her successor
shall take office.
D. Vacancies in office shall be filled by regular election procedure as herein
specified with terms to run until the next annual organizational meeting.
E. Resignations from the Commission shall be in written form and
transmitted to the Town Clerk, who will then forward same to the
executive officer of the community.
§ A182-7. Meetings.
A. Regular meetings will be held at Wethersfield Town Hall on the third
Wednesday of each month, except as may be otherwise noted in the
schedule of meetings on file in the office of the Town Clerk. In event of
conflict with holidays or other events, a majority may change the date
of said meeting at the time the annual schedule of meetings is prepared
for filing with the office of Town Clerk as set forth in Public Act 723
(1967). The Town staff shall notify the membership of regular meetings,
in writing, not less than 48 hours in advance of such meeting.
B. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman, when such meetings
are deemed necessary to the interests and welfare of the Town, provided
notice of such meeting is posted in the office of the Town Clerk not less
than 24 hours prior to such meeting; and further, emergency meetings
may be called without such notice provided a copy of the minutes of such
meeting, adequately setting forth the nature of the emergency and the
proceedings of the Commission is filed in the office of the Town Engineer
not more than 72 hours following such meeting (Public Act 723, 1967).
C. A majority of the voting membership of the Commission shall constitute
a quorum, and the number of votes necessary to transact business shall
be a majority of members of the Commission except approval of minutes
which shall be by majority of members present, as otherwise provided
by the Connecticut General Statutes. The notice of such meeting shall
specify the purpose of such meeting and no other business may be
considered except by unanimous consent of the members present.
§ A182-5 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A182-7
93:402
D. In case any member of the Commission is unable to act because of
absence, sickness or self-interest, his place shall be taken by an alternate
member selected under the procedure specified by the Connecticut
General Statutes.
E. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public when in
session and shall be open to the public when in executive sessions when
so voted by the majority of the Commission members present and voting.
In accordance with the "Ordinance Establishing an Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission" within the Town of Wethersfield, all meetings
at which decisions are made shall be open to the public.
F. Unless otherwise specified, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the
proceedings at the meetings of this Commission.
§ A182-8. Disqualification.
No members of the Commission shall participate in any hearing or decision
or any matter when he/she is disqualified for self interest, personal,
financial or otherwise. In the event of such disqualification, it shall be
entered upon the records of the Commission and the place of the member
disqualified shall be taken by an alternate member designated by the
Chairman. The Chairman shall make the final decision as to the
disqualification of a member for self-interest.
§ A182-9. Order of business.
A. Unless otherwise determined by the Chairman, the order of business at
public meetings shall be:
(1) Call to order.
(2) General comments.
(3) Public hearings.
(4) Public meeting.
(5) Old business.
(6) New business.
(7) General business.
(a) Approval of minutes.
(b) Reports of officers and committees.
(c) Correspondence.
(8) Adjournment.
B. A motion from the floor must be made and passed in order to dispense
with any item on the agenda or change the order of business.
§ A182-10. Public hearings.
A. Public hearings shall be held on the third Wednesday of each month,
immediately preceding the public meeting, except as may be otherwise
noted in the schedule of meetings on file in the office of the Town
Engineer. In the event of conflict with holidays or other events, a
majority vote may change the date of said hearings at the time the
annual schedule of meetings is prepared for filing with the office of the
Town Clerk in accordance with Public Act 723 (1967).57
57.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 1-210.
§ A182-7 (RESERVED) § A182-10
93:403
B. The Commission may hold public hearings, in addition to required
hearings, when it decides that such hearings will be in the public
interest, provided that notice of any such hearing is posted in the office
of the Town Engineer not less than 24 hours before such meeting in
accordance with Public Act 723 (1967).
C. All public hearings prescribed by law shall be held in accordance with
the requirements set forth for such hearings in the "Ordinance
Establishing an Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission" within
the Town of Wethersfield, the aforementioned statutes and the
aforementioned Public Act 723 of 1967.
D. A competent stenographer shall take the evidence, and/or the evidence
shall be recorded by a sound recording device, at each hearing before
the Commission in which the right to appeal lies to the Superior Court.
Proceedings of the hearing shall be incorporated into the minute book of
the Commission to be permanent part of the record.
E. To better expedite the proceedings of the hearing and to cause a better
understanding of the issue involved, the Commission shall have prepared
prior to the hearing a hearing agenda and visual aids for display and
presentation during the discussion of the hearing, if practicable.
§ A182-11. Conducting public hearing.
A. The Chairman of the Commission shall preside at the public hearing.
In the event of his absence, the Vice Chairman or duly appointed
Commission member shall act as presiding officer.
B. The Town staff shall read the legal advertisement and note the dates and
newspapers in which the advertisement appeared.
C. The Chairman shall prescribe the method of conduct of the hearing.
D. It shall be made clear to the public that all comments must be directed
to the Chair, and only after being properly recognized by the presiding
officer.
E. All persons recognized shall approach the hearing table in order to
facilitate proper recording of comments. Before commenting on the
matter before the hearing, each person shall give his name and address.
F. The presiding officer shall assure an orderly hearing and shall take
necessary steps to maintain the order and decorum of the hearing at
all times. The presiding officer shall reserve the right to terminate the
hearing in the event the discussion becomes unruly and unmanageable.
G. The show of hands by those persons present shall not be allowed on
any general question present at the public hearing. The hearing shall be
conducted only for the purpose of taking testimony to be considered in
deliberations of the public meeting of the Commission.
§ A182-12. Special committees.
Special committees may be appointed by the Chairman for purposes and
terms which the Commission approved.
§ A182-13. Public relations.
§ A182-10 WETHERSFIELD CODE § A182-13
93:404
A. The Chairman or a duly appointed Commission member or staff
personnel shall act as public relations or publicity director for the
Commission. His/her duties include the preparation of all news releases
to be distributed to the communications media. All information releases
shall reflect the thinking of the majority of the Commission.
B. In the matter of the press, radio, and television representatives, the
Commission shall comply with Chapter 3, Sections 1-19, 1-20, 1-21, of
the Connecticut General Statutes, 1958 Revisions, as amended.58
§ A182-14. Staff and their duties.
A. The Commission shall appoint a duly authorized agent to carry out
specific functions and duties as prescribed by the Commission. These
duties shall include:
(1) Making jurisdictional rulings;
(2) Issuing enforcement orders;
(3) Making permit compliance inspections;
(4) Investigating complaints.
B. The duly authorized agent shall make a report to the Commission at its
regular meeting. Such report shall consist of a list and description of all
rulings and activities performed.
C. Any ruling made by the duly authorized agent is subject to final approval
by the Commission.
§ A182-15. Amendments.
These rules and procedures may be amended by a two-thirds vote of the
entire voting membership of the Commission, only after the proposed
change has been read and discussed at a previous regular meeting, except
that the rules and procedures may be changed at any meeting by the
unanimous vote of the entire voting membership of the Commission.
58.Editor's Note: Said statutes have been transferred or repealed; see now C.G.S. §§ 1-210,
1-21i and 1-225, respectively.
§ A182-13 (RESERVED) § A182-15
93:405
WETHERSFIELD
ZONING REGULATIONS
Zoning Regulations first adopted on May 24, 1926.
Comprehensive Revisions - November 15, 2004
Amended to:
May 6, 2005
September 26, 2008
August 16, 2005 December 8, 2008
October 18, 2005 May 5, 2009
December 20, 2005 September 1, 2009
August 7, 2007 June 18, 2010
January 15, 2008 October 15, 2010
February 19, 2008 May 17, 2011
August 8, 2008 March 23, 2018
Chapter 167A of the
CODE of the Town of WETHERSFIELD
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS Page
ARTICLE I - INTRODUCTION
1.1. Authority………………………………………………………………………………………. 7
1.2. Purpose……………………………………………………………………………………….... 7
1.3. Zoning Districts………………………………………………………………………………... 7
1.4. Applicability………………………………………………………………………………….. 8
A. Conformity of Use or Occupancy
B. Conformity of Buildings
C. Conformity of Area and Bulk
D. Conformity of Signs
E. Conformity of Subdivisions
ARTICLE II - INTERPRETATION
2.1. General Interpretation…………………………………………………………………………. 9
A. Prohibited If Not Clearly Permitted
B. Construal of Provisions
C. In The Event of Conflict
2.2. Word Usage……………………………………………………………………………………. 9
2.3. Definitions…………………………………………………………………………………….. 10
ARTICLE III - RESIDENTIAL ZONES & USES
3.1. Purpose………………………………………………………………………………………. 26
3.2. Permitted Principal Uses…………………………………………………………………….. 27
A. Basic Residential Uses
B. Other Residential Uses
C. Open Space Uses
D. Recreation Uses
E. Institutional Uses and Community Facilities
F. Miscellaneous Uses.
3.2.1. Congregate Residential Development …………………………………………………. 29
A. Purpose
B. Special Permit Review Criteria
C. Permitted Uses
D. Site Development Requirements
E. Dimensional Requirements
3.2.2. Care Centers…………………………………………………………………………… 31
3.3. Open Space Development District (OS)………………………………………………………. 31
3.4. Special Residential Development District (SRD)……………………………………………… 31
A. Purpose
B. Procedural Requirements
C. Permitted Development Types and Uses
D. Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses
E. Site Development Requirements
F. Minimum Floor Area of Units
G. Dimensional Requirements
H. Exceptions
3.5. Accessory Uses……………………………………………………………………………….. 37
3.5.1 Permitted Accessory Uses ………………………………………………………….. 37
A. Incidental Parking
B. Vehicular Storage
C. Pets and Livestock
D. Day Care
E. Home Occupation
F. Accessory Apartment
3
G. Miscellaneous Accessory Uses
3.5.2 Home Occupation …………………………………………………………………… 39
3.5.3 Accessory Apartment………………………………………………………………… 39
3.5.4. Livestock ……………………………………………………………………………… 40
3.5.5 Commercial Vehicles........................................................................................................... 41
3.6. Accessory Buildings & Structures……………………………………………………………. 43
A. General Requirements
B. Garages
C. Residential Outbuildings
D. Accessory Recreational Facilities
E. Guesthouse
F. Farming Structures
G. Miscellaneous Accessory Structures
3.7. Dimensional Requirements……………………………………………………………………. 45
A. Basic Provisions
B. General Exceptions in Residential Districts
1. Front Yard Setback Averaging
2. Yards On Corner Lots
3. Front Yard Setback On Cul-De-Sacs
4. Building Overhangs or Projections
5. Building Additions
3.8. Pre-Existing Residential Lots………………………………………………………………… 47
3.9 Rear Lots……………………………………………………………………………………… 47
ARTICLE IV - CONSERVATION ZONES
4.1. Agricultural (AG) Zone………………………………………………………………………. 50
A. Purpose
B. Permitted Uses
C. Dimensional Requirements
4.2. Floodplain Regulations………………………………………………………………………… 52
A. Purpose
B. Encroachment Standards
C. Residential Construction and Flood-Proofing
D. Flood-Proofing of Elevated Non-Residential Structures
E. Flood-Proofing of Other Non-Residential Structures
F. Additional Flood Proofing Measures
G. Recreational Vehicles
H. Certification
I. Design Standards for Subdivision Proposals
ARTICLE V - BUSINESS ZONES & USES
5.1. Purpose……………………………………………………………………………………… 56
5.2. Permitted Principal Uses …………………………………………………………………… 57
A. Residential Uses
B. Public and Semi-Public Uses
C. Office Uses
D. Retail and Service Establishments
E. Automobile Establishments
F. Hospitality Uses
G. Recreational Uses
H. Industrial and Storage Uses
I. Other Uses
5.3 Accessory Uses & Structures……………………………………………………………… 60
A. Accessory Uses
B. Accessory Buildings and Structures
5.4 Dimensional & Area Requirements……………………………………………………….. 62
4
A. General Provisions
B. Special Provisions
5.5 Consolidated Parcels……………………………………………………………………….. 63
5.6. Exceptions for Business Redevelopment……………………………………………………. 63
5.7. Public Garages And Filling Stations…………………………………………………………. 64
5.8. Alcoholic Beverages…………………………………………………………………………. 64
5.9 Car Wash Facilities………………………………………………………………………….. 65
5.10 Mixed Residential and Commercial Uses…………………………………………………… 65
5.11 Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facilities……………………………………………………. 66
ARTICLE VI - USE & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
6.1. Landscaping Requirements……………………………………………………………….. 68
A. Purpose
B. Applicability
C. General Landscaping Regulations
D. Overall Landscape Requirements
E. Perimeter Landscaped Area Requirements
F. Screening
G. Parking Area Landscaping Requirements
H. Sign Area Landscaping
I. Landscaped Buffer Requirement
J. Preservation of Existing Trees For Credit
K. Landscaping Plans & Maintenance
L. Reduction or Modification
6.2. Parking and Loading Regulations…………………………………………………………. 71
A. Purpose
B. General Requirements
C. Number of Required Parking Spaces
D. Reduction of Required Parking Spaces
E. Parking Space & Aisle Size
F. Handicapped Space Requirements
G. Surface Treatment
H. Parking Area Construction Standards
I. Internal Circulation
J. Off-Street Loading Requirements
K. Operation and Maintenance
L. Joint Use of Parking Areas
6.3. Sign Regulations…………………………………………………………………………….. 77
A. Purpose
B. Measurement of Sign Area
C. Sign Content
D. Signs Permitted in any Zone
E. Signs Permitted in Residential Zones
F. Signs Permitted in Business and Industrial Zones
G. Temporary Signs
H. Sign Location
I. Sign Construction & Illumination
J. Sign Maintenance & Abandonment
K. Sign Exceptions and Approval Criteria
L. Sign Permits
M. Non-Conforming Signs
6.4. Performance Criteria………………………………………………………………………… 87
6.5. Improvements Required …………………………………………………………………… 87
6.6. Erosion & Sediment Control……………………………………………………………….. 88
6.7. Outdoor Lighting …………………………………………………………………………… 89
6.8. Refuse Storage………………………………………………………………………………. 92
5
6.9. Access Management…………………………………………………………………………. 92
6.10. Earth Removal & Filling…………………………………………………………………….. 93
6.11. Proximity to Pipelines …………………………………………………………………… 94
6.12. Design Review …………………………………………………………………………. 94
ARTICLE VII - EXCEPTIONS TO REGULATIONS
7.1. Height Exceptions……………………………………………………………………… 96
7.2. Yard Exception For Fences……………………………………………………………… 96
7.3. Exceptions for Non-Conforming Conditions…………………………………………… 97
7.4. Waivers to Regulations………………………………………………………………… 98
ARTICLE VIII - SPECIAL PERMIT CRITERIA
8.1. Suitable Location………………………………………………………………….…… 99
8.2. Neighborhood Compatibility…………………………………………………………… 99
8.3. Appropriate Structures And Landscaping………………………………………………... 99
8.4. Suitable Access And Parking…………………………………………………………… 99
8.5. Overall Circulation……………………………………………………………………… 99
8.6. Adequate Public Utilities………………………………………………………………… 100
8.7. Environmental Protection & Conservation……………………………………………… 100
8.8. Consistent With Purposes……………………………………………………………… 100
8.9. Other Considerations…………………………………………………………………… 100
ARTICLE IX - SPECIAL REGULATIONS
9.1. Towers and Antennae…………………………………………………………………… 101
ARTICLE X - ADMINISTRATION
10.1. Administration By The Commission………………………………………………………. 103
A. Pre-Application Review
B. General
C. Special Permit Application
D. Site Plan Application
E. Change in Use or Structure
F. Amendments to Zoning Regulations
G. Zone Change Application
H. Telecommunications Facility Application
10.2. Administration By Staff…………………………………………………………………… 109
A. Zoning Permit
B. Home Occupation/Accessory Apartment
C. Flood Plain Administration
10.3. Enforcement………………………………………………………………………………… 111
10.4. Zoning Board Of Appeals………………………………………………………………….. 111
A. Establishment
B. Duties
C. Procedures
D. Variances
E. Variances to Flood Plain Requirements
F. Additional Requirements for Use Variances
G. Limitations
10.5. Validity & Effective Date……………………………………………………………………. 114
APPENDIX A - SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
1. General Requirements………………………………………………………………………… 115
2. Site Plan Requirements………………………………………………………………………. 115
3. Zone Change Map Requirements……………………………………………………………… 118
4. Earth Filling & Removal Plan Requirements…………………………………………………. 119
6
APPENDIX B - PLOT PLAN REQUIREMENT ………………………………………………….. 120
APPENDIX C - DESIGN GUIDELINES …………………………………………………………… 121
APPENDIX D - AMENDMENT DATES ……………………………………………………………. 124
7
ARTICLE I - INTRODUCTION
1.1. Authority.
These regulations are adopted under the authority of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut, as amended.
1.2. Purpose.
These regulations are adopted for the purpose of:
A. Promoting and protecting the public health, safety, comfort, and general welfare of the community in living
and working conditions;
B. Preventing the overcrowding of land and avoiding undue concentration of population;
C. Conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the town;
D. Regulating and restricting the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings designed for
specified uses;
E. Regulating and limiting the height, bulk and area of buildings hereafter erected;
F. Regulating and determining the area of yards, courts and other open spaces for buildings hereafter erected;
G. Lessening congestion in the streets;
H. Securing safety from fire, panic, flood, and other dangers;
I. Providing adequate light and air;
J. Facilitating adequate provision of transportation, water, gas, electric light and power lines, sewerage, drainage,
schools, parks and other public requirements;
K. Minimizing and, where possible, preventing loss of life, injury and damage to public and private property
caused by flooding and attendant hazards; and
L. Addressing other matters authorized by statute.
1.3. Zoning Districts.
A. To accomplish the purpose of these Regulations, the Town of Wethersfield is hereby divided into different
classes of districts or zones as enumerated in these Regulations.
B. The districts or zones are shown on the official Zoning Map, as amended, which are declared to be part of
these regulations. This map is on file with the Office of the Town Clerk and in the Office of the Building
Official.
C. Unless otherwise dimensioned on the Zoning Map, zone boundaries shall be construed as follows:
1. Following the center line of a street, highway, railroad, right-of-way, or easement.
2. Following the lines of a particular geophysical feature including brooks, streams, floodplains, or steep
slopes.
8
3. Following lot lines, such being lines of record at the time of adoption of these Regulations or relevant
amendments hereto.
4. Where zone boundaries are set back from such lines, they shall be considered running parallel thereto, at
distances indicated.
D. In case of uncertainty regarding zone boundaries on the Zoning Map, the zone boundary shall be determined
by the Commission.
E. The operative date for the establishment of zoning regulations in the Town of Wethersfield is May 24, 1926.
1.4. Applicability.
A. CONFORMITY OF USE OR OCCUPANCY
No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied except in conformity with these regulations for the zone in
which the building or land is located.
B. CONFORMITY OF BUILDINGS
No building or other structure or part thereof shall be erected, raised, moved, replaced, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged, or altered except in conformity with these regulations for the zone in which the building or land is
located.
C. CONFORMITY OF AREA AND BULK
1. No lot shall be diminished in area nor shall any yard, setback, or other open space be reduced except in
conformity with the provisions of these Regulations.
2. No lot on which a building is or shall be erected shall be reduced or diminished so that the frontage, area,
yards, courts or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by these regulations for the zone in which
the building or land is located.
D. CONFORMITY OF SIGNS
1. No sign shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered
except in conformity with these Regulations and until a sign permit, if required by these Regulations, has
been issued.
2. Any sign not expressly permitted is prohibited.
E. CONFORMITY OF SUBDIVISIONS
The subdivision of land shall be subject to the appropriate regulations herein contained for the zone shown on the
zoning map.
9
ARTICLE II - INTERPRETATION
2.1. General Interpretation.
A. PROHIBITED IF NOT CLEARLY PERMITTED
1. Use of land, buildings or structures not clearly permitted in the various zoning districts is prohibited.
2. Activities not clearly permitted in the Regulations are prohibited.
B. CONSTRUAL OF PROVISIONS.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, unless the context clearly
indicates that such provision is intended to be a maximum limitation.
C. IN THE EVENT OF CONFLICT
Where any conflict arises between the provisions of this Chapter and any other law, ordinance, easement, covenant,
rule, regulation, or permit, the provision that establishes the greatest restriction upon the use of land, buildings or
structures or imposes the highest standard shall control.
2.2. Word Usage.
A. For the purpose of interpretation and enforcement of these regulations, certain words contained herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
1. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
2. The word "may" is permissive.
3. When not inconsistent with the context:
a. words in the present tense include the future and vice-versa,
b. words in the singular include the plural and vice-versa, and
c. words in the masculine include the feminine and neuter and vice-versa.
4. The word "lot" includes the word "plot."
5. The words "occupied" or "used" include the words "designed, arranged or intended to be occupied or used."
6. The words "zone", "zoning district", and "district" have the same meaning.
7. The word "person" also includes a partnership, association, trust, corporation or other legal entity.
8. The phrase “these Regulations” shall refer to the entire Zoning Regulations.
B. For the purpose of interpretation and enforcement of these regulations, certain words not defined in this
Section shall be defined by the Commission after consulting:
1. The Building Code.
2. The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions.
3. The Connecticut General Statutes.
4. Black's Law Dictionary.
5. Webster's Third New International Dictionary.
10
2.3. Definitions.
A --
ABANDONMENT – To cease/discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume, but excluding
temporary or short-term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of remodeling,
renovation or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility, or during normal periods of vacation
or seasonal closure.
ACCESSORY – Subordinate to and customarily incidental to.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT - A complete and separate housekeeping unit (containing cooking,
bathing, and sleeping quarters) that is accessory to a detached single family unit.
ACCESSORY BUILDING -- A detached building subordinate to and customarily incident to a principal building
on the same lot and supported by a permanent foundation.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE -- A detached structure subordinate to and customarily incident to a principal
building on the same lot.
ACCESSORY USE -- A use subordinate and customarily incident to a principal use on the same lot in compliance
with the same standards and procedures that govern the principal use of a property.
ADULT ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT – As defined in Chapter 46 of the Wethersfield Code of Ordinances.
ANTENNA Any device used to collect or transmit telecommunications or radio signals. Examples include but
are not limited to panel, whip and dish antennae.
ASSISTED LIVING -- A congregate housing facility that assists residents with personal care, basic health care,
and supervision of self-administered medication as a transition between independent living and skilled
nursing care.
ACTIVE ADULT HOUSING –A managed residential community consisting of single-family residential structures
the occupancy which is limited, to those persons aged fifty-five (55) years and older.
B –
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) - The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in
relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the
floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. (9/26/08)
BASEMENT- A story having any part of its height below grade. A “basement” shall not be included in computing
either the number of stories, building height, or minimum floor area. For the purpose of these regulations,
the words “cellar” and “basement” are synonymous. For floodplain management purposes, a basement is
any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground) on all sides.(9/26/08)
BED AND BREAKFAST – An owner-occupied residential dwelling where overnight accommodations and a
morning meal are provided to guests for compensation.
BOARDER, LODGING - The use or occupancy of a dwelling by not more than three (3) persons or paying guests,
in addition to members of the family residing in the dwelling.
BUILDABLE SQUARE – A square of a specified dimension on each side that will fit on a residential lot behind
and touching the required setback of the front yard for all frontages.
11
BUILDING -- A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter of persons, animals, chattels
or property of any kind. Each of the units into which a building is divided by party walls shall be regarded
as a separate building. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part
thereof."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL – The primary building on a property. A building attached to the principal building by a
covered passageway or by having a wall or part of a wall in common with it shall be considered an
integral part of the principal building for the purpose only of computing the mandatory open spaces.
BUILDING AREA -- The maximum ground area enclosed by the walls of a building and the area of all covered
porches and other roofed portions.
BUILDING FRONTAGE –The horizontal, linear dimension of that side of a building measured at ground level that
abuts a street or parking area which is open to the general public and that has either the primary window
display of the enterprise or the primary public entrance to the building. Where more than one tenant
occupies a building, each tenant having a primary window display or primary public entrance for its
exclusive use is considered to have its own building frontage, which is the front width of the portion of the
building frontage occupied by that use.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF -- The vertical distance from the average ground level along the front wall of the
building to the highest point of the roof or parapet, whichever is higher.
BUILDING LINE -- A horizontal line, drawn parallel with the street line, beyond which, in the direction of the
street line, the foundation wall or walls of a building or structure shall not encroach or extend.
12
C --
CARE CENTER -- Premises or portion thereof used as a place for the day care, guidance and/or supervision of
seven (7) or more persons not of common parentage on a recurring basis for six (6) or more hours each
day.
CARPORT -- A structure with a permanent floor and roof covering used for the storage of not more than two (2)
private passenger motor vehicles that may be free-standing or may be attached to and architecturally
integrated with the design of the dwelling. A "carport" shall be open on at least three (3) sides, except that
trelliswork or other decorative work may occupy not more than fifty percent (50%) of the otherwise open
area.
CAR WASH -- Any facility, including structures and accessory uses operated wholly or partly to wash and clean
cars. (10/18/05)
CELLAR – See “Basement”.
CEMETERY -- Any place that is used or intended to be used for interment of human remains, and includes a
graveyard, burial park, or mausoleum. (5/6/05)
CHANGE OF USE – A change of use shall occur whenever an existing use in a building or on a tract of land is
changed so that a more stringent section of the Zoning Regulations becomes applicable.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE – Any vehicle or equipment regularly used to carry, deliver, handle or move goods in
the conduct of a business, commerce, profession, or trade, and which has two (2) or more of the following
characteristics:
? Exceeds a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of ten thousand (10,000) pounds,
? Exceeds seven (7) feet in height from the base of the vehicle to the top,
? Exceeds twenty (20) feet in length,
? Has more than 2 axles,
? Has more than 4 tires in contact with the ground,
? Used, designed and built to carry more than 8 passengers,
? Designed to sell food or merchandise directly from the vehicle or trailer itself,
? Bears signs, logos, advertising or markings identifying the owner or registrant, a trade, business,
service or commodity,
? Has modifications such as a platform rack or mechanical equipment such as a hoist used to facilitate
the carrying of goods or equipment.
The following types of vehicles when regularly used to carry, deliver, handle or move goods in the
conduct of a business, commerce, profession, or trade shall all be considered commercial vehicles: step
vans, cargo vans, box trucks, flat bed or stake bed trucks, buses, semi trailers, tractor trailers, dump trucks,
wreckers and trailers used for commercial purposes. The following types of equipment shall also be
13
considered commercial vehicles: earth moving equipment, cement mixers, trenching, pipe laying
equipment or other similar type of construction equipment. (10/15/10)
COMMISSION -- The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Wethersfield.
CONGREGATE HOUSING -- A residence facility for elderly or disabled residents that contains independent
living units with provisions for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping; that provides communal dining
facilities and other appropriate support services such as security, housekeeping, organized social and
recreational activities, and/or transportation; and that is appropriately staffed on a 24-hour a day basis.
CGS – “Connecticut General Statutes”.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT -- The grant of a property right stipulating that the described land will remain in
its natural or pre-existing state and precluding future or additional development.
CONTRACT -- A contract between the Town of Wethersfield and an applicant for an approved Special Permit.
COST- As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration,
repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor’s estimate.
The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing components,
structural components, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials; building equipment and
fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition
and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time;
contractor’s overhead; contractor’s profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and
specifications; survey costs; permit fees; outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells,
landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages,
sheds, and gazebos.(9/26/08)
COUNTRY CLUB -- A nonprofit membership organization having as its primary purposes golf, swimming or
tennis and including other activities normally incident thereto.
COURT -- A portion of a lot unoccupied above grade but partially or wholly surrounded by walls of a structure.
.
D --
dBA – A measure of sound level, in decibels, using the flat network of a sound-level meter and octave band filter
manufactured in accordance with the American Standards Association.
DEVELOPMENT – Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage of
14
equipment or materials; and the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials, and public or private
sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.(9/26/08)
DISPENSARY FACILITY - Means a place of business where marijuana may be dispensed or sold at retail to
qualifying patients and primary caregivers and for which the Connecticut Department of Consumer
Protection has issued a dispensary facility permit under Public Act 12-155 and Sections 21a-408-1 to 21a-
408-70, inclusive, and as applicable, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. (3/23/18)
DRIVE THROUGH – Any business or facility or any portion thereof that is dependent upon serving customers
while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure.
DWELLING -- Any building or portion thereof which is designed or used for residential purposes.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY -- A building designed for or occupied by two (2) families living independently of
each other.
E --
ELDERLY HOUSING -- Housing designated to be occupied exclusively by persons fifty-five (55) years of age
and over who are eligible for such housing as determined by the federally established criteria as being
elderly. Such housing would enable these elderly, as well as younger persons who have been certified as
being totally disabled under the Federal Social Security Act, to live in pleasant, safe and adequately
planned and built dwellings.
ELEVATED BUILDING - A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level
by means of fill, solid perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls,
as allowed under applicable standards.
ENCROACHMENT - Any development activity which intrudes upon the floodplain in a manner which diminishes
its width, area or flood storage capacity or causes any change in flood elevation within such floodplain.
F --
FAMILY -- Any number of individuals living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, whether related
to each other legally or not, and shall be deemed to include domestic help but not to include paying guests.
FARM -- A parcel or parcels of land of five (5) or more acres under single ownership or leasehold and used for
farming. The term "farm" shall include farm buildings and accessory buildings, nurseries, orchards,
ranges, pastures, greenhouses and structures used primarily for the raising and incidental sale of
agricultural and horticultural commodities.
FARMING -- The use of a farm for agricultural activities:
15
? including forestry; cultivation of the soil for raising and harvesting any agricultural or horticultural
commodity; the raising, dairying, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of
livestock;, the production or harvesting of maple syrup or another agricultural commodity as an
incident to ordinary farming operations; and the handling, packing, storing or delivery to storage or to
market or the direct sale of any agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary
farming operations.
? excluding the commercial raising of pigs, commercial slaughtering, commercial reduction of inedible
animal matter, commercial kennels, or animal hospitals.
FARMLAND RECLAMATION - Filling of land for the express purpose of increasing its utility and productivity
as cropland, pastureland or for silviculture, but not for structural development of any form, excepting the
erection of fences.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) - The federal agency that administers the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).(9/26/08)
FILLING STATION -- Any premises or building or any part thereof where fuel used in the propelling of motor
vehicles using combustion-type engines is sold or offered for sale at retail.
FINISHED LIVING SPACE- Space that can include, but is not limited to, a space that is heated and/or cooled,
contains finished floors (tile, linoleum, hardwood, etc.), had sheetrock walls that may or may not be
painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathroom, fireplaces and other
items that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace.(9/26/08)
FLOOD, BASE - The one-hundred-year-flood; the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
FLOOD ELEVATION - The base flood water surface elevation, without floodway, specified for each flooding
source cross section in Table 1 of the Flood Insurance Study. The headings “With Floodway” and
“Without Floodway”, as they appear in Table 1, mean with floodway fringe obstruction and without
floodway fringe obstruction.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) – An official map of the Town of Wethersfield on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated the areas of special flood hazards and the risk
premium zones applicable to the Town, as well as base flood elevations at selected.(9/26/08)
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) – The official report for the Town of Wethersfield provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of
the base flood and includes the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).(9/26/08)
FLOODING - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from
the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
FLOODPLAIN - That area designated as subject to periodic flooding by the base flood, consisting of the floodway
and the floodway fringe of the one-hundred-year flood as shown on the Flood Boundary and Floodway
Maps in the Flood Insurance Study, as amended.
FLOODWAY - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area specified for each flooding
source cross section in Table I of the Flood Insurance Study that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without exceeding the base flood water surface elevation, with floodway, specified in said
Table 1.
16
FLOOR - The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement) i.e., top of slab in concrete slab
construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a
garage used solely for the parking of vehicles.
FLOOR AREA - The cumulative area of the habitable floors of a building as measured from the exterior faces of
exterior walls or, where applicable, from the center line of interior party walls.
FOOT CANDLE (fc) – A measure of luminance. A unit of luminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot
from a uniform point source of light of one candlepower and equal to one lumen per square foot.
(12/20/05)
FRONTAGE – See Lot Frontage.
FULL CUT OFF – A luminaire or light fixture that by design of the fixture housing does not allow any light
dispersion or direct glare to shine above a ninety-degree, horizontal plane from the base of the fixture.
(12/20/05)
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE OR FACILITY- A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities,
port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building
and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage,
manufacturing, sales or service facilities.(9/26/08)
G --
GARAGE, COMMUNITY -- An accessory building or portion of a principal or accessory building used for the
storage or housing of more than three (3) motor vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE -- An accessory building or portion of a principal or accessory building used for the storage
or housing of up to three (3) motor vehicles.
GARAGE, PUBLIC -- Any building, other than a private garage or community garage, used for selling, renting,
servicing or repairing motor vehicles
GLARE – The sensation produced by light within the visual field that is sufficiently greater than the light to which
the eyes are adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance or visibility. (12/20/05)
GUN CLUB -- A nonprofit membership organization having as its primary purpose the sport of target shooting
with firearms and including other activities normally incident thereto.
GVWR – Gross vehicle weight rating.
17
H –
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG)-The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction
next to the proposed walls of a structure.(9/26/08)
HISTORIC STRUCTURE- Any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually
listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have
been certified either: (1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.(9/26/08)
HOME OCCUPATION -- Any use of residential premises carried on for a business or as a business by a person or
persons residing on the premises.
HOME OFFICE -- Any portion of a residential premises used on an occasional basis by a person or persons
residing on the premises in conjunction with employment typically occurring elsewhere.
HOSPITAL -- Any building designed, equipped or actually used to receive and treat or care for more than five (5)
sick, injured or infirm persons at one (1) time, excluding correctional institutions and institutions for
insane and feebleminded patients, alcoholics and drug addicts.
HOTEL -- A building or group of buildings used for the accommodation of transient guests with each unit of
accommodation having access to a common interior hallway.
I --
INDOOR AMUSEMENT CENTER - An establishment of which the use is a mixture of assorted amusements and
other family activities.
J --
K --
KENNEL – A site or structure used for the keeping of animals for compensation.
L --
LANDSCAPED AREA -- Areas that contain wooded vegetation, lawn, mulched planting beds, ornamental or
shade trees, shrubbery, buffer vegetation, and similar landscaped treatment.
LIFE CARE -- A congregate housing facility that is planned, designed and operated to provide a full range of
accommodations and services for elderly or disabled residents, including independent living, assisted
living, and nursing facility.
LIVESTOCK -- Horse, cow, sheep, goat, hen, rabbit or similar animal.
18
LOT -- A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a single use and the buildings and uses customarily
incident thereto.
LOT LINES -- The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT, CORNER -- A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
LOT, INTERIOR -- A lot other than a corner lot or through lot..
LOT, THROUGH -- An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets.
LOT DEPTH -- The mean horizontal distance between the street and rear lot lines measured in the median
direction of the side lines of the lot.
LOT FRONTAGE -- The distance between the side lines of the lot measured along the building line or the building
line extended. Where the building line follows an arc, the distance shall be measured along the chord of
said arc. On corner lots, the smaller frontage on a street shall in all cases be considered as the "lot
frontage."
LOT WIDTH - The distance between the side lot lines measured in a straight line at right angles to the mean
direction of such side lot lines, which line of measurement shall touch but not be in front of the building
line. In the case of a corner lot the street line which has the least dimension shall be considered to be the
front lot line and the lot lines adjacent thereto shall be considered to be the side lot lines.
19
LOWEST FLOOR - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a building. An
unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in
an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's "lowest floor."
LUMINAIRE – A complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps together with the parts deigned to distribute
the light, to position and protect the lamps and to connect the lamps to the power supply. (12/20/05)
M --
MANUFACTURED HOME - A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar
vehicles or transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days or
longer and intended to be improved property.(9/26/08)
MARKET VALUE- The market value of the structure shall be determined by the use of the cost approach method
to value, the quantity survey method or the square foot method prior to the start of the initial repair or
improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.(9/26/08)
MDC DATUM - Elevation datum established by the Metropolitan District Commission (MDC) which, for National
Flood Insurance Program purposes is 2.08 feet higher than the National Geodetic Vertical Datum.
MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL) – The North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) are
referenced.(9/26/08)
MIXED RESIDENTIAL and COMMERCIAL USES -- A building or site that contains at least one floor devoted to
allow nonresidential uses and at least one devoted to allowed residential uses. (12-8-08)
20
MOTEL -- A building or group of buildings used for the accommodation of transient guests, primarily motorists,
with each unit of accommodation having a separate exterior entrance.
MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT -- A building or complex of buildings on common property designed for or
occupied by more than two (2) families.
N --
NEW CONSTRUCTION - Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective
date of this ordinance (not the revision date) and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING -- Any building which does not conform to the requirements of these
regulations or any amendment thereto upon the effective date of enactment.
NON-CONFORMING LOT -- Any lot which does not conform to the requirements of these regulations or any
amendment thereto upon the effective date of enactment.
NON-CONFORMING USE -- Any use of land or building or part thereof being which does not conform to the
requirements of these regulations or any amendment thereto upon the effective date of enactment.
NURSING HOME - A facility licensed by the State of Connecticut to provide a full range of direct medical,
nursing, and other health services on a 24-hour basis to residents.
O --
OFFICE, BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL OR MEDICAL – The office of a member of a recognized profession
including doctors or physicians, dentists, optometrists, architects, surveyors, engineers, public
accountants, lawyers, artists and other recognized professional occupations which in the judgment of the
ZEO are similar in nature.
OPEN SPACE -- All land within any residence zone not subdivided into building lots or designated as public
streets or private streets.
OUTDOOR SALES -- The display or sale of products and services outside of a building or structure.
P --
PARKING AREA -- An open space used for parking motor vehicles exclusively and in which no gasoline or motor
vehicle accessories are sold and no other business is conducted.
PLAN OF CONSERVATION & DEVELOPMENT – The most recent plan of conservation and development
officially adopted by the Town of Wethersfield.
Q --
R --
21
REAR LOT -- A lot which does not meet the frontage requirements of these regulations for the underlying zones.
(8/7/07)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE – A vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis, (2) four hundred (400) square feet
or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, (3) designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light-duty truck, and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.(9/26/08)
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: (6/18/10)
SINGLE FAMILY: (6/18/10)
CONVENTIONAL -- Detached single-family dwellings on individual subdivided lots with private yards
on four (4) sides of the house.
PATIO HOUSE – Single-family detached or semi-attached dwellings on small, individual subdivided lots
with each lot fully enclosed for privacy by a solid wall or fence of four (4) to six (6) feet in height.
TOWNHOUSE -- A single-family attached dwelling on an individual subdivided lot sharing a common
sidewall with one or two other units, such that the common sidewall forms the vertical plane of the
common side lot lines. A duplex unit is one type of townhouse development.
ZERO LOT LINE -- Detached single-family dwellings on individual subdivided lots with the house set on
one (1) of the side lot lines.
MULTI-FAMILY: (6/18/10)
HIGH-RISE – One or more buildings containing multiple units and occupying undivided land with
residential units located in structures that are six or more stories high. (6/18/10)
MID-RISE – One or more buildings containing multiple units and occupying undivided land with
residential units located in structures that are between three and five stories high. (6/18/10)
MULTIPLEX – One or more buildings containing multiple units occupying undivided land with units
arranged in one or more of a variety of configurations, such as side by side, back-to-back or vertically,
with or without individual outside access. Garden apartments and townhouse configurations are forms of
multiplex development. (6/18/10)
RESTAURANT, DRIVE THROUGH – A facility that is used for the preparation and sale of food and beverages
accessory thereto and that has a drive through facility.
RESTAURANT, SIT DOWN – A facility that is used for the preparation and sale of food and beverages accessory
thereto that are consumed by the purchasers seated at tables or counters located within the building.
RESTAURANT, TAKE OUT – A facility that is used for the preparation and sale of food and beverages accessory
thereto that are typically consumed by the purchasers off premises.
S --
22
SCHOOL -- An institution of formalized instruction, licensed by a governing body and the instruction must
ultimately lead to a formal graduation and granting of a diploma or degree and includes both public and
parochial schools.
SERVICE STATION – A business establishment oriented towards the operation, servicing or maintenance of
motor vehicles, other than a gasoline service station, repair garage service station, or a body repair service
station.
, GASOLINE – A business establishment offering gasoline or diesel fuel and accessory sales of
other items.
, REPAIR GARAGE – A business establishment providing general repairs or limited repairs as
provided in the Connecticut General Statutes.
, BODY SHOP – A business establishment providing vehicular body modifications or repairs to
vehicles with body damage.
SETBACK -- The shortest horizontal distance measured perpendicular to a lot line from the nearest point of a
foundation wall of a building or structure to the lot line.
SHIELDING – A technique or method of construction which causes all the light emitted from an outdoor light
fixture to be projected below a horizontal plane passing through the fixture. (12/20/05)
SHOPPING CENTER -- A group of not less than five (5) structurally connected retail stores or personal service
establishments functioning as a single unit, under single ownership and/or control having a total gross
ground floor building area of at least sixty (60) thousand square feet, with immediate adjoining off-street,
parking facilities not less than prescribed by these Regulations.
SIGN -- Any natural or artificial structure, object, device, light or display or part thereof or device attached thereto
or painted or represented thereon which is used to advertise, identify or attract attention to any object,
project, place, activity, person, article, product, institution, organization, business, service or location by
any means including, but not limited to, letter(s), number(s), figures, banner, flag, insignia, device, design,
symbol, fixture, color, logo, illumination or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an
announcement, direction or advertisement and which is situated so that it can be seen from a public street.
This definition shall not include official traffic signs or notices required by law.
SIGN, ANIMATED – Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting or color to depict action or create a
special effect or scene. This definition includes signs with rotating panels, generally referred to as
trivision signs and shall include electronic reader boards or message centers. (1-15-08)
SIGN, CHANGEABLE -- Any sign upon which letters, numbers, pictures or symbols are not permanently fixed,
attached, painted, written, drawn or represented.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION -- A sign identifying the architects, engineers, contractors, or other individuals or firms
involved with the construction of a building on that site.
SIGN, DETACHED -- Any sign which is not attached to any building and is supported by any other structure or
will stand by itself.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL -- A sign which guides or directs pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
SIGN, EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED -- A sign illuminated with an artificial light external to the sign.
SIGN, FLASHING – An illuminated sign on which the artificial light or color is not kept stationary or constant in
intensity at all times when in use. (1-15-08)
23
SIGN, HEIGHT -- The vertical distance from the lowest ground level within the public right-of-way along the
street line of the subject property closest to the detached sign to the highest point of the sign.
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED -- A sign illuminated from within by means of an artificial light.
SIGN, INTERIOR -- A sign located on, or within 3 feet of, a window inside a building and obviously capable of
being seen from the exterior.
SIGN, NOTICE -- A sign on the premises or lot restricting the right to enter such premises or lot and indicating the
private nature of such premises, lot or driveway.
SIGN, PORTABLE – Any sign not permanently attached to a building or building surface such as but not limited
to an “A” frame sign which may be located on sidewalk in front of a commercial building within the
public right of way. (1/15/08)
SIGN, REAL ESTATE -- A sign displayed on private property advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises
or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed.
SIGN, WALL -- A sign attached to any surface or plane of a building and which does not extend more than 12
inches beyond the perimeter of the building or above the roof line.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA - The area within a community subject to one (1) percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year, as identified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
START OF CONSTRUCTION - The date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
(including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles,
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure.
STORE, RETAIL – A use primarily devoted to the retail sale of goods or commodities such as food, drugs,
clothing jewelry, hardware, stationary, household items, appliances or furnishings, in small quantities
directly to the ultimate consumers.
STORY -- That portion of a building in which persons live, sleep, work or congregate between the upper surface of
any floor and the upper surface of the floor directly overhead, except that the topmost story shall be that
portion of a building in which persons live, sleep, work or congregate between the upper surface of the
topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
STORY, HALF -- A space under a sloping roof which has the principal lines of intersection of roof decking and
wall face not more than four (4) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than threefourths
(3/4) of the floor area is finished off for use.
STREET -- A way dedicated to public use or a way owned and maintained by the abutting property owners.
, ARTERIAL -- A Street designated as an arterial street in the Plan of Conservation and
Development.
, COLLECTOR -- A Street designated as a collector street in the Plan of Conservation and
Development.
STREET LINE -- The dividing line between the street and a lot.
24
STRUCTURE -- That which is built or constructed or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or
which is attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. A walled and roofed building
that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank would each be
considered a structure. The term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part
thereof."
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY – A structure which is intended for use on a temporary basis.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to it’s before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of
the structure before damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT – Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, taking place over a
one year period, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market.(9/26/08)
T --
TAG SALE -- The sale from residential premises of personal property of the occupant of the dwelling, or a
common sale of personal property of more than one (1) household, specifically excluding merchandise
purchased or received on consignment for sale or resale.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY - Towers, antenna, associated equipment, and other structures used in
conjunction with the provision of wireless communication services such as cellular communications and
personal communications services.
CO-LOCATED - A telecommunication facility that shares land, towers, buildings or other
structures for the placement of antennae with one or more telecommunication provider.
HEIGHT - The height of a telecommunication facility measured from the ground level to the top
of the tallest feature.
TOOLHOUSE -- A building, not supported by a permanent foundation, used for the storage of tools and
equipment, exclusive of motor vehicles, and customarily used in the maintenance and upkeep of the
premises on which the toolhouse is located.
TRAILER, AUTOMOBILE -- Any vehicle, except a mobile home, designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle or
designed for temporary human habitation of a recreational nature.
TRAILER CAMP -- A parcel of land which is used for occupancy by two (2) or more automobile trailers.
U --
V –
VARIANCE- A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management regulations that
allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship.(9/26/08)
VIOLATION - A failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain
management ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation
documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is resumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.(9/26/08)
25
W --
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION - The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988 or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of riverine areas.(9/26/08)
X --
Y --
YARD, FRONT -- An open space, unoccupied except as permitted by these regulations, across the width of the lot
between the side lines of the lot, the depth being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line
and the front foundation wall of the building. In cases where the two (2) street frontages of a corner lot
vary in length, the lot shall be deemed to be situated on the street containing the narrower frontage in
determining the setback. Where the street frontages of a corner lot are the same length, the owner may
elect which street is to govern the setback line of his building.
YARD, REAR -- An open space, unoccupied except as permitted by these regulations, extending across the full
width of the lot, the depth being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear
wall of the principal building. On corner lots, the "rear yard" shall in all cases be opposite the least lot
frontage.
YARD, SIDE -- An open space, unoccupied except as permitted by these regulations, between a side line of the lot
and the nearest point of the side wall of the principal building and extending from the rear yard to the front
yard of the building.
Z --
ZBA – The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut.
ZEO – The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut.
26
ARTICLE III - RESIDENTIAL ZONES & USES
3.1. Purpose.
A. The various residential districts are intended to provide suitable areas for residential development
appropriate to the environmental characteristics of the land and the character of the neighborhood. The
differentiation among the residential districts is intended to provide for variety in the size and density of
residential neighborhoods and a diversity of housing opportunities. The districts are intended to
accommodate certain non-residential uses when they are compatible with residential uses and preserve
neighborhood character and property values.
B. In order to carry out the provisions of these regulations, the Town is hereby divided into the following
residential districts:
Open Space Development Single Family Residential (OS)
Single Family Residential AA
Single Family Residential A-1
Single Family Residential A
Single Family Residential B
Single Family Residential C
Special Residential Development SRD
27
3.2. Permitted Principal Uses.
No residential lot shall be occupied by more than one permitted principal building or, when specifically
authorized by these Regulations and the review and approval procedures established herein, a group of
permitted principal buildings.
Table Legend
P Permitted Use Following Zoning Permit Approval By the ZEO
SP Permitted Following Site Plan Approval By the Commission
CU-SP A Conditional Use Permitted Only After Special Permit Approval By the Commission
Blank Not A Permitted Use
A. Basic Residential Uses
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. Single-family dwellings
P P P P P
2. Two-family dwellings
P
3. Renting of not more than
two (2) rooms to persons who
are not members of the family.
(5/6 /05)
P P P
B. Other Residential Uses
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. Open Space Development in
accordance with Section 3.3
(5/6/05)
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
2. Nursing home or convalescent
home on a collector or arterial
street in accordance with
Section 3.2.1.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
3. Congregate housing, assisted
living, or life care facility on a
collector or arterial street in
accordance with Section 3.2.1.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
4. Bed and breakfast operation
conducted by the owners and
residents of the premises.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
28
C. Open Space Uses
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. Public or private park or open
space
P P P P P
2. Wildlife sanctuaries or
preserves
P P P P P
3. Farming, agriculture, forestry
and nurseries
P P P P P
D. Recreation Uses
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. Municipal recreation facility
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
2. Public or private golf course
or country club, including
clubhouse.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
E. Institutional Uses &
Community Facilities
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. Hospital or college on a
collector or arterial road.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
2. Church or religious institution.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
3. Municipal building, public
library, or public museum.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
4. School or educational
institution.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
5. Cemeteries. (5/6/05) CU-SP
F. Miscellaneous Uses
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. Care centers in accordance
with Section 3.2.2.
CU-SP
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
2. Telecommunications facility
in accordance with Section
9.1.
CU-SP
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
29
3.2.1. Congregate Residential Development
A. PURPOSE
This Section is intended to provide for congregate housing opportunities for persons aged fifty-five (55) years or
older appropriate to the environmental characteristics of the land and the character of the neighborhood.
B. SPECIAL PERMIT REVIEW CRITERIA
In addition to the criteria established by the requirements of Article VIII of these regulations the Commission must
determine that:
1. The project will help meet the senior housing needs of Wethersfield;
2. The intensity of the use and the scale and character of the housing development shall be reasonably compatible
with the surrounding neighborhood.
C. PERMITTED USES
1. Development shall only occur upon approval of a Special Permit application to permit a managed residential
community having shared support services for residents restricted to persons aged fifty-five (55) years or
older to include:
a. Assisted living;
b. Life care;
c. Nursing home;
d. Convalescent home; or
e. Congregate care facilities but excluding hotels or similar commercial lodging facilities.
2. The following uses are permitted as accessory to the permitted principal use when approved as part of the
Special Permit and Site Plan applications:
a. On-site parking for motor vehicles owned or used by the residents and employees.
b. Active and passive recreation improvements.
c. Other accessory uses, buildings and structures may be permitted upon approval by the Commission to
provide services and facilities on site for the residents which are customarily incidental to the permitted
use.
D. SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
1. Residential buildings shall be surrounded by a landscaped border of not less than fifteen (15) feet in width
adjacent to and parallel to all sides of the building except points of entry, unless modified by the Commission. .
2. Common open space shall be:
a. Provided on the development site in an appropriate amount and configuration in relation to the intended
occupancy characteristics of the site.
b. Appropriately located in relation to the planned development site and, where feasible, to be connected by
means of linear greenbelts.
3. Public improvements shall conform to the applicable requirements of the Subdivision Regulations and the
following standards:
a. All utilities shall be installed underground.
b. Sidewalks constructed to town standards shall be installed within the site and along the public street on
which the site fronts.
c. A complete lighting system shall be installed.
4. Exterior parking lots shall be:
a. Located at least fifteen (15) feet from any building,
b. Screened by landscaping of appropriate height and density, and
30
c. Illuminated in a manner which is compatible with the development.
5. Parking areas containing more than fifty (50) spaces shall have two (2) driveways to a street, except where the
applicant can demonstrate that reasonable traffic circulation exists to and from the site for emergency or other
public safety vehicles A report from the Wethersfield Police and Fire Departments shall be required to permit
a reduction to one driveway. Parking areas shall have a width of twenty-four (24) feet, except that aisle width
may be reduced if angle parking and one-way vehicle circulation are provided.
6. An appropriate declaration of covenants and residency restrictions running with the land and/or buildings in
favor of the Town of Wethersfield shall:
a. Be submitted as part of an application for a special permit.
b. Restrict the design, use and occupancy of the buildings and land for elderly housing in accordance with
such special permit and accompanying plans which may be approved.
c. Be recorded on the land records of the Town of Wethersfield with the special permit, if granted, and shall
be prior in right to all encumbrances not excused by the Commission.
E. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
Minimum lot area (square feet) excluding wetlands
(Where an existing building is to be converted for congregate
housing there shall be no minimum lot area)
2.0 acres
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 150
Minimum yards (feet)
Front yard depth 50
Rear yard depth 50
Side yard depth 30
Minimum building separation 15 feet or the height of the structure,
whichever is greater
Maximum building height (stories / feet)
Maximum building height when restricted to persons
Aged 55 and over (stories/feet) (08/08/08)
2 ½ / 35
3/45
Maximum building coverage (percent of lot area) 35%
Maximum landscaped area (percent of lot area) 35%
Maximum density (units/beds per acre)
Congregate housing /Assisted Living 20.0
Nursing/Convalescent Homes 25.0
The density limitations shall not apply to the conversion of
existing buildings.
Minimum Floor Area For Dwelling Units
Assisted Living
Congregate Housing
350 sq. ft.
400 sq. ft.
31
3.2.2 Care Centers
A. A care center may be permitted by the Commission as a Special Permit provided that:
1. The Commission shall determine the use to be suitable and appropriate to the area in which such proposed
use is to be located.
2. The applicant shall satisfy the Commission that adequate off-street parking shall be provided to satisfy the
needs of the staff and other persons who may be expected to be present from time to time, including but
not limited to physicians, nurses, parents and attendants.
3. Adequate provision has been made for off-street discharge and pickup of attendees at the care center.
4. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the applicable provisions of the Connecticut Public
Health Code, the Connecticut Fire Safety Code and all other applicable state and local ordinances and
regulations.
B. As a precondition of any approval for a care center, the Chief Building Official shall certify to the Commission
that:
1. Any existing building which is intended to be devoted to such a use meets the requirements of the
Connecticut Basic Building Code for the intended use.
2. Any proposed new building meets the requirements of the Connecticut Basic Building Code for the
intended use.
C. The Commission shall stipulate, if it approves the proposed use in the proposed location that the plan as
certified shall be complied with in its entirety.
3.3 Open Space Development District (OS)
A. An Open Space Development shall not be established until the Commission approves a Zone Change, a
special permit and a subdivision/resubdivision provided that:
1. At least 25 percent of the land area is preserved as open space,
2. Any land not subdivided into building lots or designated as public streets shall be open space, provided
that not more than fifty percent (50%) of lands set aside as open space shall be classified as inland wetlands.
B. The requirements of the zone or zones in which the tract was classified at the time of application for an Open
Space Development shall prevail except as may be modified below:
AA
A-1
A
Maximum Density (lots per acre)
1.8 2.2 3.0
Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet)
15,000 10,000 7,500
Minimum lot frontage (feet)
90 75 60
Minimum yards (feet)
Rear yard depth 40 40 30
3.4 Special Residential Development District (SRD).
A. PURPOSE
1. This regulation is intended to provide for a residential zoning district which permits a variety of housing
diversity and housing opportunities including single family and multi-family residential units appropriate to
the environmental characteristics of the land and the character of the neighborhood. (6/18/10)
32
2. It is intended that any Special Residential Development (SRD) District shall be established by the Commission
only after taking into consideration the following:
a. The community need as determined by the Commission;
b. The supply of land available in the present and proposed zone;
c. Whether the site is capable of accommodating the increased building density without detrimental impact.
(6/18/10)
B. PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
1. A Special Residential Development District may only be established following approval of a Zone Change that
will include the submission of a Master Plan depicting the size, scale, intensity, and layout of the proposed
development and a land use table setting forth the specific type of development (e.g. Active Adult Housing,
Multi-Family Development, Single Family Development), the number of units proposed, the number of
parking spaces proposed, and the development parameters such as the building height, lot coverage and
proposed yards. The Master Plan and land use table shall include the following: (6/18/10)
a. A boundary survey of the land included within the proposed SRD zone conforming to a Class A2 Survey
and sealed by a land surveyor registered by the State of Connecticut. (6/18/10)
b. A preliminary plan showing the proposed general system of utilities and their connection points to existing
systems. (6/18/10)
c. A statement prepared by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Connecticut stating that the
water supply and distribution system, sanitary sewer system and drainage system can be designed to
adequately service the site. (6/18/10)
d. A traffic impact study and statement that characterizes the pre and post development traffic conditions
and demonstrates the potential adverse impacts on the traffic in the area. (6/18/10)
e. A land use table indicating the type of development (e.g. multi-family, high rise, age restricted), the
maximum amount of building development and density, number of dwelling units by type, size, square
footage and bedroom count, the maximum impervious coverage, the maximum building height, the
proposed yards, and the proposed open space, landscaping and/or buffers. (6/18/10)
f. A schematic plan indicating the proposed layout of the proposed development. The plan shall be
diagrammatic in nature, indicating development areas with examples of building layouts, parking areas,
open space areas and access systems, both vehicular and pedestrian. (6/18/10)
g. A listing of any other development criteria to be applied to the development. (6/18/10)
h. A proposed development sequencing if the project is to be phased. (6/18/10)
i. Preliminary building plans, including schematic floor plans, architectural elevations, and descriptions of
types of building materials. (6/18/10)
j. A fiscal impact study prepared by a qualified professional regarding the impact of the development on
municipal services including police, fire and schools. (6/18/10)
2. The intent of this regulation is to link the approval of the SRD zone change to the Master Plan, land use table
and the associated design details including: density, number of units, number of bedrooms, floor area of units,
building size, building heights, setbacks, coverage, site and building layout and architectural design. The
Master Plan and the associated land use table become the requirements of the SRD zone approved for the
parcel. (6/18/10)
After the zone change has been approved and if the proposed development has not changed significantly from
that shown on the Master Plan, the applicant may file a Site Plan application further detailing the proposed
development and its compliance with these regulations, the Master Plan and the land use table. (6/18/10)
The Commission shall, in its sole discretion, determine which if any changes constitute a significant change.
(6/18/10)
Minor changes to the previously submitted Master Plan may be made as part of the Site Plan application
provided such changes do not significantly affect the overall design and dimensional requirements detailed in
the Master Plan and land use table. (6/18/10)
33
Minor changes may include technical changes to the utility, parking, landscaping, driveways, lighting and
grading plan and slight modifications to the building height, size and setbacks or other similar minor
alterations to the Master Plan. (6/18/10)
Any change deemed to be significant by the Commission from what was presented on the Master Plan or set
forth in the land use table shall be considered and processed as a special permit application. (6/18/10)
Any change that increases the proposed density, use or type of development (e.g. changing from Active Adult
to Multi-Family), number of units and number of bedrooms or decreases the proposed minimum floor area of
the units shall be considered and acted upon as a completely new application for change of zone to an SRD
District. (6/18/10)
C. PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT TYPES AND USES
1. Provided the requirements of this section are complied with, development may occur:
a. With each individual residential unit on a separate lot or common land (such as a conventional, zero-lotline,
duplex, patio house, townhouse development, elderly housing, or individual active adult residence).
(5/6 /05)
b. With multiple individual residential units located on common land in:
1. Multiplex building(s),
2. Mid-rise building(s) and/or
3. High-rise building(s).
2. One or more of the following uses may be permitted in the SRD District upon zone change approval: (6/18/10)
a. Active Adult Housing;
b. Elderly Housing;
c. Multi-Family Development.
d. Single Family Development. (5/6/05)
e. Congregate housing, assisted living or life care facility on a collector or arterial street in accordance with
Section 3.2.1. (8/8/08)
D. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES & USES
The following uses are permitted as accessory to the permitted principal uses when approved as part of a Site Plan
application and when in compliance with the Accessory Buildings & Structures requirements of Section 3.6. of
these regulations: (5/6/05)
1. On-site parking for motor vehicles owned or used by the residents.
2. Active and passive recreation improvements.
3. Private garages and carports
4. Community garages and carports
5. A bathing or swimming pool
6. Other accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily subordinate and incidental to a permitted use as
approved by the Commission. (6/18/10)
E. SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
1. Residential units built under this Section shall be accessed from internal driveways and streets and not from
existing public streets.
2. Residential buildings shall be surrounded by a landscaped border of not less than fifteen (15) feet in width
adjacent to and parallel to all sides of the building except points of entry.
34
3. Buildings shall be situated and grouped in a manner which, to the satisfaction of the Commission gives due
consideration to the elements of site design, including but not limited to terrain, vegetation, watercourses and
other noteworthy natural features; pedestrian and vehicular circulation; the location and design of open space;
building form, style and bulk; energy conservation; and access to sunlight, solar radiation, ventilation and
noteworthy vistas. Buildings shall be so designed as to avoid monotonous patterns of construction or repetitive
spaces between buildings.
4. Common open space shall be:
a. Provided on the development site in a minimum amount of space that is equal to 25% of the land area.
b. Configured as outdoor living space and conservation areas for the use of residents. The open space shall,
when appropriate be improved as lawns and other landscape areas, common areas, walkways and the areas
accessible from them, paved terraces, sitting areas, outdoor recreational areas and patios. (5/6/05)
c. Provided in addition to yards within lots, undeveloped lots, or areas necessary to establish mini mum
setback for multiplex buildings and paved surfaces.
d. Configured such that not more than fifty percent (50%) of such open space shall be land designated as
wetland.
e. Planned so as to be reasonably distributed throughout the development site and, where feasible, to be
connected by means of linear greenbelts.
f. Protected through adequate controls to assure the permanence of open space uses in areas so designated,
through public acquisition or by easement or other suitable type of agreement. (5/6/05)
5. Public improvements shall conform to the applicable requirements of the Subdivision Regulations and the
following standards:
a. All utilities shall be installed underground.
b. Sidewalks constructed to town standards shall be installed on both sides of all public and private streets
within the site and along the public street on which the site fronts.
c. A complete street lighting system shall be installed and all construction and energy charges incurred prior
to acceptance of such improvements shall be borne by the developer.
d. The Commission may modify these requirements if public safety is not adversely affected by a threefourths
(3/4) vote of all the members of the Commission after stating upon its records, in each case, the
reason for which a waiver was granted.
6. Within multifamily structures, dwelling units designed to meet the needs of handicapped persons shall be
provided at the rate of the greater of one (1) unit for every twenty-five (25) units provided within all such
structures on the planned development site or as otherwise required by building code. (6/18/10)
7. Garage spaces for detached or attached dwellings occupying individual lots may be placed on a corner by a
rear and side lot line if attached to the garage of the adjoining lot. Attached garages so placed may be served
by a single, common driveway.
8. Exterior parking areas in parking lots shall be:
a. Located at least fifteen (15) feet from any building,
b. Screened by landscaping of appropriate height and density, and
c. Illuminated in a manner which is compatible with the development.
9. Where parking areas contain more than fifty (50) spaces, two (2) driveways to a street may be required by the
Commission. In the event that the applicant does not have sufficient frontage or otherwise does not have the
ability to provide two (2) driveways, then the applicant may provide emergency access through private
property by way of an easement or other arrangement if the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Town’s public safety officials that the alternate emergency access is adequate. Driveways and aisles of
parking areas shall have a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet, except that aisle width may be reduced if
angle parking and one-way vehicle circulation are provided. (5/6 /05) (6/18/10)
10. Written declaration shall be made to the Commission as to the intended ownership and management of all land,
buildings and other improvements on the site to remain in common ownership.
11. Where required, an appropriate declaration of covenants and restrictions running with the land and/or buildings
in favor of the Town of Wethersfield shall:
a. Be submitted as part of an application for a special permit for elderly housing.
b. Restrict the design, use and occupancy of the buildings and land for elderly housing in accordance with
such special permit and accompanying plans which may be approved.
c. Be recorded on the land records of the Town of Wethersfield with the special permit, if granted, and shall
be prior in right to all encumbrances not excused by the Commission.
35
12. A change in use of an approved plan of development for housing for the elderly and handicapped may be made
only through the procedures established for granting of a new special permit and approval of a new plan of
development in accordance with applicable zoning regulations.
F. MINIMUM FLOOR AREA OF UNITS
1. Except as may otherwise be set forth herein, a multi-family residential unit shall contain at least 600 square
feet of floor area for a one bedroom unit and 800 square feet of floor area for a two bedroom unit and shall not
contain more than two bedrooms unless specifically authorized by the Commission. (6/18/10)
2. A high-rise residential unit, when restricted to persons aged 55 and over, shall contain at least 500 square feet
of floor area plus at least 150 square feet per actual or potential bedroom and shall not contain more than two
bedrooms unless specifically authorized by the Commission.
3. An elderly housing unit shall contain at least 400 square feet of floor area.
4. An active adult housing unit shall contain at least 900 square feet of floor area.
G. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Minimum lot area (square feet) excluding wetlands.
(Where an existing building is to be converted for
housing there shall be no minimum lot area)
2.0 acres
2. Minimum lot frontage (feet) Where a development
proposes the construction of a public street that extends
an existing dead-end street the minimum lot frontage
required is fifty (50) feet. (5/6/05)
150
3. Minimum yards (to public streets and perimeter property lines)
a. Front yard depth 50’ with at least 12 feet per story if front yard adjacent to
residentially zoned property (6/18/10)
b. Rear yard depth 50’ with at least 8 feet per story if rear yard adjacent to
residentially zoned property (6/18/10)
c. Side yard depth 30’ with at least 8 feet per story if side yard adjacent to
residentially zoned property (6/18/10)
4. Minimum separation (to private streets and internal property lines)
a. Front yard depth 15 feet
b. Rear yard depth 15 feet
c. Side yard depth (may be zero if approved as duplex
or townhouse)
5 feet
5. Minimum building separation 15 feet (6/18/10)
6. Maximum building height (stories / feet)
a. Single Family and multiplex residential units
(5/6/05) (6/18/10)
2½ / 35
b. Mid-rise residential units 5 stories 50 feet (6/18/10)
c. High-rise residential units 6 stories 60 feet (6/18/10)
d. High-rise residential units when restricted to persons
aged 55 and over
8 stories 80 feet
7. Maximum density (units per acre)
a. Single Family residential unit (5/6/05) 6.0 units per acre
b. Multiplex residential units 9.0 units per acre
c. Mid-rise residential units 15.0 units per acre (6/18/10)
d. Mid-rise residential units when restricted to
persons aged 55 and over
18.0 units per acre (6/18/10)
e. High-rise residential units 20.0 units per acre (6/18/10)
f. High-rise residential units when restricted to
persons aged 55 and over
25.0 units per acre
8. Maximum building coverage (percent of lot area)
a. Single Family residential unit (5/6/05) 35%
b. Multiplex residential units 35%
c. Mid-rise residential units 35% (6/18/10)
d. High-rise residential units 35% (6/18/10)
e. High-rise residential units when restricted to
persons aged 55 and over
40%
9. Minimum landscaped area (percent of lot area)
a. Single Family residential unit (5/6/05) 35%
b. Multiplex residential units 35% (6/18/10)
c. Mid-rise residential units 35% (6/18/10)
d. High-rise residential units 35% (6/18/10)
e. High-rise residential units when restricted to
persons aged 55 and over
40%
H. EXCEPTIONS
1. The Commission may, where deemed appropriate and in the sole judgment of the Commission, allow
development in the SRD District that does not comply with the strict application of these Regulations by
modifying the minimum yard, minimum building separation, common open space and minimum separation
requirements of these Regulations upon determination that one or more of the following criteria has been
satisfied: (5/6 /05)
a. Unusual site conditions exist which warrant flexibility in the application of these regulations;
b. The exception provides for the most orderly development of the land and the neighborhood;
c. The exception results in a substantial functional and aesthetic improvement in the site design;
d. The applicant has substantially exceeded one or more of the minimum dimensional or site plan
requirements of these regulations.
2. In the event the property that is the subject of the application is located partially within Wethersfield and
partially in another town and the access to the property is from the other town, then, notwithstanding the
requirements set forth above, the following criteria shall apply: (6/18/10)
a. There shall be no frontage requirement in Wethersfield provided the property abuts a public road in the
other town and provided the property has not less than 150 feet of frontage on such public road. If there is
no frontage on a public road in Wethersfield, then the property shall not be required to have a front yard.
The Applicant shall designate which property line shall be the rear lot line and all other lot lines shall be
side lot lines. (6/18/10)
b. In the area where the property line is coterminous with the Wethersfield Town line, such area shall be
deemed a side yard. In the area where the property crosses the Town line, if such area is also the location
where the access to the other Town’s public road is located, then there shall be no yard requirement at the
Town line in such area provided that the distance from the Town line to the public road is at least 50 feet.
(6/18/10)
37
3.5 ACCESSORY USES
Table Legend
PR Permitted By Right No Permit Required
P Permitted Use Following Zoning Permit Approval By the ZEO
SP Permitted Following Site Plan Approval By the Commission
CU-SP A Conditional Use Permitted Only After Special Permit Approval By the Commission
CU-SE A Conditional Use Permitted Only After Special Exception Approval by the Zoning Board of
Appeals (10/15/10)
Blank Not A Permitted Use
3.5.1 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
A. Incidental Parking
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. On-site parking for registered non-commercial motor vehicles owned or
used by a resident.
PR PR PR PR PR
2. Parking of not more than two (2) commercial vehicles subject to the
following restrictions: (5/6/05) (9/1/09) (10/15/10)
? The vehicle must be owned or operated by the resident of the dwelling.
? The vehicle shall have no more than 2 (two) axles and no more than
four (4) tires in contact with the ground,
? The vehicle shall be parked so as not to obstruct the view of traffic from
adjacent driveways or streets.
? Only commercial vehicles that are the resident’s primary means of
transportation to and from their place of work are permitted to be
parked.
? The vehicle shall not exceed eleven thousand (11,000) pounds GVWR.
? The vehicle shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height from the base of
the wheel to the top.
? The vehicle shall not exceed twenty-two (22) feet in length.
? The vehicle shall be parked on a durable all-weather surface.
? Any signs, logos, advertising or markings identifying the owner or
registrant, trade, business, service or commodity shall be limited to
not more than 2 and each is limited to not more than six (6) square
feet in area.
? The vehicle must be operable.
PR PR PR PR PR
h
3. Parking of one (1) commercial vehicle, subject to the issuance of a
Zoning Permit by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and compliance with
the standards of Section 3.5.5.A.of these regulations. (10/15/10)
P P P P P
4. Parking of farm trucks on an active farm in the rear yard of the
dwelling or principal accessory building.
PR PR PR PR PR
5. Parking of a commercial vehicle exceeding the requirements of 3.5.5.A.
may be parked or garaged on a lot, subject to the provisions of Section
3.5.5.B. of these regulations. (10/15/10)
CU-SE CU-SE CU-SE CU-SE CU-SE
6. No garage, or combination of garage space in a principal or accessory
building shall be constructed that exceeds eight hundred and fifty (850)
square feet in area. (5/6/05)
P P P P P
38
B. Vehicular Storage AA A-1 A B C
1. Storage in a building of boats, automobiles, or trailers by the
resident of the premises.
PR PR PR PR PR
2. Renting of a private garage to another party provided no
more than two motor vehicles are habitually parked outside
such garage.
PR PR PR PR PR
3. Outside storage of one recreational vehicle, one boat and its
trailer, or one automobile trailer not more than eighteen (18)
feet in length, may only be parked in the rear yard by the
resident when treated as an accessory structure in
compliance with Section 3.6. (5/6/05)
PR PR PR PR PR
4. Outside storage of a recreational vehicle, boat or trailer by
the resident when not in compliance with the above
provisions.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
C. Pets & Livestock
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. The keeping of dogs, cats, and other animals kept as pets or
companions and housed together with human occupants.
PR PR PR PR PR
2. The keeping of livestock on residential premises solely for
the personal use of the occupants in accordance with Section
3.5.4.
P P P P P
3. The keeping of livestock when accessory to a farm. P P P P P
4. The keeping of pets and livestock when not in compliance
with the above provisions.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
D. Day Care AA A-1 A B C
1. Family day care home per CGS 19a-77. P P P P P
2. Group day care home per CGS 19a-77. P P P P P
E. Home Occupation AA A-1 A B C
1. Home office in compliance with Section 3.5.2. P P P P P
2. Home occupation in compliance with Section 3.5.2. P P P P P
3. Home occupation that does not comply with Section 3.5.2. CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
F. Accessory Apartment AA A-1 A B C
1. Accessory Apartment in compliance with Section 3.5.3. P P P P P
2. Accessory Apartment that does not comply with Section
3.5.3.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
G. Miscellaneous Accessory Uses
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. A tag sale for up to three consecutive days and not more than
twice in a calendar year.
PR PR PR PR PR
2. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted
use.
P P P P P
39
3.5.2 HOME OCCUPATION
A. A home office is permitted when accessory to a residential use of the premises.
B. A minor home occupation is permitted when accessory to a residential use of the premises provided that a
written request and appropriate plans in accordance with Section 10.2.B are submitted to, and approved by, the
Zoning Enforcement Official. The Zoning Enforcement Official may refer any application to the Commission
and the Commission reserves the right to review any home occupation for compliance with the following
requirements and act upon its findings:
1. The home occupation shall not involve any employees stationed on the premises.
2. It shall occupy less than 25% of the gross floor area of the dwelling.
3. The home occupation shall not involve customers or clients arriving at the dwelling.
4. It shall not involve the retail sales of merchandise except for crafts or art created at the premises.
5. It shall not require equipment other than may be typical for a residential household, other than a loom or
photographic darkroom or similar craft or art equipment.
6. It shall not require a commercial vehicle.
C. A major home occupation (not complying with one or more of the above standards) may only be authorized by
the Commission as a Special Permit.
D. Any home office or home occupation shall conform to the following requirements:
1. It shall be carried on only by the inhabitants of the dwelling.
2. It shall be operated entirely within the confines of the dwelling.
3. It shall be clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.
4. It shall have adequate off-street parking for the home occupation in addition to the dwelling.
5. It shall not involve the storage or delivery of significant quantities of goods or materials.
6. It shall not require storage of any materials or products on the premises outside of the dwelling unit.
7. The home occupation (and any associated parking or other activity) shall not materially change the
residential character of the dwelling or the neighborhood.
8. It shall not create a health or safety hazard or be considered a nuisance due to objectionable illumination,
noise, smoke, odor, toxic fumes, vibration, interference with radio or television reception in the vicinity or
unsightly conditions that would set the dwelling apart in its surroundings or degrade residential property
values in the neighborhood.
3.5.3. ACCESSORY APARTMENT
An accessory apartment as defined in these Regulations that is accessory to a residential use is permitted provided
that a written request and detailed plans in accordance with Section 10.2.B are submitted to, and approved by, the
Zoning Enforcement Official in clear compliance with the following standards:
A. Only one accessory apartment shall be permitted for each single-family dwelling.
B. The owner of the property shall occupy either the principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit and
failure to maintain owner-occupancy shall be a violation of these regulations and shall be cause for removal of
the accessory apartment. A sworn, notarized statement from the owner indicating that the owner will reside at
the subject premises is a condition of maintaining an accessory apartment and such statement shall be
submitted with any application to establish an accessory apartment.
C. The accessory apartment shall:
1. meet the minimum floor area requirements of the current Building Code.
2. not exceed 850 square feet or 40% of the combined floor areas of the single family dwelling and the
accessory apartment, whichever is less
3. be accessible from the principal dwelling by an operable door along a common wall or through a
permanently enclosed breezeway.
D. Both the accessory apartment and the principal dwelling unit shall be serviced by public water and public
sewer.
40
E. Upon establishment of the accessory apartment, the building shall:
1. maintain the exterior appearance and style (roof line, roof pitch, building materials, window style and
spacing, etc.) of the principal residence, and
2. have any secondary entrance incorporated into the principal residence to reflect the architectural style of a
single family unit.
F. Parking and access from the public right-of-way shall serve both the principal and accessory units, and shall
not be distinguishable as separate facilities.
G. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for the accessory apartment and the single family dwelling.
H. The Zoning Enforcement Official may refer any application to the Commission and the Commission reserves
the right to review any accessory apartment for compliance with the above requirements and act upon its
findings.
3.5.4 LIVESTOCK.
A. PURPOSE
This section is intended to allow for the keeping of livestock when accessory to a residential use. Farms and
farming shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section.
B. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. The keeping of livestock may include raising, breeding, instructing, training, sales, boarding, riding, driving
and similar uses normally associated therewith.
2. Additional regulations of the Public Health Code, the Department of Environmental Protection, the
Connecticut Department of Agriculture, and the Connecticut General Statutes may apply.
3. The raising or breeding of livestock exclusively for their pelts is prohibited.
C. REQUIREMENTS
1. The keeping of bees is permitted in conjunction with a residence.
2. For the purposes of this section, a livestock unit shall be defined as follows:
a. one horse, cow, or similar large animal whose mature weight exceeds 500 pounds,
b. three sheep, goats or similar medium size animals whose mature weight is between 30 and 500 pounds, or
c. fifteen hens, rabbits or similar small animals whose mature weight is less than 30 pounds.
3. Livestock offspring shall not apply to the calculation of livestock units until after weaning.
4. Livestock may only be kept in accordance with the following table:
Lot Size Permitted Livestock
Less than 8,000 sq. ft. None
8,000 to 20,000 sq. ft. Up to 5 hens, capons, rabbits or similar
small animals or birds, one sheep, or one
goat
More than 20,000 sq. ft. 0.5 livestock units per acre or part thereof
5. All livestock shall be confined in keeping areas with adequate fencing located at least twenty-five (25) feet
from any lot line.
6. An appropriate permanent shelter shall be provided for all livestock and such shelter shall be located at least:
a. 100 feet from the street line,
b. 50 feet from a rear property line,
c. 25 feet from a side property line, and
d. one hundred (100) feet from a reservoir, pond or watercourse.
7. All manure shall be:
a. kept in a covered, water-tight pit or chamber and as approved by the Health Department.
41
b. removed at least once a week during the period from May 1 to October 1 and during the other months at
intervals sufficiently frequent to maintain a condition which is sanitary and free from offensive odors to
the satisfaction of the Director of Health.
c. located at least one hundred (100) feet from any street line and fifty (50) feet from any lot line.
d. visually screened from the street or any neighboring lot.
8. Any pre-existing non-conforming fence for confining livestock may be repaired, maintained, or replaced.
3.5.5 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES. (10/15/10)
A. The parking of one (1) commercial vehicle with the following characteristics may be permitted in a residential
district as an accessory use subject to the issuance of a zoning permit from the ZEO and subject to the
following restrictions:
1. The commercial vehicle must be owned or operated by the resident of the dwelling.
2. The vehicle shall have no more than 2 (two) axles and no more than 6 (six) tires in contact with the
ground.
3. The vehicle shall be parked so as not to obstruct the view of traffic from adjacent driveways or streets.
4. Only commercial vehicles that are the resident’s primary means of transportation to and from their place
of work are permitted to be parked.
5. The vehicle shall not exceed twelve thousand (12,000) pounds GVWR.
6. The vehicle shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height from the base of the wheel to the top.
7. The vehicle shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in length.
8. Any signs, logos, advertising or markings identifying the owner or registrant, trade, business, service or
commodity shall be limited to not more than 2 and each is limited to not more than twelve (12) square feet
in area.
9. The vehicle shall be parked in a fully enclosed garage or in unusual situations where the vehicle cannot fit
in a garage the ZEO may permit the vehicle to be parked outside of a garage on a durable all-weather
surface and may require screening from view from neighboring properties or from a public right-of-way
with appropriate vegetative buffering, fencing, earthen berms or a combination thereof.
10. The ZEO may require applicants to submit information about the commercial vehicle on a form provided
by the Town.
11. The ZEO reserves the right to refer any application submitted under these regulations to the Zoning Board
of Appeals under the Special Exception requirements of these regulations.
B. By Special Exception, the Zoning Board of Appeals may permit one (1) larger commercial vehicle exceeding
or not in compliance with the requirements of 3.5.5.A. to be parked or garaged on a lot, subject to the Special
Standards and Procedures of Article VIII of these regulations and the following:
1. The Board may require that commercial vehicles approved under this subsection shall be parked in a
location that will be screened from view along the nearest property line or from a public right-of-way with
appropriate vegetative buffering, fencing, earthen berms or a combination thereof.
2. In considering an application for a commercial vehicle, the Board shall consider such factors as:
a. The proposed method of screening,
b. Proximity to adjacent lots and buildings,
c. The size and characteristics of the vehicle,
d. The intended use,
e. The hours of operation of the vehicle,
f. Other vehicles on the property and,
g. The character of the neighborhood.
3. The Board may attach reasonable restrictions and conditions on any Special Exception approved under
these regulations in order to maintain neighborhood residential character.
4. All applications for a Special Exception shall be accompanied by:
a. A detailed description of the vehicle on a form provided by the Town that shall include: gross vehicle
weight, height, total length, box length, wheelbase, model and make.
b. A color photograph of the vehicle, and
c. A site plan identifying the proposed parking area for the vehicle, proximity to adjacent buildings and
any proposed screening.
42
C. The parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in business zones as an accessory use to the permitted use of
the property after the issuance of Site Development Plan approval from the PZC permitting such vehicles. The
Commission shall be governed by the submission requirements and review criteria of Section 3.5.5.B. of these
regulations.
D. The following are exempt from the provisions of these regulations:
1. Commercial vehicles parked temporarily while engaged in providing products or services to the owner of
the property or when picking up or discharging passengers.
2. Vehicles used on the site of a permitted agriculture, farming, forestry, or nursery gardening use.
3. Vehicles parked temporarily during active construction work at a permitted site or building construction
activity authorized by these regulations.
4. As used by a facility operated by the Town of Wethersfield, State or Federal Government provided the
vehicles are properly stored on Town, State or Federal property.
5. Emergency and utility company vehicles on call or during the course of repairs.
E. The following vehicles are prohibited by these regulations in residential zones:
1. Vehicle used for transporting hazardous materials or waste.
2. Vehicles/equipment, including but not limited to; backhoes, bobcats, commercial trailers, bucket loaders,
bucket trucks, cranes, forklifts, wreckers, tanker trucks used for hauling liquids, front end loaders,
bulldozers, buses, dump trucks, tow trucks and track vehicles.
3. No tractor-trailer, semi-trucks, nor the tractor or the trailer.
4. Vehicles equipped with refrigeration equipment.
5. Vehicles in which food or beverages are stored or sold.
43
3.6. Accessory Buildings & Structures.
Table Legend
P Permitted Use Following Zoning Permit Approval By the ZEO
SP Permitted Following Site Plan Approval By the Commission
CU-SP A Conditional Use Permitted Only After Special Permit Approval By the Commission
Blank Not Permitted
A. General Requirements
1. Accessory buildings and structures shall be located only in the rear yard
except that:
a. accessory buildings on corner lots and through lots in residence zones shall be located only in the
quarter of the lot farthest removed from any street.
b. an accessory building or structure may be located in the front yard or side yard provided that it is set
back at least seventy (70) feet from the front lot line.
2. Accessory buildings or structures shall be located at least five (5) feet from a side lot line and at least five
(5) feet from a rear lot line in residence zones.
3. The maximum height of an accessory building or structure shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet .
4. The maximum coverage of all accessory buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed more than forty
percent (40%) of the required rear yard area.
5. For residential lots having an average width of less than sixty-five (65) feet, accessory buildings may be
located to within three (3) feet of the side and rear lot lines.
B. Garages
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. One detached private garage or carport no larger than
850 square feet in area. See Section 3.5.1.A.5.
(5/6 /05)
P P P P P
2. Any community garage or a private garage or
carport not complying with the above requirements.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
C. Residential Outbuildings
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. One tool house, gazebo, or greenhouse for hobby or
personal use if 200 square feet or less in area.
P P P P P
2. Any outbuilding not complying with the above stated
requirements.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
3. Any outbuilding resulting in more than three
accessory structures on a property.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
D. Accessory Recreation Facilities
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. One child's playhouse no larger than 200 square
feet in area.
P P P P P
2. One bathing or swimming pool in the rear yard
only.
P P P P P
44
3. One tennis court or paddle tennis court in the rear
yard only.
P P P P P
E. Guesthouse
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. A guest house or detached accessory
residential building occupied provided:
? The lot is at least one (1) acre in area
? The building is located in the rear yard
? Occupancy is limited to members of
the family, their guests, or domestic
service employees on the premises, and
? Such accessory building is located at
least 25 feet from side and rear lot line
and 100 feet from the street line.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
F. Farming Structures
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. Stables or other structures incidental to the
keeping of livestock for personal use
accessory to a residential use, provided that
all structures are located at least 100 feet
from any street line and 50 feet from the
side and rear lot lines.
P P P P P
2. Farm outbuildings accessory to farm uses
provided that all farm buildings, except
roadside stands, are located at least 100 feet
from any street line and 50 feet from the
side and rear lot lines.
P P P P P
3. Temporary farm stands for the sale of
products grown on the premises when set
back at least 25 feet from the street and 10
feet from side and rear lot lines, and
provided the stand shall be removed within
30 days after the use thereof has been
discontinued.
P P P P P
G. Miscellaneous Accessory Structures
AA
A-1
A
B
C
1. Temporary structures, including membrane
structures, no larger than 200 square feet for
no more than 6 months in any 12 month
period
P P P P P
2. Other accessory buildings and structures
customarily incidental to a permitted use
and 200 square feet or less in area.
P P P P P
3. Residential radio or television antennae and
other accessory installations in accordance
with Section 9.1.
P P P P P
4. Other accessory buildings and structures
customarily incidental to a permitted use
larger than 200 square feet in area..
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
45
3.7. Dimensional Requirements.
See the following pages for possible exceptions
to these requirements.
A. BASIC PROVISIONS
AA
A-1
A
B
C
Minimum lot area (square feet)
Single Family 20,000 13,500 10,500 7,500 6,000
Two-Family
- - - - 8,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet)
For a single family dwelling 110 90 75 60 60
For a two-family dwelling - - - - 75
For a municipal building 110 90 75 75 75
For any other allowable use
200 200 200 200 200
Minimum Buildable Square (dimension
of each side in feet)
100 80 65 50 50
Maximum building area (percent of lot
area)
20% 25% 30% 35% 50%
Minimum front yard depth for a single-family or
two-family dwelling (feet)
On Wolcott Hill Road (441-515,
535-583, 522-600)),
Ridge Road, (581-725)
75 75
Other streets
40 40 40 40 25
Minimum side and rear yards for a
single-family or two-family dwelling (feet)
Rear yard depth 50 40 40 30 30
Side yard width
One yard 15 12 10 5 5
Aggregate both yards
30 27 23 15 15
Maximum building height
Stories 2 1/2 2 1/2 2 1/2 2 1/2 2 1/2
Feet 35 35 35 35 35
46
B. GENERAL EXCEPTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
In addition to the exceptions granted by Article VII of these regulations the following exceptions shall apply to
single-family residential development in residence zones and shall not apply to special permit uses in these zones
without specific approval by the Commission.
1. Front Yard Setback Averaging
In a residence zone, the minimum depth of the front yard need be no greater than the average distance from the
street line to the principal buildings:
? on the two adjoining lots on each side of the proposed site if developed with buildings, or
? for the principal buildings located within two hundred (200) feet of frontage on each side of the
proposed site if fifty percent (50%) or more of that frontage is developed with buildings.
2. Yards On Corner Lots
In a residence zone, a corner lot in existence or shown on a plan of subdivision approved prior to
December 31, 1965, may observe the following minimum side yard on the street side of a corner lot:
? AA zone 25 feet
? A-1 zone 20 feet
? A Zone 15 feet
? B zone 15 feet
? C zone 15 feet
The rear yard on any corner lot in a residence zone may be reduced provided that no such yard shall be smaller than
the minimum side yard prescribed for that zone.
3. Front Yard Setback On Cul-De-Sacs
A single family dwelling to be erected on a lot having fifty percent (50%) or more of its frontage on a cul-de-sac
may observe a twenty-five (25) foot setback provided that all other applicable requirements of this chapter are met.
4. Building Overhangs or Projections
Typical projections such as eaves, pilasters, sills, cornices, and bay windows may extend into any required yard not
more than 18 inches. Chimneys may extend into any required yard not more than two feet. A basement hatchway
may project into the required rear yard not more than six (6) feet. An open porch or deck or entrance steps may
project into the required front yard not more than six (6) feet. On interior lots, a porch, entrance steps or entrance
47
platform, any of which may be open or enclosed with a removable enclosure, may extend not more than ten (10)
feet into the required rear yard.
5. Building Additions
For a principal or accessory building that currently encroaches into a required side or rear yard in a residential
zone, an extension of or addition to that building may encroach into the same yard to the same extent. (5/6 /05)
3.8. Pre-Existing Residential Lots.
A. The limitations imposed by these Regulations shall not prohibit the erection of one single-family dwelling on
any lot in a residential district containing either an area or frontage, or both, less than required, provided that
such lot has been duly recorded by deed or included in a subdivision approved by the Commission prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
B. Any such lot having less than one hundred ten (110) feet in depth shall be considered to have a minimum rear
yard requirement of thirty percent (30%) of the lot depth.
C. All other dimensional requirements of these Regulations shall be complied with, except that, where necessary,
the side and rear yard requirements may be those applicable to the next lower zone.
D. Two or more contiguous, non-conforming lots as to lot size and shape, under the same ownership, shall be
combined to the extent necessary to cause such lot or lots to become conforming or more nearly conforming.
3.9 Rear Lots (8/7/07)
The purpose and intent of this Section is to allow for the development of larger interior lots which have excess lot
size which, due to their limited frontage, could not otherwise be subdivided. The creation of a rear lot may be
48
permitted in special situations in the following residential zones upon the submission of a detailed site development
plan and upon the granting of a Special Permit from the Planning and Zoning Commission and subject to the
following requirements:
1. Each rear lot shall conform to all requirements for the zoning district in which it is located except that the front
yard setbacks and minimum lot area, exclusive of the access strip be at least 50% greater than the minimum
requirement for the zoning district in which the lot is located and in accordance with the following table:
A. BASIC PROVISIONS FOR
REAR LOTS
AA
A-1
A
B
Minimum lot area (square feet) for
Rear lot and front lot (excluding access
strip
50,000 33,750 26,25
0
18,75
0
Minimum lot area (square feet) for rear
lot (excluding access strip)
30,000 20,250 15,75
0
11,25
0
Minimum lot area (square feet) for
Front lot (excluding access strip)
20,000 13,500 10,50
0
7,500
Minimum lot frontage (feet) for rear lot
25 25 25 25
Minimum lot frontage (feet) for front lot
110 90 75 60
Minimum combined lot frontage (feet)
for rear lot and front lot
135 115 100 85
Minimum Buildable Square (dimension
of each side in feet)
100 80 65 50
Maximum building area (percent of lot
area)
20% 25% 30% 35%
Minimum front yard depth for a
single-family dwelling (feet) for
rear lot
60 60 60 60
Minimum side and rear yards for a
single-family dwelling (feet)
Rear yard depth 50 40 40 30
Side yard width
One yard 15 12 10 5
Aggregate both yards
30 27 23 15
Maximum building height
Stories 2 1/2 2 1/2 2 1/2 2 1/2
Feet 35 35 35 35
2. Both front and rear lots must conform to all minimum lot, area, yard and other requirements prescribed for the
zone in which the lots are located.
3. There shall be a maximum of one-single family dwelling with permitted accessory buildings or uses on each
rear lot. No accessory building may be constructed within a designated access strip.
49
4. Each rear lot shall be connected by an access strip at least 25 feet in width for its entire length, in fee simple
ownership by the owner of said rear lot, to an existing Town street approved by the Town and on file with the
Town Clerk.
5. The access strip shall not exceed 500 feet and no single family dwelling will be permitted in excess of fivehundred
(500) feet from a fire hydrant. The Fire Marshal may require the installation of a public or private fire
hydrant in order to satisfy this requirement.
6. The maximum number of adjacent access strips shall be two.
7. A restricted deed covenant shall be filed on the Town Land Records which clearly provides that the Town of
Wethersfield shall not be required to maintain or take ownership of said access strip as a public street. A
landscape maintenance agreement shall be filed on the Town Land Records to insure that the property owner
maintains the access strip for adequate emergency vehicle access. Vegetation shall be cleared and maintained
for an area of 15 feet in width and 17 feet in height.
8. The driveway must provide adequate occupancy, ingress, egress, maneuvering and an adequate paved surface
of no less than 12 feet in width for its entire length. The driveway shall be constructed with a minimum of 8
inches of processed stone over a minimum of 2 inches of bituminous to adequately accommodate fire
apparatus and other emergency vehicles. All rear lots shall be provided with a vehicular turnaround designed
for an SU-30 turning radius at the dwelling in order to accommodate emergency vehicles.
9. The area of the access strip shall not be included in the minimum required area of the rear lot and shall not be
used for building purposes.
10. A landscape buffer shall be required by the Commission where necessary within the lot and along the access
strip to ensure that the development of rear lots will be in harmony with surrounding areas and protect existing
homes.
11. Dwellings shall be connected to the MDC water and sewer system, when constructed, if those facilities are not
available the Health Department must approve the proposed lot for an on site well and septic system prior to
approval by the Commission.
12. Electric and other utility service lines shall be placed underground.
13. The Commission may modify the above requirements when it determines that the rear lots and the access
thereto will be in harmony with the surrounding area and preserve the public health, safety, welfare and
property values.
14. The Commission shall require a site plan in accordance with Appendix A (Site Plan Requirements) of the
Wethersfield Zoning Regulations showing sufficient detail to clearly indicate the proposed development and
site improvements of the lot and the proximity to surrounding properties.
15. The Town street entrance to the rear lot shall be posted with a house number identification sign with numbers
at least 6” high.
16. A written report from the Town Engineer, Police Chief, Fire Chief and Fire Marshal shall be provided to the
Commission prior to the Public Hearing on any rear lot.
50
ARTICLE IV - CONSERVATION ZONES
In order to carry out the provisions of these regulations, the Town has hereby established the following
conservation zone:
4.1. Agricultural (AG) Zone
A. PURPOSE.
The agricultural zone is intended to allow for agricultural activities in keeping with Wethersfield’s heritage and the
character of these areas.
B. PERMITTED USES.
Table Legend
P Permitted Use Following Approval of a Zoning Permit By the ZEO
CU-SP A Conditional Use Permitted Only after Special Permit Approval By the Commission
1. Farming, agriculture, forestry, horse stables, corrals and trails, public or private open space,
wildlife sanctuaries or preserves, municipal park or municipal recreation facility P
2. Temporary farmers' stands for the sale of products grown on the premises provided the stand shall
be removed thirty (30) days after the use thereof has been discontinued. P
3. Farm buildings, accessory to farm uses, provided the buildings are located at least one hundred
(100) feet from any street line and fifty (50) feet from the side and rear lot lines.
P
4. Target, trap and skeet ranges including accessory uses and structures. (5/5/09) P
5. Other accessory buildings and structures customarily incidental to a permitted use.
P
6. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use.
P
7. Country club, golf courses, driving ranges and uncovered tennis courts with appurtenant
clubhouses and equipment storage buildings.
CU-SP
8. Swimming pools or beaches with appurtenant changing rooms, equipment storage buildings and
staff office and training facilities. CU-SP
9. Nature centers, fairgrounds, and picnic areas with appurtenant open pavilions and accessory
structures.
CU-SP
10. Campgrounds and camps (including day camps) with appurtenant recreation buildings and
accessory structures but excluding residential buildings.
CU-SP
11. Boatyards with appurtenant buildings for boat storage and repair and ship chandlery but excluding
hotel/motel and restaurant uses.
CU-SP
51
12. Municipal maintenance facilities and services and municipal storage or composting of organic
matter but excluding sanitary landfilling.
CU-SP
13. Telecommunications facility in accordance with Section 9.1.
CU-SP
C. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
Minimum lot area (square feet) 40,000
Maximum building area (percent of lot area) 10%
Minimum yards (feet)
Front yard depth 40
Rear / side yard depth 25
Maximum building height (feet) 35
52
4.2. Floodplain Regulations
A. PURPOSE
These regulations are intended to provide a reasonable degree of protection to persons and property from the effects
of flooding. The areas of the Town designated as lying within the one hundred (100) year floodplain (Special
Flood Hazard Area) are subject to periodic inundation that may result in loss of life, property, and health and safety
hazards. It is the purpose of this zone to minimize public and private losses in flood prone areas. The Special
Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for the Town of Wethersfield, dated September 26, 2008, and accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated September 26, 2008, and other supporting data, and any subsequent revisions
thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this regulation. Since mapping is legally adopted by
reference into this regulation must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or
map revision is obtained from FEMA.(9/26/08)
While the degree of flood protection required by this Article is considered reasonable for regulatory damages that
result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. A structure or
development already in compliance with this regulation shall not be made non-compliant by any alteration,
modification, repair, reconstruction or improvement and must also comply with other applicable local, state and
federal regulations. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, modified or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this regulation and other applicable regulations.(9/26/08)
B. ENCROACHMENT STANDARDS
1. Encroachment within the floodway is prohibited.
2. Encroachment within the floodplain shall:
a. Require approval by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency.
b. Be in accordance with the minimum standards for the preservation and usage of land within the
Conservation Zone established by the Connecticut River Assembly pursuant to CGS Chapter 477c.
3. Approval of encroachment for purposes other than farmland reclamation shall require certification to the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency by a professional engineer licensed in Connecticut that flood
storage capacity shall be created elsewhere in the floodplain in a volume equal to that consumed by the
encroachment.
4. Approval of encroachment within the floodplain for purposes of farmland reclamation shall:
a. Require the execution and filing of a covenant running with the subject land in favor of the Town for a
period of at least ten (10) years, restricting the subject land to a farm use.
b. Not cause the final elevation of the subject land to exceed elevation 28.00, MDC datum.
5. No encroachment in its cumulative effect shall cause the water surface elevation during flooding to exceed
the base flood water surface elevation, with floodway, specified for each flooding source cross section in
Table 1 of the Flood Insurance Study.
6. In flood hazard areas designated “A” on the Wethersfield Flood Insurance Rate Maps, where base flood
elevations have been determined but where a floodway has not yet been designated, no encroachment, new
construction or substantial improvement shall be permitted which would increase base flood elevations more
than one (1) foot at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated development or encroachment is
considered cumulatively with the proposed development or encroachment.
7. Compensatory Storage - The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas that are tidally
influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction, or substantial
improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure shall be compensated for by deepening
and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from
adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously
used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume
of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced
by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the
same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the
municipality.(9/26/08)
8. (New) Equal Conveyance - Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as
designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from
53
filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are
prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating,
with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood
elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide
compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood
velocity.(9/26/08)
C. RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION AND FLOOD-PROOFING
1. No dwelling shall be constructed and no existing dwelling shall be substantially improved in the Floodplain
unless such construction assures that the lowest floor, including basement, is elevated to at least one (1) foot
above the flood elevation.
2. No new residential construction shall be permitted within the Floodplain unless access is provided to land
outside the floodplain and such access shall:
a. Have continuous elevation above the base flood elevation, and
b. Be passable at all times by emergency vehicles.
3. A residential elevated building is prohibited in the Floodplain.
4. Manufactured homes and mobile homes are prohibited in the Floodplain .
5. Satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this section concerning elevation shall be certified to the
Zoning Enforcement Official by a land surveyor licensed in Connecticut.
D. FLOOD-PROOFING OF ELEVATED NON-RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
1. Occupied areas shall be elevated to at least one (1) foot above the flood elevation.
2. New construction or substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other
exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to either:
a. Allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls, or
b. Be water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water with structural components
capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy during conditions of
flooding.
3. Access to any enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or
limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the occupied area (stairway or elevator).
4. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify to the Town that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this
subsection or provide a minimum of two (2) openings with:
a. A total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding.
b. The bottom of all openings no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
c. Screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices that permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions.
E. FLOOD-PROOFING OF OTHER NON-RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
1. Other structures located in the Floodplain may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that:
a. The areas of the structure below the floodplain elevation are water tight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and
b. Structural components have the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects
of buoyancy.
2. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify to the Town that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this
subsection or provide a minimum of two (2) openings with:
a. A total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding.
b. The bottom of all openings no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
54
c. Screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices that permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions.
F. ADDITIONAL FLOOD-PROOFING MEASURES
1. Any development permitted within the Floodplain shall be subject to the following minimum requirements
and additional requirements that may be imposed by the Commission.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall:
a. Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
b. Be constructed with materials and utility and mechanical equipment resistant to flood damage.
c. Be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
d. Have structural components and/or subsurface drainage systems capable of withstanding or relieving
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and uplift (buoyancy) caused by flooding.
3. All new and replacement:
a. Water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system.
b. Sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system, discharge from the system into floodwaters and backflow during floods.
c. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding.
d. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding.(9/26/08)
4. Aboveground Storage Tanks - Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or
inside of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be
securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe
extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood
water.(9/26/08)
5. Portion of Structure in Flood Zone - If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area
(SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction
requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or
any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood
zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone.(9/26/08)
6. Structures in Two Flood Zones - If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards
of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., A zone is more restrictive than X zone; structure
must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or
any other structure attached to the main structure. (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone
will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.)(9/26/08)
7. No Structures Entirely or Partially Over Water - New construction cannot be constructed or located entirely or
partially over water unless it is a functionally dependent use or facility.(9/26/08)
G. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
In the Floodplain, recreational vehicles placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days must be elevated above
the base flood elevation and anchored, or be fully licensed and ready for highway use by:
1. Being supported only by its wheels or jacking system,
2. Being attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
3. Having no permanently attached additions.
H. CERTIFICATION.
1. Satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this section shall be certified to the Zoning Enforcement
Official by a professional engineer or architect, as appropriate, licensed in Connecticut.
55
2. Upon completion of the foundation and prior to placement of any walls or floors, a land surveyor licensed in
Connecticut shall provide written certification that the lowest floor elevation (including basement) is at least
one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation.
3. Design plans and construction methods are to be in accordance to acceptable standard practices and certified as
to such.
4. Deficiencies detected by the review of the above items shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and
prior to any further work.
5. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections required shall be cause to issue a stop-work
order for the project.
I. DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS (9/26/08)
If a proposed subdivision is located in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) the following requirements shall
apply:
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and
4. In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available, the applicant shall
provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis performed by a Connecticut licensed professional
engineer that generates BFEs for all subdivision proposals and other proposed development.
56
ARTICLE V - BUSINESS ZONES & USES
5.1. Purpose.
These business districts are intended to provide suitable areas for business development that will help meet
community needs for goods and services, employment, and tax base. The differentiation among the non-residential
districts is intended to provide for variation in uses in response to the character of the neighborhood, the availability
of transportation and infrastructure, and the environmental characteristics of the land.
A. The Village Business (VB) District is intended to provide for the development, maintenance, and enhancement
of mixed-use pedestrian-friendly areas that support and enhance overall community character and the
ambience of this historic district.
B. The Town Center (TC) Business District is intended to provide for the development, maintenance, and
enhancement of a community focal point along the Silas Deane Highway that provides for a more pedestrianfriendly
area that will support and enhance overall community character and ambience.
C. The Office (O) District is intended to provide for the development, maintenance, and enhancement of lower
intensity office uses in order to provide for employment and a healthy tax base for the community.
D. The General Business (GB) District is intended to provide for the development, maintenance, and
enhancement of business areas that have developed along major roadways in Wethersfield, such as the Silas
Deane Highway.
E. The Regional Commercial (RC) District is intended to provide for the development, maintenance, and
enhancement of large scale business development that will meet the needs of residents of Wethersfield and the
surrounding communities.
F. The Business Park (BP) District is intended to provide for the development, maintenance, and enhancement of
areas that will allow for economic development in order to provide for employment and a healthy tax base for
the community.
57
5.2 Permitted Principal Uses
Table Legend
P Permitted Use Following Zoning Permit Approval By the ZEO
SP Permitted Following Site Plan Approval By the Commission
CU-SP A Conditional Use Permitted Only After Special Permit Approval By the Commission
Blank Not Permitted
A. Residential Uses
VB
TC
O
GB
RC
BP
1. One-family dwellings.
P P P P
2. Mixed residential and
commercial uses in accordance
with Section 5.10 (12-8-08)
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
3. Nursing, convalescent,
congregate, or assisted living
facility in accordance with
Section 3.2.1.
CU-SP
B. Public & Semi-Public Uses
VB
TC
O
GB
RC
BP
1. Municipal offices, school,
library, police station, firehouse,
and other municipal facilities.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
2. Religious institution,
educational institution, day care
center.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
C. Office Uses
VB
TC
O
GB
RC
BP
1. Business, professional, or
medical offices < 20,000 SF of
gross floor area.
CU-SP CU-SP SP SP SP SP
2. Business, professional, or
medical offices > 20,000 square
feet of gross floor area.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP SP SP
3. Bank, credit union, financial
institutions.
CU-SP CU-SP SP SP
4. Bank, credit union or financial
institution with drive-through or
drive-up window
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
5. Hospitals and research
laboratories.
SP SP
58
D. Retail & Service Establishments
VB
TC
O
GB
RC
BP
1. Retail store or personal service
establishment < 3,000 SF of
gross floor area.
CU-SP SP SP SP
2. Retail store or personal service
establishment with 3,000 to
20,000 SF of gross floor area.
CU-SP SP SP SP
3. Retail store or personal service
establishment with 20,000 to
50,000 SF of gross floor area
CU-SP CU-SP SP
4. Retail stores > 50,000 SF of
gross floor area
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
5. Shopping Centers up to 200,000
SF of gross floor area.
CU-SP SP
6. Shopping Centers > 200,000 SF
of gross floor area.
CU-SP
7. Dispensary facility in
accordance with Section 5.11.
(3/23/18)
CU-SP
E. Automobile Establishments
VB
TC
O
GB
RC
BP
1. Filling stations, subject to the
provisions of Section 5.7.
CU-SP SP
2. Service stations (limited repair)
in accordance with Section 5.7.
SP SP
3. Service stations (general repair)
in accordance with Section 5.7.
CU-SP CU-SP
4. Automobile sales provided all
vehicle storage is indoors.
CU-SP CU-SP
5. Car Wash Facilities (10/18/05) CU-SP CU-SP
F. Hospitality Uses
VB
TC
O
GB
RC
BP
1. Sit-down or take-out restaurants.
CU-SP SP SP SP CU-SP
(5/17/11)
2. Restaurant with outdoor dining.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
(5/17/11)
3. Restaurant with drive-through or
drive-up window.
CU-SP CU-SP
4. Banquet hall, place of assembly,
or fraternal organization.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
5. Bed and breakfast
establishment.
CU-SP
6. A hotel.
SP SP CU-SP
7. A motel CU-SP CU-SP
59
G. Recreational Uses
VB
TC
O
GB
RC
BP
1. Public and private parks and
playgrounds. P
P P P P P
2. Health and fitness or indoor
commercial recreation facility.
SP SP SP SP SP
3. Cinemas.
SP
H. Industrial & Storage Uses
VB
TC
O
GB
RC
BP
1. Wholesale storage and
distribution.
SP
2. Product assembly and light
fabrication.
CU-SP SP
3. Storage facility with interior and
exterior access to storage bays.
(8/16/05)
CU-SP
(8/16/0
5)
CU-SP
(8/16/05)
4. Manufacturing, processing, and
similar industrial activities.
CU-SP CU-SP
5. Trucking or freight operations
with complete visual screening
of equipment and materials..
CU-SP
6. Contracting businesses with
complete visual screening of
equipment and materials.
CU-SP
7. Storage, treatment and selling
at wholesale of seeds, roots and
bulbs.
SP
I. Other Uses
VB
TC
O
GB
RC
BP
1. Veterinary hospitals and kennels. CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
2. Funeral homes.
CU-SP CU-SP
3. Utility facilities, excluding
generating plants, service yards
and outside storage areas.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
4. Telecommunications facility in
accordance with Section 9.1.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
5. Other uses similar to the
permitted uses.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
60
5.3 Accessory Uses & Structures
A. ACCESSORY USES
Table Legend
P Permitted Use Following Zoning Permit Approval By the ZEO
SP Permitted Following Site Plan Approval By the Commission
CU-SP A Conditional Use Permitted Only After Special Permit Approval By the Commission
Blank Not Permitted
VB
TC
O
GB
RC
BP
1. Parking and driveways for the
principal use.
SP SP SP SP SP SP
2. Parking of Commercial Vehicles,
subject to the provisions of Section
3.5.5.B.
SP SP SP SP SP SP
3. On-site residence for owner, manager,
or caretaker.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
4. Any facility with drive-through or
drive-up window.
CU-SP CU-SP
5. Electronic games accessory to a
permitted use.
P P P P P
6. Alcoholic beverage sales or
dispensing.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
7. Exterior vending machines or deposit
boxes.
CU-SP CU-SP
8. Wholesale operations accessory to a
retail operation in the same structure
when the products for sale are the
same.
P P P P
9. With approval of the ZEO, outdoor
merchandise sales or display for up to
fourteen (14) days in a calendar year.
P P P P
10. With approval of the Commission,
outdoor merchandise sales or display
for more than fourteen (14) days in a
calendar year.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
11. Temporary or seasonal sales of any
agricultural product grown on the
property.
P P P P P P
12. Exterior storage in a side or rear yard
only with complete visual screening.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
13. Parking of Commercial Vehicles,
subject to the provisions of Section
3.5.5.C (10/15/10)
SP SP SP SP SP SP
14. Other accessory uses. (5/6 /05) CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
61
B. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS & STRUCTURES
Table Legend
P Permitted Use Following Zoning Permit Approval By the ZEO
SP Permitted Following Site Plan Approval By the Commission
CU-SP A Conditional Use Permitted Only After Special Permit Approval By the Commission
Blank Not Permitted
VB
TC
O
GB
RC
BP
1. Temporary farm stands for the sale of
products grown on the premises when set
back at least 25 feet from the street and
10 feet from side and rear lot lines.
P P P P P P
2. In accordance with Section 9.1, satellite
antenna 2 feet or less in diameter and
mounted no higher than 5 feet above the
roof.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP SP SP SP
3. In accordance with Section 9.1, satellite
antenna more than 2 feet in diameter
and/or mounted more than 5 feet above
the roof.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
4. In accordance with Section 9.1, radio
antennae that extend less than 50 feet in
height above the ground per Section 9.1.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP SP SP SP
5. In accordance with Section 9.1, radio
antennae that extend more than 50 feet in
height above the ground per Section 9.1.
CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
6. Other accessory buildings and structures. CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP CU-SP
The accessory building and structure requirements of Section 3.6 of these regulations apply to accessory
buildings and structures constructed in a Business Zone. (5/6/05)
62
5.4 Dimensional & Area Requirements
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. General Provisions
VB
TC
O
GB
RC
BP
1. Minimum Lot Size (square
feet)
N/A N/A 20,000 10,000 30,000 80,000
2. Minimum Lot Frontage On A
Public Street (feet)
N/A N/A 100 100 100 200
3. Minimum Front Yard (feet)
(see Section B. below)
25 25 25 25 25 50
4. Minimum Side Yard (feet)
(see Section B. below)
12 12 12 12 25 25
5. Minimum Rear Yard (feet)
(see Section B. below)
10 10 10 10 10 25
6. Maximum Building Coverage
50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50%
7. Maximum Impervious
Coverage
100% 100% 75% 75% 75% 75%
8. Maximum Building Height
(feet)
40 40 40 40 40 40
9. One-story buildings
CU-SP CU-SP P P P P
B. SPECIAL PROVISIONS
1. It is the specific intent of the Commission to implement the recommendations of The Silas Deane, A Vision
For Reinvestment, Action Items and Design Guidelines, Prepared By Fuss & O’Neill, April 2006 and the Old
Wethersfield Master Plan, Prepared by John Milner Associates, Inc., July 2008. Since the creation and
maintenance of an active and attractive streetscape is an important objective, the Commission may, by Special
Permit, waive any dimensional requirement of these regulations for a mixed use development if the design
implements the streetscape and architectural guidelines of the plan. (12-8-08)
2. In the VB and TC zones, the Commission may reduce the minimum front yard requirement and/or the
minimum side yard requirement to zero feet (0’) by Special Permit if, in the Commission’s judgment, it will
help achieve the purposes of the district.
3. In all zones except BP, the Commission may reduce the minimum rear yard requirement to 10 percent (10%)
of the lot depth by Special Permit if, in the Commission’s judgment, it will help achieve the purposes of the
district.
4. Where Business Park Zones abut a residential zone, the minimum yard requirement shall be 75 feet.
63
5.5 Consolidated Parcels
A. PURPOSE
For the purpose of integrated development, any number of contiguous parcels in a business zone may, upon
approval of an overall plan by the Commission, be consolidated for the purpose of development, and the
consolidated parcel shall be construed to be one lot when computing building coverage and yard requirements, and
permitted uses, provided:
1. The consolidated parcel is developed with an integrated plan of buildings, parking, loading and unloading, and
open space.
2.. The owner of each lot shall give to the owner of each lot in the consolidated parcel by deed, easement, or
condominium agreement filed in the office of the Town Clerk, the right of entrance, exit, passage, parking and
loading.
3. Said agreement shall clearly establish the responsibility of each separate owner for maintenance of the entire
outside premises, including the exterior walls of the building.
4. Said agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Attorney.
5. Said agreement shall be executed and recorded in the Town Clerk's office after the granting of approval by the
Commission.
6. The Commission may require or limit use of access driveways to one or more parcels, whether or not under
separate ownership, in order to assure safe traffic movement onto the street and to avoid congestion.
5.6. Exceptions for Business Redevelopment.
A. PURPOSE
This Section is intended to permit the redevelopment or renovation of properties in business zones when such
improvements will result, in the sole opinion of the Commission, in functional and aesthetic improvements in the
overall character of the property, the neighborhood, and the community.
B. APPLICABILITY
1. This Section shall only be available for the redevelopment or renovation of property in a business zone that
does not comply with the strict application of these Regulations prior to the redevelopment or renovation.
2. For the purposes of this Section, “redevelopment” means changes to a site that involves demolition of all or a
portion of existing building(s) on the property and/or the construction of new buildings or additions thereto.
3. For the purposes of this Section, “renovation” means changes to a site that do not involve the demolition of
buildings or the construction of new or replacement buildings but may include structural alternations, such as
façade replacement/restoration, relocation of doorways, windows, reconstruction of parking areas and similar
changes.
C. PROCESS
1. The provisions of this Section shall only be available through a Special Permit that may be granted by the
Commission.
2. Any action taken by the Commission under this Section of the Regulations shall be clearly identified in the
proceedings of the Commission, clearly noted on any filed plan(s), and clearly referenced in any letter of
approval related to an application.
D. PROVISIONS
The Commission may, where deemed appropriate in the sole judgment of the Commission, allow redevelopment or
renovation of property in a business zone in a manner that does not comply with the strict application of these
Regulations by modifying one or more of the requirements of these Regulations as will:
64
1. Result in substantial functional and aesthetic improvements in the overall character of the property, the
neighborhood, and the community (including building design, site design, building landscaping, perimeter
landscaping, parking area landscaping, signage, and similar attributes),
2. Provide for the most appropriate use of the land and the neighborhood,
3. Provide for the most orderly development of the land and the neighborhood,
4. Protect the public health and safety and preserve property values, and
5. Otherwise further the purposes of this Section and these Regulations.
5.7. Public Garages And Filling Stations.
A. Under no circumstances shall a building permit be issued for the erection of, or for the conversion of any
premises to, a public garage or a filling station in any business or industrial zone if any point on such premises
is situated within a radius of two hundred (200) feet from the boundary of:
1. Any residence zone.
2. A college or school.
3. A charitable hospital or institution.
4. A church or public library.
B. No existing public garage or filling station shall be deemed to become a non-conforming use:
1. Through the subsequent erection of such a school, hospital, church or library, as defined above, within the
aforesaid prescribed area.
2. If it was in existence as of April 17, 1956 when the requirements of Section 1 above were established.
C. No gasoline filling appliance shall be located within 45 feet of any street or property line.
D. All repairs, except for emergency repairs, shall take place within a building.
E. Except as may be permitted by the Commission, there shall be no storage of vehicles which are unregistered or
are unfit for repair.
5.8. Alcoholic Beverages.
A. APPLICABILITY.
The provisions of this Section shall apply to any class of permit as described in Sections 30-15 to 30-37h, inclusive,
of the Connecticut General Statutes, including:
1. Any café, club, or tavern permit.
2. Any hotel permit.
3. Any package store permit.
4. Any restaurant permit.
5. Any special sporting facility permit.
6. Any bowling establishment or racquetball facility permit.
B. SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. In addition to the requirements of the zoning district where the property is located, the use of a building, a
portion of a building or other premises for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages shall require the
issuance of a Special Permit by the Commission.
2. In acting upon an application for a special permit under this Article, the Commission shall consider the
following in addition to the standards of Article VIII of these Regulations:
a. The proximity of the establishment to schools, churches/synagogues, residential neighborhoods and
charitable institutions supported by public or private funds such that, in the judgment of the Commission,
the trade associated with the establishment does not disrupt the quiet pursuit of education and religion.
b. The proximity of the establishment to another alcoholic beverage establishment such that, in the judgment
of the Commission, there not be created a cluster or undue concentration of establishments where the sale
65
or consumption of alcoholic beverages may be perceived as a dominant characteristic of the neighborhood
or area.
5.9. Car Wash Facilities. (10/18/05)
A. All car wash facilities shall be located on a lot, which lot shall have no portion located within three hundred
(300) feet, measured in a straight line as established by the Planning and Zoning Commission, from any part of
any lot, building or premises used or arranged, designed or intended to be used for a:
1. College
2. School
3. Place of worship
4. Hospital
5. Library
6. Theatre
7. Park
8. Playground; or
9. Within 300 feet of another car wash facility
B. Every car wash facility shall be screened from any adjacent residential property, residential zone, hotel and/or
motel by a suitable opaque fence (which shall bear no advertising), or planting screen, eight (8) feet in height
and providing of such density so as to provide year-round screening.
C. In addition to all parking requirements as contained in Section 6.2, each car wash bay shall have the following
vehicle stacking capacity for cars waiting to be serviced: four (4) stacking spaces for each self serve bay; eight
(8) spaces for each automatic bay.
D. If accessory vacuuming facilities are provided, the site plan shall demonstrate one parking space for each
vehicle capable of being serviced at any one time at such vacuum facility where such spaces do not interfere
with circulation drives or entry and exit drives. Such vacuum facility may be located within a required rear or
side yard only upon good cause shown as determined by submission.
E. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for such a facility, the applicant shall provide to the Town that
approval has been received from the Department of Environmental Protection for the discharge of car wash
wastewater to the sanitary sewer system.
F. No repair, vehicle storage, towing service, sale or dispensing of automobile parts and accessories including,
but not limited to, tires and batteries, shall be permitted.
5.10. Mixed Residential and Commercial Uses. (12/8/08)
A. PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Section is to provide an incentive to encourage higher density mixed use developments on key
properties along the Town’s commercial corridors. Due to the unique characteristics of mixed use developments
and the desire to create an attractive environment, these regulations are intended to be flexible in allowing mixed
use developments to maximize their benefits to the Town and to encourage economic reinvestment.
B. APPLICABILITY.
1. Mixed use developments may be permitted in Village Business, Town Center, General Business and the
Regional Commercial District only.
2. The underlying use standards of the zone must be complied with.
C. PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS.
66
1. Prior to the submission of a formal application all plans for a mixed use project shall be submitted for review
under the provisions of Section 10.1.A. pre-application review to the Commission for comment.
2. The provisions of this Section shall only be available through a Site Development Plan and Special Permit that
may be granted by the Commission.
D. SPECIAL PERMIT CRITERIA.
The Commission shall approve a Special Permit for a mixed use only if it finds that, in addition to the review
criteria of Section 8 Special Permit Criteria, the following criteria are satisfactorily met:
1. Any mixed use development shall be pedestrian-oriented , providing adequate circulation and parking for
vehicles, but employing strategies which facilitate pedestrian and bicycle movement.
2. Development shall occur reasonably proximate to bus routes and other mass transit opportunities.
3. Building designs shall complement and enhance the architectural qualities of the existing neighborhood.
4. The proposal does not create an undue concentration of high density residential development in any area.
5. Mixed use developments shall consider open space and recreational opportunities for the residents.
6. Where a number of contiguous parcels are proposed to be consolidated for the purpose of the development the
use of access management strategies in order to assure safe traffic movement.
7. Where appropriate incorporation of the proposed streetscape and transportation improvements as identified in
the approved project area plans such as the Silas Deane Highway Vision Master Plan and the Old Wethersfield
Master Plan.
8. Consists of the highest quality building design, urban design and site planning.
9. Provides an overall public benefit.
E. DENSITY.
1. The maximum density for a mixed use project in the Town Center, General Business and in the Regional
Commercial District shall not exceed twenty-five (25) units per acre.
2. The maximum density in the Village Business district shall not exceed eight (8) units per acre.
F. SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
In order to promote and encourage flexibility and design innovation the Commission may, in addition to the other
provisions of these regulations consider the granting of specific exceptions to the area and dimensional
requirements of the zoning district where the Commission determines that such exceptions will result in an
improved development of the site. Where these exceptions are requested they shall be clearly identified on the
plans and requested in writing and the Commission shall identify such exceptions in the record of the application.
5.11. Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facilities (3/23/18)
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of this section is to provide for the regulation of medical marijuana dispensary facilities through the
adoption of reasonable and appropriate standards that will limit these uses to appropriate locations under strict
conditions. The intent of these regulations is to minimize any potential adverse impacts of such facilities on
adjacent properties, and to protect and preserve neighborhoods, commercial districts, property values, public
health, safety, welfare and quality of life.
B. APPLICABILITY.
1. Medical marijuana dispensary facilities shall be prohibited unless permitted by a Special Permit in the Town
Center/TC zone, in accordance with these Regulations, and the requirements of this section.
2. No changes, enlargement, relocation, amendments or expansion of any use approved under these regulations
may be permitted without conducting a public hearing and the issuance of a Special Permit.
C. LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
67
In addition to the Special Permit criteria established under Article 8 of these regulations the following restrictions
apply:
1. No medical marijuana dispensary facility shall be located within one-thousand (1,000) feet of a church, temple
or other place of worship or a public or private elementary or secondary school.
2. No medical marijuana dispensary facility shall be located within one-thousand (1,000) feet of any other site
containing a medical marijuana dispensary facility.
3. All distances contained in this section shall be measured by taking the nearest straight line between the
respective lot boundaries of each site.
D. CONDITIONS.
The Commission reserves the right to attach reasonable conditions to any Special Permit issued under these
regulations, including but not limited to:
1. The hours of operation.
2. Permitted signage.
3. A copy of the required permit from the State Department of Consumer Protection shall be provided prior to a
Certificate of Occupancy being issued.
4. The Special Permit shall become null and void after one (1) year of the date of approval if the required
Department of Consumer Protection approval has not been issued. The Commission may grant an extension if
the applicant can demonstrate ongoing progress with the State permit application.
5. A limitation on the types of services or products to be offered by the facility.
6. The filing of an annual report with the Commission demonstrating continued compliance with the
requirements of the Special Permit.
E. PARKING.
1. Medical marijuana dispensaries shall provide adequate off-street parking at the same ratio as a retail use in
compliance with Section 6.2 of these regulations.
F. PRODUCT VISIBILITY.
1. All facilities permitted under these regulations shall be designed and operated in a manner that does not permit
the observation of any materials depicting, describing or relating to medical marijuana or related paraphernalia
to be visible from the building exterior.
G. SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
Applicants for a Special Permit for a dispensary facility shall submit the following information:
1. Floor plans that detail the interior layout of the dispensary facility as required by Section 21a-408-15(11) of
the of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
2. A security plan, compliant with the requirements of the Department of Consumer Protection, in a report
submitted to the Chief of Police for review and comment.
3. A scale drawing depicting the property lines and the separation distances from the nearest property boundary
of the parcel containing the medical marijuana dispensary location to the property boundary of the parcel
containing any uses requiring specific separation distances. If any of the uses are located within fifty (50) feet
of the minimum required separation distance, the drawing shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor.
4. Architectural renderings or photographs of the exterior of the proposed dispensary facility which depicts the
proposed façade treatment and proposed exterior or window signage.
5. A site plan that that complies with Section 10 of these regulations that illustrates the proposed location of the
dispensary facility.
68
ARTICLE VI -
USE & DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
6.1. Landscaping Requirements.
A. PURPOSE
This section is intended to establish the minimum standards for the preservation, installation and maintenance of
landscaping materials in order to:
1. Protect property values,
2. Provide privacy from view, light, glare, dirt, and noise,
3. Screen parking areas from view from roadways,
4. Buffer incompatible land uses,
5. Provide shade in parking areas,
6. Prevent the erosion of soil,
7. Provide water recharge areas,
8. Improve the environment, and
9. Enhance the appearance of properties in Town.
B. APPLICABILITY
Landscaping shall be required for all plans submitted to the Commission for approval. This section shall apply for
all new construction or expansions to existing buildings or uses in all zones in Wethersfield and to all uses except
that it shall not apply to the development of a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling.
C. GENERAL LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
1. All landscaped areas shall be planted in lawn or mulched planting beds unless modified by the Commission
for another suitable landscape material.
2. Bituminous materials will be permitted only when required for vehicular travel.
3. All proposed trees and shrubs shall be nursery grown and be suitably planted in accordance with the
International Society of Arboriculture Standards and Practices. Deciduous trees shall, when planted, be not
less than two inches (2.") in caliper measured six inches (6") above the root collar. Evergreen trees shall be
not less than six feet (6') in height for evergreen trees, and of reasonable size for shrubs.
4. Incorporation of stone walls and the preservation of existing trees into the overall landscaping scheme shall
be encouraged to the maximum extent possible.
5. A suggested plant list is available from the Planning Department for reference as to trees and other
vegetation found compatible with local soil and climatic conditions and which are preferred for various
types of applications.
6. A landscaping plan shall consider the landscaping and species on adjacent parcels so as to avoid drastic
changes in style, species or appearance.
7. The use of indigenous plants is recommended.
8. Non-native invasive plant species as identified by the State of Connecticut Department of Environmental
Protection shall not be permitted as part of any landscaping plan approved by the Commission.
9. All landscaped areas shall be planted in grass, shrubbery, trees or other plant material.
10. Earth berms may be required by the Commission where they will complement design, increase aesthetics
and/or reduce noise levels.
D. OVERALL LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
1. Except where modified by the Commission in the Village Business and Town Center Zones, at least 25
percent of any lot developed for non-residential use shall be maintained as a landscaped area.
69
E. PERIMETER LANDSCAPED AREA REQUIREMENTS
1. Unless modified by the Commission, any lot developed for non-residential use shall provide:
a. a landscaped strip between the street line and the building line adjacent to the sidewalk right-of-way
(except driveways).
b. a minimum five foot (5') landscaped area between the side property line and any parking area.
2. Perimeter landscaped areas (front, side, and rear) shall contain an equivalent number of trees equal to at least
one deciduous tree at least 2.5 inches in caliper for each 50 feet or part thereof of perimeter.
F. SCREENING
1. Loading areas, outdoor storage areas and other outdoor work areas visible from public roads shall be
required to provide a landscaped area between this area and the street to screen the area to the greatest extent
possible.
G. PARKING AREA LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
1. Unless modified by the Commission, any parking area accommodating 10 or more cars shall provide
landscaped areas consisting of curbed islands, peninsulas or medians within the parking lot equal to at least
15 percent of the gross paved parking lot area.
2. Such internal landscaped areas shall be provided with not less than one tree for each 10 cars in the parking
area, suitably located in landscaped islands within the parking area so as to enhance the appearance of the
lot.
3. Any planting islands used to satisfy this requirement shall have an area of not less than 160 feet, a width not
less than 8 feet and shall be protected by curbing.
4. Wherever possible, existing trees shall be saved by appropriate welling or mounding and incorporated into
parking lot islands.
5. Wherever possible, each island, median or peninsula required herein shall at a minimum contain at least one
tree.
6. All rows of parking spaces shall be provided a terminal island to protect parked vehicles, define driveways,
identify and provide circulation control, identify ingress and egress points for traffic control and provide
space for landscaping.
H. SIGN AREA LANDSCAPING
The area within which a detached sign is erected shall contain at least sixty-four (64) square feet of landscaping.
I. LANDSCAPED BUFFER REQUIREMENT
1. A landscape buffer shall be provided between dissimilar land uses or intensities as follows or as may be
required by the Commission:
To Less Intensive Uses
From More Intensive
Use
Business Multi-Family Residential Single Family
Residential
Industrial 15 feet 25 feet 25 feet
Business 15 feet 15 feet
Multi Family Residential 15 feet
2. Such landscape buffer be of suitable height and density to provide effective screening of neighboring uses
and property.
3. Such landscape buffer shall contain adequate landscape materials to provide a visual barrier and shall consist
of no fewer than two rows of suitable evergreen shrubs and trees of at least 6 - 8 feet in height, planted at a
density sufficient to obscure lights and other visually objectionable items, , staggered in adjoining rows or
other landscaping treatment deemed acceptable by the Commission.
70
4. Where appropriate, in the judgment of the Commission, walls, fencing, or existing vegetation may be
required as part of the required buffer.
5. When any lot or part thereof in a business district fronts on a street opposite a residential district a front yard
landscaped buffer may be required by the Commission where necessary to preserve and protect residential
character.
J. PRESERVATION OF EXISTING TREES FOR CREDIT
1. Site development shall be designed where possible so as to avoid locating parking and building if such
would result in the removal of any existing significant trees. Whenever possible, existing vegetation and
plant materials which are preserved may be used to meet all or part of the required landscaping.
2. Any tree for which credit is given shall be in a condition that encourages long-term survival and in a location
that conforms to the intent and standards of this regulation..
3. Existing trees which are to be preserved and receive credits shall be marked on the landscape plan.
4. The caliper of the preserved tree shall exceed 3 times the minimum tree caliper required herein to be
considered for credit.
K. LANDSCAPING PLANS & MAINTENANCE
1. Landscape plans shall include the information specified in Appendix A and shall show existing vegetation to
remain, proposed new planting, and shall include a plant list with plant names (common and botanical),
quantities, size at planting and size when mature.
2. In order for the Commission to be able to determine compliance with the requirements of these regulations
all landscape plans shall include calculations which document compliance with the requirements of these
regulations.
3. All landscaping shall be completed and maintained in accordance with the landscaping plan approved by the
Commission.
4. Landscape plans shall include a maintenance program specifying how the proposed landscaping will be
maintained in perpetuity.
5. All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a living and healthy condition, with the owner of the property
replacing dead, or diseased, trees or shrubs. Failure to maintain any required landscaping shall constitute a
violation of the provisions of these regulations.
6. All landscaping shown on the approved plan shall be completed before issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy.
7. If weather or other extraordinary conditions do not allow for completion of the landscaping, the completion
of the landscaping shall be guaranteed by filing with the Town:
a. A written agreement between the Town and the developer assuring that the planting will take place when
the proper season arrives.
8. Prior to the granting of a Certificate of Occupancy, the applicant shall provide:
a. evidence of a guarantee from the landscaping contractor or supplier that any trees or shrubs that die within
one year will be replaced.
L. REDUCTION OR MODIFICATION
1. The Commission may, in accordance with Section 7.4 of these Regulations, modify or waive the landscaping
requirements of these regulations where site conditions limit the ability of a particular site to conform to the
requirements herein. In such cases the applicant shall submit a proposal that strives to maintain the intent of
these regulations to the best of its ability.
2. In addition, the Commission may, in accordance with Section 7.4 modify or reduce the landscaping
requirements of these regulations where the applicant has demonstrated excellence in building and site
design.
3. The Commission may increase the landscape requirements when unusual conditions of the site or the use
require more extensive screening for noise abatement or to protect surrounding residential properties.
71
6.2. Parking and Loading Regulations.
A. PURPOSE
This section is intended to provide sufficient off-street parking spaces to serve all existing and proposed uses,
buildings and structures and alterations, enlargements or intensification thereto. It is the intent of these Regulations
to allow the minimal amount of parking needed to serve the proposed development
B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. A building in existence at the time of adoption of this regulation may continue to be used without adequate
parking and loading as required by these regulations. However, should such building be increased in area or
changed in use so as to require additional parking or loading, such additional parking or loading shall be
provided in conformance with these regulations.
2. Required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use for which such spaces is required, except
with approval of the Commission in unique circumstances, parking spaces may be located on another lot
within a radius of 250 feet of, and in the same zoning district as the use which it is intended to serve.
3. No parking space or travel aisle or other exterior area shall be used for the sale, storage, or display of goods
unless approved by the Zoning Enforcement Office or the Commission.
4. The parking or outdoor storage of unregistered motor vehicles is permitted only at locations designated for
that use on an approved site plan and further provided that those spaces are in addition to those required in
this Section.
5. No parking space or travel aisle or other exterior area shall be used for the sale, storage, or display of goods
unless approved by the Zoning Enforcement Office or the Commission.
6. The parking or outdoor storage of unregistered motor vehicles is permitted only at locations designated for
that use on an approved site plan and further provided that those spaces are in addition to those required in
this Section.
C. NUMBER OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
1. Unless waived or modified by the Commission, an adequate number of off-street parking spaces shall be
provided at the time of the erection of any principal building, the enlargement of any principal building or use
or the conversion of any building to any of the uses specified in this Section.
2. An adequate number of parking spaces shall be as specified in this Section or as required, in the
Commission’s sole discretion, to accommodate the motor vehicles of all occupants, employees, suppliers,
customers and persons normally visiting the premises at any one time.
3. In the Village Business zone, the Commission may consider the availability or provision of on-street parking
spaces, off-street parking spaces, and parking spaces provided on nearby sites in determining compliance with
the parking requirements. The applicant shall provide the Commission with sufficient information, analysis
and documentation regarding the availability of off-site parking spaces.
4. Applicants preparing applications which include unique uses or uses not explicitly listed in the parking table
below should meet with Staff to discuss and agree upon parking requirements prior to submitting a formal
application. Should an agreement not be reached between the applicant and Staff, the Commission shall
determine the parking requirements for a use not listed by determining a similar listed use and/or referring to
available parking requirement information from other professional reference sources.
5. Except for shopping centers, the number of off-street parking spaces for sites with multiple land uses or joint
use of parking facilities shall be calculated and summed to determine the total amount of parking required.
6. When computation of required parking spaces results in a fraction of a car space the required number of
spaces shall be increased to the next whole number of spaces.
7. No area shall be credited as a parking space which is in any part credited or used as a loading space or travel
way.
72
8. MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS
a. RESIDENTIAL USES Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces
1.) Single And Two Family Dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit
2.) Accessory Apartment 1 additional space
3.) Multi-Family Dwellings 1.5 spaces per unit (6/18/10)
4.) Housing For The Elderly
5.) Congregate Housing
6.) Assisted Living Facility
1 space per unit
1 space per 4 dwelling units
1 space per 2 units
7.) Bed & Breakfast / Boarding Lodging Two parking spaces plus 1 additional space per room for
separate occupancy
8.) Home Occupation 1 space plus 1 space per employee.
b. PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces
1.) Churches, Theaters, Auditoriums,
And Places Of Assembly And
Recreation
1 space per 4 seats or permitted occupancy, or 1 parking
space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area available
to patrons where capacity is not determined by the
number of seats, whichever is greater
2.) Funeral Establishments 1 space for each 25 square feet of public floor area
c. INSTITUTIONAL USES Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces
1.) Convalescent Or Nursing Homes: 1 space per 4 patient beds
2.) Hospitals 1 space per 4 patient beds plus 1 space per employee and
physician on the largest shift
3.) Philanthropic Or Non-Profit
Institutions
4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
d. RETAIL / SERVICE USES Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces
1.) Retail Store
Or Service
Establishment
Up to 10,000 SF 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
10,000 to
50,000 SF
5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area,
More than 50,000
SF
4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area,
Minimum of 225 spaces
2.) Shopping Center
4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for the
shopping center as a whole
3.) Gasoline Filling Stations A minimum of 5 spaces
73
4.) Motor Vehicle Repair And Service 3 spaces per bay plus 1 space per employee
5.) Car-Washing Establishments 1 car space per employee, plus stacking space of 10 cars
per bay
6.) Bowling Alleys 1 car space per employee, plus 5 spaces per bowling
lane
e. OFFICE USES Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces
1.) Business Offices And Financial
Institutions
4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
2.) Medical And Dental Offices 6 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
f. HOSPITALITY USES Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces
1.) Restaurants, Sit-down
(including outside dining)
1 space per 3 table seats and 1 space per 2 counter
seats and 1 space per 2 employees on the largest shift
2.) Restaurants, Take-out Three additional spaces
3.) Restaurants, Drive-through Adequate drive-through lane with stacking distance
for at least 4 cars
4.) Hotels/Motels 1 space per room, plus 1 per 2 employees on the
largest shift, plus 1 per 50 square feet of conference
area
5.) Night Clubs, Taverns, Cocktail Lounges
Or Other Drinking Places
1 space per 35 square feet of gross floor area,
excluding basement area
g. INDUSTRIAL USES Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces
1.) Industrial and Manufacturing
Operations, Contractor Yards
1 space per 1000 square feet or 1 space per 2
employees on the largest shift or other standard per
the Zoning Enforcement Official
2.) Warehouse / Storage 1 space per 2500 square feet
h. OTHER USES Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces
1.) Roadside Stands 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
2.) Other Uses The number of parking spaces as specified by the
Commission in order to maintain the purpose and
intent of this Section.
74
D. REDUCTION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
1. Intensity of Use - The Commission may waive the requirement for the installation of additional spaces when a
change in the use of the premises results in an increase in the number of required parking spaces in an amount
of 15 percent or less than the number of existing parking spaces.
2. Reserved Parking - The Commission may waive the immediate installation of up to 25 percent of the required
parking spaces when:
a. The applicant has designed the location of all required parking spaces on the site plan and has labeled
them as “Reserved Parking”;
b. The area designated for possible future parking shall be left in their natural state or landscaped as directed
by the Commission;
c. The Commission’s determines that the reduced parking facilities will adequately serve the proposed use;
and
d. The applicant has filed the site plan with the Town Clerk stipulating that the owner, or the successor and
assigns of the owner, will reserve the required spaces for future parking needs. The Commission may
require the future construction of as many of the waived parking spaces as the Commission deems
necessary within 6 months of the Commission’s request.
3. Excellence In Building and Site Design – The Commission may, by Special Permit, permit a reduction of up to
15 percent of the required parking spaces due to excellence in building and site design.
4. Shared Parking – Shared parking areas for more than one use shall be encouraged. The Commission may, by
Special Permit, permit a reduction of the required parking spaces due to shared use of the parking facilities
when the parking needs of the joint users occur at different hours of the day. The applicant shall present to the
Commission an analysis of the shared parking needs of the various uses. In no case shall the total parking
requirements be reduced below the estimated peak hour parking need as estimated by the parking analysis. The
Commission may grant such approval only after it has received a written agreement between the users that
clearly stipulates the terms of the shared use of the parking.
5. Permanent Village Business District Reduction - In the Village Business District, the Commission may, by
Special Permit, permit a reduction in the number of required on-site parking spaces due to shared use of the
parking facilities and the availability of parking off-site in the vicinity.
6. The applicant can demonstrate that the requirements are unreasonable or unnecessarily stringent for the nature
of the building or use, and that the proposed number of parking spaces will adequately serve the proposed
development.
E. PARKING SPACE & AISLE SIZE
1. Each required parking space shall, exclusive of driveways and traffic aisles, shall be 9 feet wide by 18 feet
long unless it is:
a. A parking space located perpendicular or oblique to a landscaped area or any existing or proposed
sidewalk that is at least 8 feet in width may be 9 feet by 16 feet,
b. A parking space located within a building may be 8.5 feet by 18 feet,
c. A required handicapped parking space,
d. For a compact vehicle in accordance with the following:
1) The minimum dimensions for each parking stall shall be 7 feet 6 inches in width and 19 feet in length.
2) Compact parking stalls shall be grouped in contiguous, uniform stalls and shall have signs placed in
appropriate locations indicating PARKING FOR COMPACT VEHICLES ONLY
3) Not more than 25% of the parking spaces required by these regulations shall be for compact vehicles.
2. Driveways and traffic aisles for other than single-family or two-family residential uses shall be at least 22 feet
wide for two-way traffic movement and 11 feet for one way movement unless modified by the Commission.
3. Driveways in the front or rear of shopping centers or providing access to the service area of business property
shall be at least 30 feet wide and or accommodate an SU-30 turning radius.
F. HANDICAPPED SPACE REQUIREMENTS
Parking spaces designed for handicapped persons shall be provided in accordance with the Connecticut General
Statutes and the State of Connecticut Building Code. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be
located as close as is possible to the nearest accessible ramp, walkway, and the building entrance on an accessible
route.
75
G. SURFACE TREATMENT
1. Unless modified by the Commission, with a showing of good cause for uses that are seasonal such as
recreation, all parking spaces, loading facilities, and access roadways for all uses other than single- and twofamily
dwellings shall be improved to the standards established by the Town Engineer and shall have a durable
all-weather surface of asphalt, bituminous, cement or other properly bound pavement that will inhibit dust.
2. All surface treatments shall be maintained in good condition.
H. PARKING AREA CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
1. Access drives may cross required yards where, in the Commission’s judgment, such drives are necessary for
circulation.
2. Unless modified by the Commission, no parking or loading spaces shall be located between the street line and
the building line.
3. All parking spaces shall be marked with clearly visible striping at least 4 inches wide.
4. No parking space shall be installed in front of a fire hydrant or siamese connection.
5. Parking areas shall be designed an SU-30 turning radius through all parking aisles.
6. All parking areas shall include landscaped areas satisfying the requirements of Section of these regulations.
7. All of-street parking areas shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation and no
surface water from any parking area shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining property unless specifically
approved by the Commission.
8. All parking spaces shall be provided with a raised curb, wheel stops or other devices to insure that motor
vehicles do not encroach beyond the parking area.
I. INTERNAL CIRCULATION
1. Each site shall provide for safe and adequate vehicular traffic flow and adequate traffic circulation.
2. No building shall be erected without access to the rear of the building for fire protection, servicing, loading and
unloading, and the necessary drives serving these areas.
3. Each parking space shall be provided with safe and adequate area for approach, turning and exit without need
to use any part of a public street right-of-way.
4. Safe and adequate pedestrian traffic flow shall be provided in all parking areas, and integrated with the parking
arrangement and to this end the Commission may require separate pedestrian walkways and/or means of
pedestrian ingress and egress to the parking area or facility.
J. OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
1. Unless waived or modified by the Commission, any non-residential use with an aggregate floor area of 5,000
square feet or more shall provide an appropriate number of off-street truck loading spaces as determined by the
Commission on the same lot as such building.
2. No commercial loading space shall be less than 12 feet wide, 25 feet long, or 15 feet high except that the
Commission may require that each truck loading space be at least 55 feet long when necessary to service the
anticipated loading activity.
3. Each loading space shall be provided with adequate area for approach, turning and exit of the vehicle for which
it was designed.
4. No loading space or access thereto shall be located in a required front or side yard, located less than 20 feet
from any property line, or be designed or arranged in a manner that vehicles must use any part of a public
street right-of-way to maneuver into or out of such space.
5. No area shall be credited as a loading space that is in any part credited or used as a parking space or travel
way.
6. Commercial loading spaces shall be at least 50 feet from any residential use or zone unless enclosed on all
sides by a wall or fence at least 6 feet high or wholly enclosed within a building.
7. Loading spaces shall be located behind buildings and/or screened from streets and adjacent property unless
waived by the Commission.
8. No required loading space shall be used for the sale, storage, or display of goods.
9. Loading spaces shall be located to serve all tenants in multi-tenant buildings.
76
K. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
Parking or loading facilities shall remain in existence so long as the use which they serve exists and shall at all
times be exclusively reserved for, and available to, the persons occupying or visiting the land or improvement, the
use of which such facilities are provided to serve.
L. JOINT USE OF PARKING AREAS
The owners of two or more properties may establish a joint parking area to satisfy the parking requirements of
these regulations. The Commission may grant a Special Permit approval only after it has received a written
agreement between the parties stipulating the terms of the joint use of the parking spaces and that such spaces are
committed and available to the respective users on a non-conflicting basis.
77
6.3. Sign Regulations.
A. PURPOSE
This section is intended to regulate the number, size, location, height, lighting, and type of signs in order to protect
the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. MEASUREMENT OF SIGN AREA
1. The sign area shall be the smallest area rectangular that encompasses all letters, designs, symbols, logos or
other information including the advertising surface. However, when a sign consists of individual letters or
symbols affixed to a building wall, the area of such sign shall be measured as the composite of the smallest
rectangles which would contain each separate line of letters or symbols. (5/6 /05)
2. The sign area shall include any background material if such material is designed to be an integral part of the
sign because of its texture, color, material, or illumination.
3. Supports which affix a sign to the ground or a building shall not be included in the area of the sign unless such
supports are obviously designed to be part of the sign.
4. When attached to a wall, the area of the sign shall not include the wall itself unless the background is different
from the balance of the wall and is designed as an integral part of or is obviously related to the sign.
5. Any sign may be double-faced (back to back) provided that both sides are equal in area; only one face shall be
counted in determining conformity to sign area limitations.
6. For the purposes of determining the permitted sign area of a wall sign each business shall be allowed a total
sign area that is based upon the linear foot of that portion of the building frontage wall that the business
occupies. (5/6 /05)
C. SIGN CONTENT
1. Signs shall pertain only to goods sold or manufactured, services rendered and establishments, persons,
organizations or facilities on the lot where the sign is located.
2. Signs may only designate two of the following items: name, address, logo, type of business, or principal
product. Where the logo appears along with other information, the logo shall be limited to no more than 25%
of the sign area, unless waived by the Commission.
78
D. SIGNS PERMITTED IN ANY ZONE
Signs may be permitted in any zone in accordance with the following:
Type
Description
Require
Permit
Design Review
Required
Max. No. Allowed Max. Area Per
Sign
1. Governmental and
Historic
Organizations
(1-15-08)
a. A detached non-illuminated sign for
identification of public, government and
historical facilities located at least 5 feet
from the street line and not exceeding a
height of six feet above grade. (1-15-08)
Staff
Yes 1 per street access, 2
maximum
24 SF
b. A wall sign identifying the name of the
building, site or facility.
Staff
Yes
N/A
1SF/linear
foot of
building
frontage
c. Welcome or visitor interest signs
erected on public property by the Town of
Wethersfield when located in a manner as
not to create a public hazard.
Staff
Yes N/A 15 SF
2. Civic Organizations Bulletin boards on the premises of
religious institutions or municipal
buildings located at least fifteen (15) feet
from the front lot line.
Staff Yes 1 12 SF.
3. Agricultural a. A sign to identify the location of a
farm
Staff No 1 12 SF
b. Directional signage for an agricultural
trade or business approved by the State
Department of Agriculture for the
Agricultural Directional Signage
Program,
N/A No N/A 4 SF
4. Development One-sided masonry, stone, or other low
maintenance sign(s) not exceeding five
feet in height identifying a development
containing multiple buildings provided
that permanent arrangements for sign
maintenance are recorded on the Land
Records.
Staff Yes 1 per entrance 12 SF
5. Non-Conforming
Use
a. Signs in connection with the
advertising of a legally existing nonconforming
use.
Staff Yes 1 15 SF
6. Traffic Control Signs for the control of traffic and parking
on a property provided such signs
conform to standards established by the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (MUTCD) and contain no
business name or logo.
N/a No N/a As per
MUTCD or
Town
Engineer
7. National or State
Flags
The display of the National, State or any
other flag adopted or sanctioned by the
legislative body of a government
jurisdiction.
N/a No 3 N/a
8. Historic Marker Placed by a bona fide historical
organization or government agency
Staff No No 10 SF
79
E. SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Signs may be permitted in residential zones in accordance with the following:
Type
Description
Require
Permit
Design Review Required Max. No.
Allowed
Max. Area Per
Sign
1. Wall Signage
a. A non-illuminated wall
sign for identifying the
name of the occupant,
address of the property
and/or historic
information about the
property
No No 1 4 SF
b. A wall sign identifying a
service offered on the
premises and accessory to
the residential use,
provided the service is
authorized by zoning
regulation, special permit
or variance
No No 1 1 SF
c. A wall sign for a
principal use authorized
by the Commission
Staff Yes 1 25 SF
d. A wall sign in connection
with the identification of a
legally existing nonconforming
use
Staff Yes 1 15 SF
2. Detached Signage
a. A detached sign for a
principal use authorized
by the Commission as a
Special Permit use
Staff Yes 1 25 SF
b. Detached sign identifying
a development containing
multiple buildings or
multiple dwellings when
not greater than five feet
in height and located at
least fifteen (15) feet from
the street line
Staff Yes 1 per
entrance
12 SF
80
F. SIGNS PERMITTED IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Signs may be displayed in business zones in accordance with the following:
Type Description Require Permit Design Review
Required
Max. No.
Allowed
Max. Area Per Sign
1. Residential Use
Any wall sign permitted in a
residential zone
Per Residential zone requirements
2. Attached Wall
Signage for
Non-Residential
Uses When
A Detached Sign
is Used
Sign is on a single-occupant
building or sign is on a multisign
building..
Staff
Yes
N/A
1 SF per lineal foot of
building frontage
(No wall sign or
combination of wall
sign areas shall be
larger than 125 s.f.)
(1-15-08)
3. Attached Wall
Signage for
Non-Residential
Uses When
No Detached Sign
is Used
(1-15-08)
Sign is on a single-occupant
building or sign is on a multisign
building..
Staff
Yes
N/A
2 SF per lineal foot
of building frontage
(No wall signor
combination of wall
sign areas shall be
larger than 125 s.f.)
4. Detached Signage
for
Non-Residential
Uses
a. Properties with less than 100 feet
of frontage and sign height 8 feet
or less. (5/6/05)
Staff
Yes
1/building
(5/6/05)
25 SF
b. Properties with more than 100
feet of frontage and sign height 8
feet or less.
(5/6/05)
Staff
Yes
1/building
(5/6/05)
32 SF
c. Properties with more than 100
feet of frontage and sign height 5
feet or less. (5/6/05)
Staff
Yes
1/building
(5/6/05)
40 SF
d. Properties with more than 100
feet of frontage and sign height
less than 5 feet above the ground
when:
1. Both signs are one-sided
and are integrated into the
landscape as stone walls or
similar features;
2. Only one sign will be
visible from any traveling
direction on the adjacent street;
3. The proposed design is
attractive and is incorporated into
the landscape on the particular
site.
Staff
Yes
2/lot
50 SF per sign face
e. Properties in the Village Business
District (VB). (5/6/05)
Staff
Yes
1
25 SF
81
SIGNS PERMITTED IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES (CONTINUED)
Type
Description
Require
Permit
Design Review
Required
Max. No. Allowed
Max. Area Per
Sign
5. Gas Price
a. A sign mounted on the main
detached identification sign
indicating the price of gasoline
products being sold on the
premises provided
letters/numbers shall not exceed
15 inches in height, and sign
height shall not exceed 8 feet.
PZC
Yes
1/Lot
12 SF
b. Signs required by state law to be
attached to each gas pump
No No N/A N/A
6. Park-Type
Developments
a. One-sided masonry, stone, or
other low maintenance sign(s) not
exceeding five feet in height
identifying a development
containing multiple buildings
provided that permanent
arrangements for sign
maintenance are recorded on the
Land Records.
Staff Yes 1 per entrance 12 SF
7. Menu Board a. A business with a drive-thru
facility may be permitted to have
a menu board.
Staff Yes 1/business 18SF
(5/6/05)
8. “Open” signs,
flags or banners
(1-15-08)
a. During operating hours only and
hanging from or attached to the
building.
Staff No 1/business 12 SF
9. Portable Sign in
the VB Zone
(1-15-08)
a. During operating hours only,
shall be located directly in front
of the establishment and shall not
obstruct the free flow of
pedestrian traffic.
ZEO No 1/business 8 SF
82
G. TEMPORARY SIGNS
Temporary detached signs may be permitted in any zone in accordance with the following:
Type
Description
Require
Permit
Design Review
Required
Max. No.
Allowed
Max. Area
Per Sign
1. Real Estate
a. In residential zones a sign advertising the
sale, lease or rental of the premises where
the sign is located when sited at least five
(5) feet from any street line.
No No 1 6 SF
b. In commercial and Industrial zones a
sign advertising the sale, lease or rental of
the premises where the sign is located
when sited at least five (5) feet from any
street line.
No No 1 24 SF
c. A like sign for not more than seven days
indicating that the sale of the property is
pending or that the property has been sold.
No No 1 6 SF
d. For each property advertised for sale or
rent, an off-premises directional sign which
may be placed within the right-of-way of
town-owned streets on Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays identifying an open house or
inspection of a property provided all such
open house signs shall be removed
promptly upon conclusion of the event or
by sunset of Sunday or of the holiday.
No No 4 SF
2. Tag/Yard or
Garage Sale
a. A sign advertising the sale of personal
property of the owner erected on the
premises for not more than three (3) days
in any calendar year. In addition, for each
advertised sale, an off-premises directional
sign which may be placed within the rightof-
way on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
identifying a tag/yard or garage sale
provided all such signs shall not create a
sight line obstruction and shall be removed
promptly upon conclusion of the event or
by sunset on Sunday or the holiday. (1-15-
08)
No No 6 2 SF
3. Political
Signs
b. Non-illuminated signs identifying persons
running for political office, or issues
concerning a matter of public interest,
controversy or subject to local referendum
may only be displayed for up to 8 weeks
before the primary election, the regular
election, town meeting, or the referendum
(if applicable) and must be removed within
five (5) days after the event.
No No N/A 32 SF
4. Land Use
Hearing
A sign providing public notice of a pending
land use application. (5/6/05)
No No 1 4 SF
83
TEMPORARY SIGNS (CONTINUED)
Type
Description
Require
Permit?
Design Review
Required
Max. No.
Allowed
Max. Area
Per Sign
5. Construction /
Development
a. Signs pertaining to and during the
construction, repair or improvement of
dwellings on the property.
No No 1
6 SF
b. Signs pertaining to and during the
construction, repair or improvement of
business buildings on the property.
No No Up to 2 32 SF
total
c. Sign(s) identifying an approved
development with lots and/or homes for
sale for up to 12 months, unless
extended.
Staff No 1/10 lots
2 max.
32 SF
6. Civic
Organizations
a. Signs of civic organizations advertising
an event for not more than 30 days
within any 12 month period provided it
shall not be located within any street
line nor within twenty (20) feet of a
side lot line nor in a location to create a
hazard to the public.
Staff No n/a 32 SF
7. New Business
Identification
a. One banner sign on the facade of the
building in a commercial zone
identifying a new business for up to 21
days.
Staff No 1 24 SF
total
b. One non- illuminated detached sign on
the property in a commercial zone
provided by the Chamber of Commerce
identifying a new business for up to 21
days.
Staff No 1 12 SF
total
c. One non- illuminated detached sign on
the property in a commercial zone
identifying a new business for up to 21
days.
Staff No 1 6 SF total
8. Window Signs a. Signs inside display windows are
limited to covering a maximum of 25%
of the window space.
N/A No N/A <25% of
glass area
9. Special Event
a. For the purpose of advertising a grand
opening or new management the ZEO
may issue approval of a zoning permit
for flags, banners and signs for a period
of not more than thirty (30) consecutive
days up to a maximum of two (2) times
per year. The Planning and Zoning
Commission may grant approval for an
additional period of time beyond the
limits of this regulation. (2-19-08)
b. Banners and signs used to
announce special sales or special events
for a period not to exceed fourteen (14)
days prior to an event and throughout
the event, to be located at the location of
the event and at the organization
headquarters and up to three (3) times
per year.
Staff
Staff
No
No
1
N/A
60 SF
32 SF
84
10. Sponsorship
Signs On
Municipal
Baseball and
Softball Fields
(1-15-08)
a. For a period not more than 4
months in any 12 month period non
illuminated sponsor signs only on
outfield fences between the foul poles
that face the playing field.
Staff No N/A 4’ × 8’
11. Off-Premise
Event Signs
a. Signs announcing an event sponsored by
any public, charitable, educational,
historical or religious institution and not
located on the site of the event for more
than thirty (30) days prior to the event.
(1-15-08)
Staff No 6 32 SF
b. Any such sign shall not be placed within
the town right-of-way unless permission
has been granted by the Town Manager
or his/her designee. (1-15-08)
Staff No 6 32 SF
13. Street Banners
Sponsored or
Installed by the
Town of
Wethersfield
(1/15/08)
Staff No N/A
H. SIGN LOCATION
1. No sign shall be located on property other than the lot where the establishment is located, except as provided in
this section, therefore, Billboards are prohibited.
2. Detached signs shall be located at least five (5) feet from any property line.
3. Signs attached to buildings shall be parallel thereto, project no more than 18 inches from the face of the
building, and shall not be located within or hang over the right-of-way of any street, nor project or hang over
any driveway, roadway or access way unless it is a wall-mounted sign in the Village Business Zone and such
location has been approved. .
4. No sign shall be located or maintained at the intersection of any street or driveway, in such a manner so as to
be a hazard to traffic or pedestrians, to obstruct any door, window, ventilation system, fire escape or exit or to
cause any other hazard to public health or safety.
5. Roof signs are prohibited, except that the ZEO may approve a sign mounted flush with the vertical or nearvertical
portion of mansard roofs.
6. Any wall or mansard roof sign shall not extend higher than the top of the exterior wall or mansard roof of any
structure to which it is affixed.
7. Uses in the Regional Commercial or General Business Zones that abut and derive access from more than one
street shall be deemed to have more than one front and may display sign areas on each front.
8. A sign permitted in any Business Zone which is prohibited in any Residential Zone shall not be displayed on a
side of a structure or property facing the Residential Zone.
9. No vehicle bearing logos or business identification shall be stationed closer than thirty (30) feet to any street
line on a permanent basis or in a manner such that said vehicle functions as a sign.
10. A commercial vehicle used for delivery or service calls shall be removed from any location closer than thirty
(30) feet to a street line during non-business hours.
I. SIGN CONSTRUCTION & ILLUMINATION
1. All signs shall be constructed of sound materials and firmly supported.
2. No sign shall contain flashing or intermittent illumination, moving parts, exposed neon lights or animation
unless specifically approved by the Commission. No sign shall be used so that the message content can be
periodically changed, except menu boards, unless specifically permitted through the issuance of a Special
Permit by the Commission. (1-15-08)
3. Colored lights shall not be used where they conflict with traffic safety.
85
4. Signs may be externally illuminated provided the light source is concentrated on the sign, shielded from the
road, sidewalk and adjacent properties, and underground electrical service is provided.
5. Internally illuminated signs shall consist of a dark background with light lettering, unless otherwise approved
by the Commission.
6. No sign or any part thereof shall be moving whether by mechanical or other means, except a traditional barber
shop pole provided the longest dimension of such pole does not exceed 3 feet.
7. No streamers, banners, advertising, flags, or other such signs shall be permitted except for thirty (30) days
from the opening date of a new business.
J. SIGN MAINTENANCE & ABANDONMENT
1. All signs and components thereof shall be kept in good repair and in safe, neat, clean, and attractive condition.
2. Sign maintenance shall include painting, repainting, changing of the sign message in accordance with these
Regulations, cleaning, and other normal maintenance and repair of a sign or a sign structure, unless a structural
change is made.
3. The replacement of sign panels shall not require the approval of the Design Review Advisory Committee.
4. Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, product sold or
activity or campaign being conducted shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having
the beneficial use of the building, structure or lot upon which such signs may be found within thirty (30) days
of such cessation upon failure to comply within the timeframe specified, the ZEO is hereby authorized to
order removal of such sign, within thirty (30) days of written notification, and expense incident thereto shall be
paid by the owner of the building, structure or lot to which such sign is affixed.
K. SIGN EXCEPTIONS AND APPROVAL CRITERIA
The Commission may grant the following exceptions to the requirements of these regulations under the following
conditions:
1. The Commission may modify the number of items on a sign and the percent of the sign occupied by a logo.
2. The Commission may increase the area of internally illuminated wall signs with opaque letters (“halo
lettering”) by no more than 10 percent.
3. In order to provide an incentive for property owners who are willing to install a unified signage program the
Commission, may, at it’s discretion and after approval of a Special Permit, modify the requirements of these
sign regulations in regards to the height, area, setback and number of signs. The Commission must consider
the applicant’s written narrative explanation and justification for the modification including the following
criteria:
a. The signs are part of a unified signage program,
b. The modification will provide a more creative, aesthetically pleasing sign design.
c. There are unusual site factors which impact the legibility and effectiveness of the sign as viewed from the
Town street system.
4. Before granting approval for a sign exception the Commission shall find that:
a. The location, size and other aspects of the proposed sign will be in harmony with the orderly development
of the area and will not alter the essential characteristics of the area.
b. The landscaping, lighting, materials and design elements of the proposed sign are attractive and suitable in
relation to site characteristics, the architecture of the building and the style of other buildings in the
immediate area.
L. SIGN PERMITS
1. All permanent signs in new building construction shall be reviewed by the Design Review Advisory
Committee for conformance to the Design Guidelines of these regulations prior to the issuance of a sign permit
except where otherwise noted in these regulations.
2. All permanent signs shall obtain a sign permit from the Zoning Enforcement Official before the sign is erected.
3. Applications for sign approval shall be made on forms provided by the Zoning Enforcement Official.
4. The application shall include a plan of the sign and its location on the site or building, the height, width, and
lighting of the sign, the area of each sign face and the total area, and gross area of signs on the parcel.
5. No permit shall be issued for signs that conflict with an approved sign concept.
86
6. A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was issued has not been completed
within a period of 6 months after the date of the permit.
7. Any sign located in a designated Historic District shall, in addition to the provisions of these regulations,
obtain any necessary approvals from the Historic District Commission.
8. Wall signs for each business use in a multi-business building shall be designed to reflect a coordinated theme
for the entire building. Accordingly, each wall sign shall be in harmony and of a compatible type, height,
materials, lettering, wall placement and illumination. To this end, and as a means to encourage a coordinated
theme applicants may apply for an receive an exception to these regulations as specified in Section K of these
regulations.
M. NON-CONFORMING SIGNS
1. The replacement of a non-conforming sign shall be in accordance with these Regulations.
2. This regulation does not require that a legal non conforming sign be made to comply with the regulation or be
removed by the owner or occupant of the land or premises. Repairs, replacement or alterations to nonconforming
signs are permitted with a permit from the Zoning Enforcement Official provided that the
nonconformity is not increased or enlarged.
3. Signs existing at the time of the enactment of this regulation and not conforming to its provisions but which
were constructed in compliance with previous regulations shall be regarded as non-conforming signs and shall
be permitted to remain as approved and maintained, repaired or replaced in kind.
87
6.4. Performance Criteria.
Land and buildings shall be used only in compliance with the following standards:
A. The use shall be carried on in such a manner and with such precautions against fire and explosion hazards as to
produce no serious exposure hazard to any property, and the storage of all flammable or explosive materials
shall be in accordance with the National Fire Safety Code as directed by the Fire Marshal of the Town of
Wethersfield.
B. The use shall emit no offensive odors perceptible from any property line of the lot on which the operation is
located and shall emit no noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases.
C. The use shall not exhaust or waste into the air dust created by any industrial operation in excess of one (1)
cubic centimeter of settled matter per cubic meter of air or produce heat or glare perceptible from any property
line of the lot on which the operation is located for a period exceeding three (3) continuous minutes.
D. Industrial and exterior lighting shall not produce glare on public highways or neighboring property or conflict
with any traffic signals.
E. Smoke or other air contaminants shall not be discharged into the atmosphere from any single source of
emission for a period or periods aggregating more than three (3) minutes in any one (1) hour which are as dark
or darker in shade than as designated as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, as published by the United
States Bureau of Mines, or which are of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or
greater than does smoke designated as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart.
F. The use shall be operated in conformance with the requirements of Wethersfield Code of Ordinances Chapter
105 - Noise Control and the following performance standards governing noise, and no sound-pressure level
shall exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown below. Sound levels shall be measured at
the zone boundary lines within which the subject use is located and with a sound-level meter and associated
octave band filter manufactured in accordance with the American Standards Association. Measurements shall
be made using the flat network of the sound-level meter.
Maximum Permitted Sound Level in Decibels
Octave Band
(cycles per second)
Planned Development
Abutting Residence Zones
Planned Development
Abutting Other Zones
0-75 72 79
75-150 67 74
150-300 59 66
300-600 52 59
600-1,200 46 53
1,200-2,400 40 47
2,400-4,800 34 41
Above 4,800 32 39
6.5. Improvements Required
A. No building shall be constructed on a lot which does not have adequate public improvements (road pavement,
curbs, sidewalks, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains) up to and including the total width of the lot
unless an alternate scheme is approved by the Town Engineer.
B. No building shall be constructed on property developed without provisions for drainage and sanitation
acceptable to the Town Engineer.
88
C. Adequate public improvements shall not be required at the time of application for a building permit, provided
that a bond in an amount sufficient to extend public improvements up to and including the proposed lot shall
have been posted with the Town Engineer.
D. Under no circumstances shall a certificate of occupancy be issued for any dwelling unit until:
1. public improvements up to the finished pavement course are completed.
2. site drainage is completed.
3. required fire protection is provided.
4. a bond to complete the finished pavement course and other public improvements in an adequate form and
amount sufficient as determined by the Town Engineer shall have been posted with the Town.
6.6. Erosion & Sediment Control.
A. PURPOSE
This section is intended to control accelerated erosion and sedimentation of land during and after development and
prevent detrimental impacts to soil and water resources.
B. REQUIREMENTS
1. Every development shall include and maintain measures to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation resulting
from land development in accordance with the performance standards specified herein.
2. The Commission may require that a bond be posted, in an amount and form acceptable to the Commission, to
ensure that adequate control measures are implemented.
C. STANDARDS
Measures for controlling erosion and sediment shall equal or exceed those contained in (Connecticut Guidelines for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control DEP, 2002), as amended, unless modified by the Commission.
D. PROCEDURE
1. If the cumulative disturbed area shall exceed more than one-half acre or site development would occur within
the Connecticut River Assembly Conservation Zone, erosion and sediment control plans shall be submitted.
2. Where an erosion and sedimentation control plan is required, no building permit shall be issued and no site
work shall be started until the Wethersfield Planning and Zoning Commission has determined that the erosion
and sedimentation control plan complies with the above standards.
E. FIELD INSPECTION & ENFORCEMENT
1. The Town Engineer or a designee is authorized to make inspections and take measurements to determine
compliance herewith and that control measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and
maintained.
2. Development shall not begin unless the control measures scheduled for installation prior to site development or
as needed based on field conditions are installed and functional.
3. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition.
4. Failure to install or maintain control measures in an appropriate manner shall be grounds for issuance of a
cease and desist order.
89
6.7. Outdoor Lighting
A. PURPOSE
This section establishes the minimum standards for outdoor lighting and is intended to:
1. Control the number, size, location, and intensity of outdoor lighting.
2. Provide lighting in outdoor public places in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
3. Protect drivers and pedestrians from the glare of non-vehicular light sources that shine into their eyes and
thereby impair safe traverse.
4. Protect neighbors and the night sky from nuisance glare and stray light from poorly shielded, aimed, placed,
applied or maintained light sources.
5. Promote efficient design and operation with regard to energy conservation.
B. APPLICABILITY
1. All public and private outdoor lighting installed in the Town of Wethersfield shall be in conformance with the
requirements established by these regulations.
2. Outdoor lighting shall be required for safety and personal security and these regulations apply to all sites
located in the Business zones, the Special Residential Development zone and non-residential uses permitted in
residential zones. (12/20/05)
3. These regulations apply to new construction as well as site changes.
4. The glare control requirements also apply to, but are not limited to, sign, architectural, landscape, recreational
and residential lighting.
5. Modification or replacement (other than maintenance) of outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the provisions of
this regulation.
6. Outdoor lighting shall be subject to a Site Plan review by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. REQUIREMENTS
All illumination on all sites shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following standards:
1. All lighting shall be operated and maintained in compliance with the Town of Wethersfield Municipal Code as
it pertains to lighting.
2. All parking and pedestrian area lighting shall be full cut-off light fixtures. (12/20/05)
3. Floodlighting is prohibited. (12/20/05)
4. The use of wall mounted fixtures for security or aesthetics is discouraged and shall only be permitted as full
cut-off or a fully shielded/recessed type. (12/20/05)
5. Poles and standards used for outdoor lighting shall not exceed 14 feet in Residential Zones and 25 feet in all
other districts, except where otherwise permitted in these regulations. (12/20/05)
6. All outdoor lighting shall be designed to control objectionable and hazardous glare off the premises.
7. All outdoor light fixtures shall be shielded in such a manner that no light is emitted above a horizontal plane
passing through the lowest point of the light-emitting element, so that direct light emitted above the horizontal
plane is eliminated.
8. Unless otherwise permitted for safety or security or for businesses that operate all night, lighting shall be
controlled by automatic switching devices such as time clocks or combination motion detectors and photocells,
to permit extinguishing outdoor lighting fixtures between 11p.m. and dawn, to reduce energy waste and
mitigate nuisance glare and sky-lighting consequences.
9. The maintained horizontal illuminance recommendations set by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IESNA) Recommended Practice Publication “Lighting for Exterior Environments” RP-33-99 and
“Lighting for Parking Facilities” RP-20 shall be observed. (12/20/05)
10. All building lights shall be full cut-off or a shielded type fixture. (12/20/05)
11. Lighting fixtures mounted on canopies shall be installed such that the bottom of the light fixture or its lens,
whichever is lower, is recessed or mounted flush with the bottom surface of the canopy and parallel to the
ground. A full cut-off light fixture may project below the underside of the canopy. (12/20/05)
90
12. The following open parking area lighting levels are hereby established: (12/20/05)
General Parking and Pedestrian Area
Type of Activity Footcandles
Avg. Min
Uniformity Ratio
(Average/Minimum
Major Regionla Shopping Center
or Mall
3.6 .9
4/1
Strip Mall, Fast Food, Area
Shopping Center or Mall,
Apartment Building,
Condominium, cultural or civic
area
2.4 .6
4/1
Local or neighborhood Shopping
Center, Industrial or educational
facility
.8 .2
4/1
13. The following maximum lighting levels are established for other outdoor lighting:
a. 5 footcandles at building entries for pedestrians.
b. 1 footcandle at building entrances that are infrequently used.
c. 5 footcandles at drive-up windows.
d. 20footcandles under service station or gas pump canopies.
B. OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS
1. Lighting fixtures used to illuminate an outdoor advertising sign shall be mounted on the top of the sign
structure to concentrate the light output onto and not beyond the sign.
C. SITE PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Lighting plan submissions shall contain the following:
1. Photometric data, such as that furnished by the manufacturer, or similar showing the angle of cut off or lights
emissions.
2. The type of fixture, height, mounting height, style of pole and level of wattage shall be indicated on the Site
Plan.
3. Proposed light poles and fixtures shall be shown on the Site Plan and shall be located so as not to interfere or
conflict with traffic movement or parking.
4. The site plan shall show the location of all buildings on all adjoining property located within 100 feet of the
site and the location of all light fixtures on adjacent properties or the street right-of-way within 10 feet of the
property.
5. A light calculation which shows the maximum light levels measured in foot candles on a grid not to exceed ten
feet by ten feet across the entire site, carried out to 0.0 footcandles, the average lighting on the site, maximum
and minimum lighting levels on the site.
6. A detailed sketch, elevation, cutsheet or the manufacturers catalog information sheet shall be submitted for
each type of light standard. The sketch for pole mounted light standards shall consist of the pole base, the
pole, the mounting arm or other attachment device, and the fixture.
7. A statement on the plans of the proposed hours when the luminaries will be on and when they will be
extinguished. (12/20/05)
D. SPECIAL USES
Notwithstanding anything in this regulation to the contrary, the following shall apply to Sport and Athletic Field
Lighting on property owned and operated by the Town of Wethersfield:
1. Lighting systems for outdoor recreational facilities shall require approval of a Special Use Permit from the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
91
2. All fixtures used for athletic field lighting shall be fully shielded and designed to minimize up light, spill-light,
sky glow and glare and shall be provided with internal and/or external glare control louvers, visors or other
shielding
3. All lighting installations shall be designed to achieve no greater than the minimal illuminance levels for the
activity as recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA RP-6-01).
4. The installation shall limit off-site spill onto neighboring properties and maximum illumination levels shall not
exceed 0.2 foot candles on any neighboring property.
5. Every design and installation shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer as conforming to all
applicable restrictions of this regulation. (12/20/05)
6. The height of luminaries shall be exempt from the height restrictions of these regulations and, to the extent
practicable, be the minimum necessary to provide the illumination levels recommended by IESNA RP-6-01 for
the specific sport. In no instance shall the height exceed one-hundred and ten (110) feet.
7. All events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity no later than 10:30 p.m and all lighting shall be shut
off within thirty (30) minutes after the game or event has ended. (12/20/05)
E. EXCEPTIONS
1. Luminaires used for public roadway illumination may be installed at a maximum height of 25 feet and may be
positioned at that height up to the edge of any bordering property.
2. These regulations do not apply to temporary lighting used for construction, emergency or maintenance projects
undertaken by a public utility, the Town of Wethersfield or other governmental agency, or their authorized
agents provided such lighting is discontinued immediately upon completion of the construction work.
(12/20/05)
3. The temporary use of low wattage (50 watt) or low voltage lighting for public festivals, celebrations, and the
observance of holidays except where they create a hazard or nuisance from glare. (12/20/05)
4. All outdoor light fixtures which are completely enclosed within a sign cabinet and which provide illumination
only for a sign face. (12/20/05)
5. Temporary lighting used by Police, Fire Department or Emergency service. (12/20/05)
6. Ornamental lighting using low voltage (12 volts or less), low wattage ornamental landscape lighting fixtures,
and solar operated light fixtures having self contained rechargeable batteries. (12/20/05)
7. All outdoor light fixtures lawfully installed prior to and operable on the effective date of the regulation are
exempt from all requirements of this regulation.
8. Residential lighting for single family and two family dwellings provided that no spot or flood light is aimed,
directed, or focused such as to cause the lights to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby
land or create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways. (12/20/05)
9. The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a Special Permit modifying the requirements of this section
upon a determination that one of the following criteria have been met: (12/20/05)
a. There are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land, buildings, or outdoor light fixtures for
which the modification is sought, that do not apply generally to the land, buildings or outdoor light
fixtures in the neighborhood; (12/20/05)
b. Additional lighting is necessary to improve safety or security for the property, its occupants or the public;
(12/20/05)
c. Where ornamental uplighting of sculpture, buildings or landscape features will enhance the character of
the area; and(12/20/05)
d. There are special circumstances or conditions applying to an activity or an event for which the lighting is
to be utilized. (12/20/05)
F. PROHIBITED LIGHTING
1. No luminaire shall have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights or other illuminating device which has changing
light intensity, brightness or color, nor shall any beacon lights be permitted except where an exception is
permitted by section G of these regulations.
92
6.8. Refuse Storage.
A. PURPOSE
This section is intended to control the number, size, location, and screening of refuse storage areas in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
B. REQUIREMENTS
1. Facilities for the storage of refuse, garbage, and recycling materials shall be located to make the facilities as
inconspicuous as possible.
2. Refuse storage areas shall have a concrete pad and shall be enclosed and screened from view within a
permanent enclosure of masonry or other sturdy material, fencing, or landscaping unless waived by the
Commission.
3. Refuse storage areas shall have an appropriate gate approved by the Commission and such gate shall be
normally closed.
4. Refuse storage areas shall be easily accessible for service vehicles and building occupants and shall not
interfere with parking spaces or travel lanes. (5/6/05)
5. No other outside sheds or storage bins for refuse, garbage, and recycling containers will be allowed unless
specifically approved by the Commission.
6. Temporary dumpsters during construction shall be exempt from the above standards provided the location and
use is approved by the Chief Building Official and the Fire Marshal.
6.9. Access Management.
A. PURPOSE
This section is intended to control the number, size, and location of driveways and access points for business uses,
especially those that front on heavily trafficked roads and state highways, in order to promote overall traffic control
and promote public safety and welfare.
B. CONSIDERATIONS
1. The Commission shall review parking layout and configuration, traffic circulation within the site, the number
and location of access points to and from the site, and the nature and type of traffic circulation on adjacent
roadways to ensure that public safety and welfare are promoted with the greatest efficiency.
2. The applicant shall submit plans to the Connecticut Department of Transportation for review of proposed curb
cuts or driveway openings on State highways prior to approval of site plans by the Commission.
C. REQUIREMENTS
1. Where a parcel has adequate frontage, the center lines of access drives to streets shall be at least 250 feet apart.
In all other cases, they shall be as determined by the Commission.
2. Where street geometry, traffic volumes or traffic patterns warrant, the Commission may:
a. Limit the number of driveways that serve a specific site,
b. Designate the location of any driveway,
c. Require the use or provision of a shared driveway with associated easements, and
d. Limit access to a major street and require access from a minor street and vice versa.
3. As part of application approval, the Commission may require an applicant or owner to:
a. Establish mutual driveway or other easements to provide a single point of access for two or more abutting
properties in a location acceptable to the Commission and the Town Engineer,
93
b. Record such easements on the land records in favor of the abutting property owners and/or the Town as
shall be acceptable to the Commission and the Town Attorney, and/or
c. Utilize a mutual driveway or other easement that exists on abutting property in lieu of having a separate
curb cut onto a road or street.
4. Any easements recorded shall be unused by the owner or owners of abutting property, and shall not be
assigned by the Town to the owner or owners of abutting property, until an abutting owner shall have granted
reciprocal easements.
6.10. Earth Removal & Filling.
A. PURPOSE
This section is intended to preserve the natural features of the landscape, keep the land suitable for appropriate
future uses, prevent nuisances, and protect the public health and safety.
B. APPLICABILITY
1. The following earth removal or filling is permitted in any zone provided erosion and sediment control and
other best management practices are implemented and no condition is created which is dangerous or damages
the surrounding land:
a. Excavation, filling and/or removal of less than 100 cubic yards of material from any lot of record provided
that such filling operation does not exceed one (1) year in duration, is graded such that the final grades are
in harmony with the existing grades, and is covered with loam or other material that will support plant life;
or
b. Necessary foundation and trench excavation and other sitework in connection with work on the premises
for which a Building Permit has been issued or Site Plan or Subdivision approval has been granted;
2. Except as provided above, the excavation, removal, or filling of sand, gravel, stone, loam, dirt or other earth
product is permitted only as a Special Permit upon written permission of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
C. STANDARDS
1. Suitable procedures shall be used at all times to minimize noise, dust or any other nuisance, maintain proper
drainage, and ensure that no excavation shall undermine other property.
2. The area shall be graded so that final slopes do not exceed a slope of 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
3. The completed excavation shall be topsoiled to a depth of six (6) inches after compaction, seeded with a
perennial rye grass, and maintained until the area is stabilized and approved by the Commission.
4. No screening, sifting, washing, crushing, or other processing activities are permitted and the Zoning
Enforcement Official may limit the stockpiling of excavated materials on the site.
5. No fixed machinery shall be erected or maintained within 200 feet of any property line and no building shall be
erected on the premises except as temporary shelter for machinery.
6. Fences shall be erected and maintained during the operation to protect pedestrians and vehicles.
7. Truck access shall be arranged to minimize traffic impacts and nuisance.
8. The access road within the area of operation shall have a dustless surface.
9. Where application for excavation permits for adjoining properties are filed, the Commission may consider
them as one application.
D. PROCEDURE
1. Application for a Special Permit and site plan approval for earth removal or filling shall be made to the
Planning and Zoning Commission by the property owner or his authorized agent.
2. The application shall be accompanied by a statement from the applicant and owner that the excavation and
grading will conform with the approved plan and a narrative describing:
a. The amount of material to be excavated or removed,
b. Proposed truck access to the excavation and the number and types of trucks and other machinery to be
used on the site,
94
c. Hours of operation,
d. The locations and types of any structures to be erected, and
e. Details of regrading and revegetation of the site at the conclusion of operations.
3. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall grant the permit only when it is satisfied that the standards of this
section will be complied with in the undertaking of such excavation.
4. The applicant shall provide a performance bond in an amount determined by the Commission to ensure
completion of the restoration and other work approved by the Commission.
5. Any deviation from the plan shall be cause for the Commission to revoke the permit provided the owner shall
have the opportunity to address the Commission regarding why the permit should not be revoked.
6. Any permit shall expire 2 years from the date of issuance unless renewed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
7. No permit shall be renewed or extended unless the operator shows, through the report of a licensed
professional engineer, that the excavation already completed conforms with the approved plan.
6.11. Proximity to Pipelines
No building or structure designed or intended for human occupancy shall hereafter be erected in the Town of
Wethersfield within a distance of forty (40) feet from the center line of any gas transmission pipeline if said
pipeline is operated or designed to be operated at a pressure in excess of two hundred (200) pounds per square inch
gauge.
6.12. Design Review
A. PURPOSE.
1. A Design Review Advisory Committee has been created to help the Commission promote and encourage
public and private actions to:
a. Encourage the highest quality standard of design and development;
b. protect the value of all real property within the community;
c. promote aesthetically pleasing development;
d. promote the development of a harmonious character in newly developing or redeveloped areas;
e. preserve the special character of existing neighborhoods; and
thus to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience and welfare of the community.
2. The advice of the Committee is intended to encourage higher quality building and site design and result in
development which is compatible with the character of the community.
B. APPLICABILITY.
1. All applicants shall submit all of the items required by Appendix A of these regulations.
2. The Commission’s staff shall, upon receipt of an application, refer application materials to the Committee for
any site plan or special permit application involving:
a. New construction of a multi-family residential structure of four (4) or more units,
b. A special residential development,
c. New construction of a non-residential structure ,
d. Any significant exterior building change or other site improvement which requires site plan or design
review,
e. Signs as required by Section 6.3 of these regulations.
C. PROCEDURE.
1. The Design Review Advisory Committee shall meet at regularly scheduled meetings to consider applications
referred to it by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Applicants are encouraged to submit preliminary or conceptual plans to the Committee for review and
comment prior to a formal submission to the Commission. In such instance, the Committee shall submit a
95
report, together with its recommendations and suggestions, to the applicant no later than twenty (20) days after
receipt thereof.
3. The Design Review Advisory Committee shall submit its advisory recommendations to the Commission in
writing at least five (5) days prior to a meeting by the Commission on the application.
4. The written report shall, to the extent feasible, include specific recommendations regarding plan modifications
which the Committee finds desirable based on the standards and criteria outlined in theses regulations an d the
Design Guidelines found in Appendix C.
5. The Commission shall not be required to delay its action on an application due to the failure of the Design
Review Advisory Committee to act in a timely manner.
6. Reports from the Design Review Advisory Committee shall be advisory and not compulsory to the
Commission, which has final approval authority for all applications.
D. GENERAL DESIGN GUIDELINES.
1. The Committee will, over time, develop and maintain design guidelines to help applicants and owners
understand design considerations in Wethersfield. Such guidelines shall be referred to the Commission for
review and comment.
2. The Committee will consider the following general issues:
a. The basic design for the proposed uses, buildings, or development.
b. The relationship between the buildings and the land.
c. The relationship between uses and buildings/structures.
d. The overall physical appearance of the proposed development and its compatibility with surrounding
neighborhood.
e. Relationship of width to height of new structures.
f. Colors, materials, location of lighting.
g. Design of signs.
h. Blending of street and mechanical hardware and miscellaneous appurtenances into the overall design.
i. Effect on the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
j. Impact on the historic significance of the site and the affected area.
k. Compatibility with the Plan of Conservation & Development of the Town.
l. Location and dimensions of public and private streets and common drives.
m. Location and dimensions of public and private pedestrian walkways, sidewalk malls and paths.
n. Types, styles and colors of building materials, exterior facades and facing, fenestration, and fire retardant
characteristics.
o. Special architectural features.
p. Conformity with these Regulations and other appropriate laws, codes, or ordinances.
96
ARTICLE VII - EXCEPTIONS TO REGULATIONS
7.1. Height Exceptions
A. The height limitations of these regulations shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, flagstaffs,
chimneys, bulkheads, water tanks, water towers, air conditioning equipment or elevator shafts, provided that
no such structure thus exempted from the height limitations of these regulations shall have a horizontal area
greater than twenty percent (20%) of the roof area of the building on which it is located.
B. Church buildings, not including the spires, belfries, cupolas or domes appurtenant thereto, may be built to a
height of fifty (50) feet.
C. Barns and silos may be built to a maximum height of fifty (50) feet on farms.
D. Schools, public libraries, municipal buildings, museums, central telephone exchanges or public utility office
buildings may be built to a height not to exceed four (4) stories.
7.2. Yard Exception For Fences
A. OPEN FENCE
A freestanding fence or other structure may be erected above ground between the street line and the building line
provided that:
1. It shall not exceed four (4) feet in height,
2. The fence or other structure shall, when viewed at right angles, not obstruct visibility by more than fifty
percent (50%),
3. No component, other than those required for support, shall be greater than six (6) inches in width or diameter,
and
4. Each component shall be distributed so as to:
a. Be separated by a dimension at least equal to its own width, and
b. Provide uniformity of design and visibility throughout the length and height of the fence, wall or structure.
97
B. SOLID FENCE OR WALL
A retaining wall or freestanding wall or fence or other structure not complying with the above provisions may be
exempt from the front yard requirement for the zone in which it is located if approved by the Zoning Enforcement
Official and the Town Engineer.
7.3 Exceptions for Non-Conforming Conditions.
A. NON-CONFORMING USES.
1. Any non-conforming use of buildings or land lawfully existing at the time of adoption of these Regulations or
any amendments hereto, may be continued.
2. No non-conforming use may be changed except to a conforming use or, with the approval of the Zoning Board
of Appeals, to another non-conforming use of a less objectionable character.
3. No non-conforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be changed back into a non-conforming
use.
4. No non-conforming use which has been abandoned shall thereafter be resumed. Where a non-conforming use
is changed to another use or the intent of the property owner to cease to maintain the non-conforming use is
demonstrated, the said non-conforming use shall be deemed abandoned.
5. No non-conforming use, and no building containing a non-conforming use, shall be created, extended or
expanded unless:
a. The use is changed to a conforming use, or
b. The Commission has approved a Special Permit application demonstrating, in the sole judgment of the
Commission, compliance with the following conditions:
i. The building and site shall be designed to enhance compatibility and reduce incompatibility with
abutting uses and the neighborhood,
ii. Adequate buffering shall be provided to minimize adverse impacts on adjacent uses, and
iii. The nature and intensity of the use in relation to the size of the lot will be more in harmony with the
neighborhood and more compatible with adjoining uses.
6. A building occupied, in whole or in part, by a non-conforming use may be maintained, repaired and structural
alterations thereto may be made, provided that the space occupied by the non-conforming use shall not be
enlarged unless approved in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
7. Any building containing a non-conforming use which has been damaged by fire, explosion, accident, or natural
disaster:
a. May be repaired, rebuilt, or replaced within one year of such damage if the damage is less than or equal to
the assessed value of the building at the time of such damage provided that such repairs, rebuilding, or
replacement does not extend nor expand the previously existing non-conforming use.
b. May only be reconstructed and thereafter used in such manner as to conform to all the provisions of this
chapter if the damage exceeds its assessed value at the time of such damage, except where such damage is
caused by natural disaster.
B NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS.
1. Non-conforming buildings may be altered or enlarged provided that such additions or enlargements conform to
the applicable provisions of these regulations.
2. Non-conforming buildings may be maintained, repaired and structural alterations may be made provided that
the building nonconformity is not further aggravated.
98
3. Any non-conforming building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, accident, or natural disaster:
a. May be repaired, rebuilt, or replaced within one year of such damage if the damage is less than or equal to
the assessed value of the building at the time of such damage provided that such repairs, rebuilding, or
replacement does not extend nor expand the previously existing non-conforming building.
b. May only be reconstructed and thereafter used in such manner as to conform to all the provisions of this
chapter if the damage exceeds its assessed value at the time of such damage, except where such damage is
caused by natural disaster.
C. NONCONFORMITY THROUGH VARIANCE.
1. When a building does not comply with all the requirements for the zone in which the property is located and
the noncompliance was occasioned by a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, such building shall,
for the purposes of this section, be considered to be a non-conforming building and, as such, subject to all the
provisions of this Section.
2. Whenever a non-conforming use or occupancy of a building or of land as granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals has ceased for a period of six (6) months, such use or occupancy shall thereafter be required to
become conforming.
7.4. Waivers to Regulations.
1. Where deemed appropriate, in the judgment of the Commission, a site plan in substantial compliance with the
requirements of these Regulations may be approved with such minor variations from the strict application of
the provisions of this chapter as will, in the sole discretion of the Commission:
a. Provide for the most appropriate use of land,
b. Protect the public health and safety and preserve property values, and
c. Provide for the most orderly development of land.
2. Any such minor variation shall be requested in writing by the applicant and shall be clearly identified on any
filed site plan associated with the application.
3. Any such minor variation shall be clearly identified in the proceedings of the Commission and in any letter of
approval related to a special permit or site plan.
99
ARTICLE VIII - SPECIAL PERMIT CRITERIA
In considering an application for Special Permit, the Commission shall evaluate the merit of the application with
respect to the following factors:
8.1. Suitable Location.
A. That the location and size of the proposed use or activity will be in harmony with the orderly development of
the area and compatible with other existing uses.
B. That the nature and intensity of the use or activity in relation to the size of the lot will be in harmony with the
orderly development of the area and compatible with other existing uses.
8.2. Neighborhood Compatibility.
A. That the design elements of the proposed development are attractive and suitable in relation to the site
characteristics, the style of other buildings in the immediate area, and the existing and probable future
character of the neighborhood in which the use is located.
B. That the proposed use or activity will not alter the essential characteristics of the area or adversely affect
property value in the neighborhood.
C. That adequate provision has been made for the maintenance of the proposed development (structures, streets,
and other improvements).
8.3. Appropriate Structures And Landscaping.
A. That the kind, size, location, height, and design of any structures and the nature and extent of the landscaping
on the lot are appropriate for the use or activity, the proposed site, and in relation to other structures in the
vicinity.
B. That the proposed structures will not hinder or discourage the appropriate use of adjoining property or
diminish the value thereof.
8.4. Suitable Access And Parking.
A. That streets providing access to the proposed use or activity are adequate in width, grade, alignment and
visibility and have adequate capacity for the additional traffic generated by the proposed use.
B. That the entrance and exit driveways are laid out to achieve maximum safety, especially with regard to
managing access onto roads and streets.
C. That the proposed use or activity shall have easy accessibility for fire apparatus and police protection and is
laid out and equipped to further the provision of emergency services.
D. That the parking and loading facilities are adequate and properly located.
8.5. Overall Circulation.
A. That the proposed use or activity will not impede implementation of the Circulation Plan of the Wethersfield
Plan of Conservation & Development.
100
8.6. Adequate Public Utilities.
A. That the water supply, the sewage disposal, and the storm water drainage shall conform with accepted
engineering practices, comply with all standards of the appropriate regulatory authority, and not unduly burden
the capacity of such facilities.
8.7. Environmental Protection & Conservation.
A. That the proposed plans have provided for the conservation of natural features, drainage basins, the protection
of the environment of the area, and sustained maintenance of the development.
8.8. Consistent With Purposes.
A. That the proposed use or activity will not have any detrimental effects upon the public health, safety, welfare,
convenience, or property values.
B. That the proposed use will not conflict with the purposes of the Regulations.
C. That the proposed use or activity will further the goals, objectives, and policies and will be consistent with the
recommendations of the Plan of Conservation & Development.
8.9. Other Considerations.
A. That the location and type of signs or lighting for the proposed use or activity are compatible with these
considerations.
B. That the proposed use or activity will provide adequate landscaping and screening for the protection of
abutting uses.
C. That the proposed development contains appropriate provisions for pedestrians, bicyclists, and handicapped
persons within the development and along public streets and, where appropriate, that adequate provision has
been made for transit service.
D. That the use will enhance community development and not result in excessive numbers or proximity of like
uses, incompatibility with neighboring uses, lack of public need, or other conditions that the Commission finds
would impair the vitality and character of surrounding uses and properties or dramatically alter the
development pattern of the community.
E. That the use will not have negative impacts on neighboring towns or on the region.
101
ARTICLE IX - SPECIAL REGULATIONS
9.1. Towers and Antennae.
A. PURPOSE.
This Section regulates the location of radio towers, wind-powered generators, satellite earth station antennas, solar
energy collection panels and similar structures to minimize nuisances to owners of adjoining properties, ensure the
safety of the public through proper installation of such structures and protect the public from unsightly and
obtrusive structures and conditions which potentially impair the enjoyment of property, the conservation of
property values and the quality of life.
B. INSTALLATIONS WHEN NO ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED
The following types of installations may be made in any district without a zoning permit:
1. Two (2) satellite signal installations may be permitted when accessory to a permitted use provided they are
attached to the building, are no greater than 3 feet in diameter, and are mounted no higher than 5 feet above
the roof.
C. INSTALLATIONS REQUIRING A ZONING PERMIT.
The following types of installations may be made provided that a zoning permit is issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Official and a building permit is issued by the Chief Building Official based upon plans, drawings and
specifications furnished by the applicant as may be required to adequately show the proposed location, elevations,
dimensions, construction, mounting and screening.
1. Solar energy collection panels or photovoltaic panels when accessory to a permitted use in a Residential or
Conservation district provided that, if to be erected on a roof which is visible from a public street, such panels
shall be mounted flush to the roof, with allowance for mounting brackets and piping.
2. A common tubular television antenna, am-fm radio antenna, or short wave installation is permitted when
accessory to a permitted use provided it projects no higher than 50 feet above the ground and is located in the
rear yard at least five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line and 40 feet from any street line. Rooftop
installations may also be permitted as long as the antenna does not project higher than ten (10) feet above the
roofline.
3. A common ham radio installation is permitted when accessory to a permitted use provided it projects no higher
than 70 feet above the ground and is located in the rear yard at least five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line
and 40 feet from any street line.
4. Any installation shall, in the judgment of the Zoning Enforcement Official, be placed as to not become a
dominant visual element when viewed from the primary focus of public activity, or shall be referred to the
Commission for approval by Special Permit.
D. INSTALLATIONS REQUIRING COMMISSION APPROVAL.
The following types of installations require approval of a Special Permit by the Commission based upon plans,
drawings and specifications furnished by the applicant as may be required to adequately show the proposed
location, elevations, dimensions, construction, mounting and screening.
1. Any installation not conforming to the requirements of Section 9.1.B.
2. Any installation not conforming to the requirements of Section 9.1.C.
3. Wind power generators accessory to a permitted use provided it projects no higher than 50 feet above the
ground.
102
E. TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
1. Any application to establish a telecommunication facility shall be in accordance with the requirements of
Section 10.1 with regard to the following:
a. Any new facility co-located on an existing facility shall require a Site Plan application to the Commission.
b. Any other telecommunication facility shall require a Special Permit application and a Site Plan application
to the Commission.
2. When siting a telecommunications facility, this Section is intended to promote the following facility hierarchy:
Priority Location
Highest ? Business districts.
? Town-owned property.
? Public utility facilities.
? Open space land.
? Residential districts.
Lowest ? Historic districts.
Priority Characteristics
Highest ? Where existing topography, vegetation, or structures
provide appropriate screening.
? Towers using “stealth” technology.
Lowest ? Other sites.
Priority Design
Highest ? On or in existing structures.
? Co-location on existing telecommunications towers.
? New towers projecting no more than 25 feet above the
existing tree-line.
Lowest ? New towers projecting more than 25 feet above the
existing tree-line.
3. Unless waived by the Commission, the application shall comply with the criteria outlined in Section 10.1.H.
4. Unless modified by the Commission, a telecommunications tower structure shall be set back from property
lines at least as far as the height of the structure.
5. In reviewing an application, the Commission may require the applicant to simulate the telecommunications
tower structure height during daylight hours by balloon or other method that will evaluate scenic impact and
may require the applicant to publish a legal notice informing the public of the date of such simulation.
6. A telecommunications tower structure shall be a monopole design unless otherwise approved by the
Commission.
7. Telecommunication tower structures, associated support features, accessory buildings, and antenna arrays shall
be painted or otherwise camouflaged in a manner approved by the Commission, to blend as much as possible
with the surrounding environment.
8. No illumination of any telecommunications tower structure shall be permitted unless specifically requested by
the applicant and specifically approved by the Commission.
9. All utilities shall be located underground unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
10. Unless modified by the Commission, all associated structures shall be screened from public view by
ornamental shrubs, evergreen trees, fences, walls, or other landscaping to maintain a natural-looking
environment.
103
ARTICLE X - ADMINISTRATION
10.1. Administration By The Commission.
A. PRE-APPLICATION REVIEW
1. All applicants are encouraged to meet with the Commission’s staff before submitting any formal application.
2. Additionally, any applicant may request in writing on a form provided by the Town, that a pre-application
review is conducted on any project. The request shall include a narrative of the project which describes the
nature of the project, the use of the land and buildings and other matters pertinent to summarize the project and
the design.
3. The pre-application review will provide the applicant with an opportunity to receive the Staff’s and the
Commission’s input prior to the submission of a formal application in order to avoid undue expense and delays
caused by submitting inappropriate or unacceptable submissions and to clarify the Town’s requirements to
avoid costly reworking of subsequent submissions.
4. The Commission will conduct all pre-application reviews at a public meeting after providing proper public
notice on an agenda for that meeting. Members of the public will be provided with an opportunity to comment
on the project at the time of pre-application review.
5. The applicant shall submit building floor plans and exterior elevations to show the Commission how the
finished development will look and how it will be built.
6. The applicant shall submit site plans that provide information on the layout of the entire project, the location
of significant natural features (wetlands, watercourses, steep slopes, flood plain) and other relevant
information.
7. The Commission shall informally review the Plans for general conformance with these Regulations and may
request additional information where deemed necessary.
8. A pre-application review shall be considered only informational and advisory in nature, shall not be binding
on the applicant or the Commission and no development rights shall attach to the review or consideration of
any Site Plan.
9. A pre-application Site Plan shall be placed on file in the Commission's office for continuing reference purposes
for subsequent Site Plan applications.
B. GENERAL
1. Applications to the Commission shall be submitted to the Commission Clerk on forms prescribed by the
Commission and with supporting plans, materials, and other information required by these Regulations no later
than fifteen (15) days before a regularly scheduled meeting.
2. Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee(s).
3. Proceedings on applications shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 124 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
4. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for a Special Permit, Zone Change, or
Amendment to Zoning Regulations.
5. Where a proposed development or activity requires multiple applications, the Commission may conduct the
public hearings simultaneously or in the order they deem appropriate.
6. On any application for a Special Permit or Zone Change, the applicant shall:
a. Post a sign or signs on the premises which is the subject of the application at least ten (10) days before
commencement of the public hearing,
b. Obtain such signage from the office of the Building Official upon receipt of a cash deposit,
c. Locate and maintain the signage so as to be visible and readable from the street or highway upon which
property has frontage for the full time of the required posting.
d. Submit an affidavit at the public hearing that the signs were posted in accordance with these requirements,
e. Remove such sign or signs within ten (10) days after the completion of the hearing,
7. An application shall not be considered complete until all of the required items have been submitted and
received by the Commission at a regularly scheduled meeting.
104
8. An incomplete application or an application submitted without the requisite fee shall be denied if such
application is not completed or fee paid before the commencement of the public hearing.
9. In approving any application except for a Zone Change, the Commission may attach conditions and safeguards
to its approval.
10. The Commission may, in accordance with CGS 8-1c and any ordinance adopted by the Town of Wethersfield:
a. Retain an architect, landscape architect, land use planner, or other relevant professional to review,
comment on, and guide its deliberations on an application, and
b. Require that the applicant:
i. Deposit funds with the Commission for such review, or
ii. Reimburse the Commission for the cost of such review.
C. SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
1. Special Permit applications shall be submitted on forms supplied by the Commission for any activity
designated in the Regulations as a Special Permit.
2. Each application for a Special Permit shall, unless waived by the Commission, be accompanied by a Site Plan
Application.
3. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for a Special Permit.
4. The applicant shall mail by certificate of mail, return receipt requested, on a form provided by the Town,
notice to all owners of land within three hundred (300) feet of the tract of land that is the subject of the Special
Permit application not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. The applicant shall submit the
following information to the Clerk of the Commission at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing:
evidence of the required mailing in the form of U.S. Postal Service Certificates of Mailing, a list showing the
names and addresses of the owners of all such properties, and a copy of the notification form which was
mailed to the land owners. The owners and their addresses shall be determined from the latest real estate list of
the Town in the Tax Assessor’s Office.
5. The applicant shall post signage on the premises in accordance with the requirements of these regulations.
6. Following the public hearing, the Commission may disapprove, modify and approve, or approve the
application as submitted.
7. In granting a Special Permit, the Commission may stipulate such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to
protect or promote the public health, safety or welfare; property values; the environment; sound planning and
zoning principles; improved land use, site planning and land development; or better overall neighborhood
compatibility.
8. Where the Commission finds or has reason to believe that circumstances or conditions upon which a Special
Permit is warranted may change over time, the Commission may limit the time during which the Special
Permit shall remain valid and may cause the review and substantiation of the justifying circumstances or
conditions at periodic intervals or when occupancy or tenancy of the premises changes.
9. Before the Commission approves a Special Permit, it shall determine that:
a. The accompanying Site Plan application is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these
Regulations, and
b. The activity for which the Special Permit is requested complies with the conditions established in Section
VIII of these Regulations.
10. Whenever the Commission acts upon a Special Permit, it shall state upon its records the reason for its decision.
11. A special permit granted by the Commission shall become effective upon the filing of a copy, certified by the
Commission, in the land records of the Town, in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-3d.
12. Any approved Special Permit shall become null and void if the Special Permit is not recorded on the land
records within 12 months of the date of approval by the Commission.
13. A special permit may be amended in like manner as provided above for the granting of a special permit.
14. Any use for which a Special Permit has been granted shall be deemed to be a permitted use in the zone in
which such use is located provided that such approval shall affect only the specific activity for which such
approval was granted.
105
D. SITE PLAN APPLICATION
1. When Required
Site Plan applications shall be submitted on forms supplied by the Commission for:
a. Any construction, development or change of use of buildings or structures; or
b. Any expansion, or exterior alteration of a building or structure; or
c. Any alteration in site improvements such as parking, pedestrian and vehicle circulation, public utilities and
landscaping:
i. Designated in the Regulations as requiring Site Plan Approval.
ii. For any residential use, involving a building to house three (3) or more families.
iii. For any nonresidential use, except farming.
2. When May Be Waived
a. Site plan applications shall not be required for the following activities unless, in the judgment of the
Zoning Enforcement Official, the Town Planner and the Director of Public Works/Town Engineer, the
proposed changes materially affect the character of the site or building or that of adjoining properties:
i. Installation of siding overlays on buildings.
ii. Introduction, removal or enlargement of doorways and windows within exterior building facades.
iii. Where as-built plans differ from approved preconstruction plans.
iv. Addition or removal of minor decorative site or building features, such as arches, lampposts and
railings, or awnings and canopies over doors and windows.
v. Installation of HVAC equipment on roof or ground if screened from public view.
vi. Installation or removal of loading platforms.
vii. Minor building and site changes in the rear yards of commercial and industrial premises or if
otherwise shielded from public view.
b. When an unsafe building exists or when emergency measures are required under Sections 124.0 and 125.0
of the State of Connecticut Building Code, as amended, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall have the
authority to waive, in writing, the requirement for submission of a site plan:
i. For a period of thirty (30) days so that the owner can prepare a site plan application.
ii. Entirely if the maintenance and repair which is required does not involve a change of existing design,
exterior materials or scale or outward appearance.
c. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall submit to the Commission a description of any insignificant
change authorized under the provisions of this section and shall cause plans and drawings documenting
such changes to be entered as part of the Commission's records.
106
3. Requirements
a. Applications for Site Plan Approval shall be accompanied by sixteen (16) copies of detailed plans for
review by the Commission and its designees that comply with the requirements of Appendix A.
b. The Commission may require the submission of additional information as is deemed necessary to make a
reasonable review of the application.
4. Standards
a. Before the Commission approves a Site plan, it shall determine that the application is in conformance with
the applicable provisions of these Regulations.
b. In its action with respect to any application, the Commission shall give particular attention to the
following characteristics of the plan:
i. The location and design of buildings and landscaping on the site.
ii. The extent and arrangement of parking facilities, entrances and exits.
iii. The compliance with the performance standards.
iv. The availability of adequate sewerage and water supply.
v. Conformity with any other applicable laws, codes or ordinances.
vi. The recommendations, if any, of all solicited departments, boards and commissions.
c. In approving a Site Plan application, the Commission may impose conditions deemed necessary to protect
the public health, safety, welfare, convenience, and property values.
d. The Commission may require that a bond be posted before any Building Permits are issued for the
activities shown on the approved plan, in an amount and form acceptable to the Commission, to ensure
that the plan is implemented.
5. Following Approval
a. Two fixed-line mylar copies of the approved Site Plan(s) shall:
i. Indicate the approval of the Commission by the signature of its Chairman.
ii. Bear a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and of all other town regulatory agencies
authorizing the activity.
iii. Be filed in the office of the Building Official before any Building Permits are issued for the activities
shown on the approved plan.
iv. Where the activity involves issuance of a special permit, a second mylar, identical to the first shall be
filed by the applicant in the Office of the Town Clerk.
b. An approved plan shall become null and void unless:
i. Construction of building is in progress and not less than fifty percent (50%) of building foundations
are completed within one (1) year of the date of approval of such plan.
ii. An extension of time is granted by the Commission, in writing.
c. Bonds will not be released until:
i. The release has been requested, in writing, by the developer,
ii. The Town Engineer has submitted a letter stating that all required improvements have been
satisfactorily completed and that all conditions and requirements of the Commission's approval have
been satisfied.
iii. The applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Commission, through submission of a set of
detailed "Record" plans on mylar, that all public improvements are in accordance with submitted site
plans.
d. Proposed modifications to approved site plans shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Official for
review. Minor changes may be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Official or submitted to the
Commission for review. Major changes (additional building area, alteration of building location) shall be
submitted to the Commission for additional review.
E. CHANGE IN USE OR STRUCTURE APPLICATION
1. Unless waived by the Commission, a Change In Use application shall be submitted when a land or building
use is proposed to be changed to a use that has different requirements in these regulations for setbacks,
parking, coverage, or other requirements.
107
2. A Change In Use Application shall meet the same standards and be treated as a Site Plan application unless the
regulations clearly indicate that it should also be treated as a Zone Change application, Special Permit
application, or similar application.
F. AMENDMENTS TO ZONING REGULATIONS
1. Applications to amend these Regulations shall be submitted on forms supplied by the Commission for any
proposal to amend, change, or repeal any section of these Regulations.
2. Applications may only be submitted by property owners, residents or persons having an interest in land in
Town, or by the Commission on its own initiative or by petition.
3. Any petitions for text amendment shall be submitted on forms prescribed by the Commission and shall be
accompanied by the following:
a. 16 copies of the precise wording of the existing and proposed text, and
b. The appropriate application fee, except that the Commission shall be exempt from any application fee.
4. Any amendment or change may be adopted only after due notice and public hearing in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
5. Before approving any amendment to these Regulations, the Commission shall determine that:
a. The public health, safety, welfare, or property values will not be adversely affected.
b. The proposed change will not hinder the attainment of the purposes of these Regulations.
6. No petition for amendment which has been rejected by the Commission shall be heard again within one year
from the date of rejection except that the Commission may grant a re-hearing before one year if it finds, on
facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this action in the interest of the public
as well as the petitioners. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a
material change in the situation for the purpose of this section.
G. ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION
1. Zone Change applications shall be submitted on forms supplied by the Commission for any proposal to alter
the zoning designation of any parcel or parcels of land or parts thereof.
2. Applications shall be signed by the affected property owner(s) or shall be initiated by the Commission on its
own initiative or by petition.
3. Applications for Zone Change shall be accompanied by sixteen (16) copies of a map for review by the
Commission and its designees that comply with the requirements of Appendix A.
4. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications for a Zone Change.
5. The applicant shall mail by certificate of mail, return receipt requested, notice to all owners of land within
three hundred (300) feet of the tract of land that is the subject of the Zone Change application at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing and submit such certificates of mailing to the Clerk of the Commission at least five
(5) days prior to the hearing date.
6. The applicant shall post signage on the premises in accordance with the requirements of these regulations.
7. Following the public hearing, the Commission may disapprove, modify and approve, or approve the
application as submitted.
8. Before the Commission approves a Zone Change, it shall determine that:
a. The proposed change is in accordance with the Plan of Conservation & Development,
b. The proposed change is in conformance with the purposes of the Regulations,
c. The location of, and activities permitted within, the new zone will not adversely affect the public health,
safety, welfare, or property value, and
d. The property is suitable for the intended use.
9. The Commission shall not have to rehear a zone change application that has been rejected within one year
from the date of rejection unless it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation
justifies this action. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material
change in the situation for the purpose of this section.
10. Upon approval of a zone change by the Commission, the applicant shall submit two (2) black-line Mylar
transparencies of the boundary survey and zone change which shall bear a copy of the decision letter of the
Commission and the effective date of the zone change.
11. Following signature by the Commission Chairman, the signed fixed-line mylar transparencies shall be filed by
the applicant in the office of the Town Clerk and in the office of the Engineering Division prior to the effective
date of the change.
108
H. TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICATION
1. Basic Documentation -– In addition to the basic requirements of these Regulations for a Site Plan Application,
the applicant may be required to submit:
a. Documentation that it is a licensed carrier authorized by the Federal Communications Commission to
construct, and operate, and provide telecommunication services from the proposed type of facility.
b. Documentation that municipal and public safety departments were offered the opportunity to locate their
facilities on the proposed telecommunications tower.
c. A copy of any proposed lease(s) or agreements for the proposed facilities.
2. Site Selection Information - The Commission may require that any application include the following:
a. Maps showing:
i. The extent of planned communications coverage in Wethersfield and adjacent communities including
detailed propagation (at –70 dBm and –95dBm) and antenna separation analysis,
ii. The location of existing telecommunication facilities,
iii. The location of the site search area at 1:24,000 scale, and
iv. The location and service area of the proposed facility.
b. A written narrative describing the following:
i. The need for the proposed facility (coverage, signal strength, other);
ii. The search criteria utilized,
iii. The siting criteria used for the proposed facility, sites identified (alternatives), and reasons for the
selection of the proposed site.
iv. The process by which other possible sites in the search area were considered and/or eliminated for
legal, technological, economic, environmental, or other reasons.
3. Site Design Information - The Commission may require that any application include the following:
a. A written narrative describing the following:
i. A description of the proposed telecommunications facility and any associated equipment (such as
transformer, emergency generator),
ii. The design criteria used for the proposed facility including provisions for additional service providers
in the future;
iii. Reasons for the selection of the proposed design (tower, antenna) and the process by which other
possible designs and technological alternatives were considered and/or eliminated for legal,
technological, economic, or other reasons,
iv. How the proposed facility complies with the concepts of multiple use, concealment, and reducing the
need to construct additional telecommunication towers;
v. How additional service providers may be accommodated in the future; and with potential effects on
the characteristics of the facility and the surrounding environment,
vi. Any requirements of other government agencies regarding illumination, colors, airport approach
surfaces, or other requirements.
b. Maps showing:
i. The proposed facilities and closest occupied buildings,
ii. Proposed access including nearest public street, and
iii. Any other land uses on the proposed site;
iv. A recent aerial photograph at a scale of 1:2400 showing the proposed facility location and
surrounding areas within 1,000 feet of the proposed facility,
c. Drawings showing:
i. Scaled elevation drawings of the proposed facilities (including tower, existing and proposed antenna
mounting locations, ice shields, lights, guy cables, associated equipment shelters, and other structures
relevant to the facility),
ii. The number and type of antennae that can be accommodated (proposed and future, if known) as well
as the proposed location of all mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum
separating distances for antennas,
iii. Topographic profiles at no more than 10-foot contours (running up/down slope and cross slope, at a
minimum) showing the location of the proposed facilities and sight lines in relation to surrounding
areas and structures within 500 feet,
109
iv. A colored plan or plans clearly indicating the proposed color of any existing features or proposed
facilities or equipment
v. Architectural or photographic rendering of the proposed facility.
4. Additional Relevant Information - The Commission may require that any application include the following:
a. A written statement by a certified radio frequency engineer:
i. Indicating the radio frequency electromagnetic power densities at the tower base and nearest property
boundary of all proposed and possible future antennae, equipment, and facilities operating at
maximum power calculated in accordance with FCC OET Bulletin 65 Edition 97-01, as amended,
ii. Stating that the facility will comply with federal emissions standards, and
iii. Describing the impact on public health and safety associated with radio emissions (signal frequency,
intensity, electro-magnetic radiation power density from all antennas operating simultaneously at
maximum output power);
b. A written statement by a certified structural engineer describing the tower structural integrity;
c. Consideration of future use or re-use of the site with provisions for facility removal and site restoration;
d. Proof of mailing of a copy of the legal notice regarding the proposed telecommunications facility to
property owners within 500 feet of the proposed facility at least ten days prior to the public hearing.
10.2. Administration By Staff.
A. ZONING PERMIT
1. No building or structure or any addition or alteration thereto shall be erected, moved, occupied or used, in
whole or in part, for any purpose until an application therefore has been approved by the Zoning Enforcement
Official.
2. A Zoning Permit shall also be required for any establishment, change, extension, or alteration of a use.
3. All applications for zoning permits shall be on a form provided by the Zoning Enforcement Official.
4. The Zoning Enforcement Official may require submission of a plot plan (as described in Appendix B)
showing:
a. The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon,
b. The size of the building to be erected,
c. The location of existing and proposed buildings upon the lot,
d. The dimensions of all open spaces,
e. The established building lines within the block, and
f. Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of these Regulations.
5. Such plot plan shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor unless the proposed yard dimensions clearly
exceed, in the judgment of the Zoning Enforcement Official, the required minimum yard dimensions by
twenty-five percent (25%) or more.
6. In all cases where these Regulations require approval of applications and/or plans by the Commission, no
Zoning Permit shall be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Official except upon authorization of, and in
conformity with, plans approved by the Commission.
7. No Zoning Permit shall be issued unless the Health Officer, Town Engineer, Fire Marshal, and Town Planner,
or their agent(s) have approved any matters related to their jurisdiction.
8. A Zoning Permit authorizing occupancy of any building or part thereof or for any use of the premises shall be
issued only after completion of all public improvements and safeguards shown on the approved plan unless the
Town Engineer allows the incomplete improvements and safeguards to be secured by cash or certified check in
an amount acceptable to the Town Engineer.
9. No Zoning Permit authorizing occupancy shall be issued for any dwelling unit until such building is made
accessible to vehicular traffic on a year-round basis and the street number is visible from a public street.
10. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, or use of a building for which a
Zoning Permit has been issued or for which plans were filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission before
the effective date of these Regulations.
11. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within 6 months after
issuance of the permit, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 6 months after the
time of commencing the work.
12. A record of all zoning permits shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Official.
110
B. HOME OCCUPATION / ACCESSORY APARTMENT
As part of any application to establish a home occupation or an accessory apartment, the following documentation
shall be provided:
1. A letter describing how the home occupation or the accessory apartment will comply with the applicable
requirements of Section 3.5.2 and 3.5.3.
2. Two sets of floor plans, drawn to scale, indicating the interior use of the building after the establishment of the
home occupation or accessory apartment with a calculation of floor area for the existing home and accessory
use.
3. If deemed necessary by the Zoning Enforcement Official , two sets of a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the
location of structures on the parcel, the utilities to service the home and accessory use, parking and drive areas,
and any other pertinent information, both existing and proposed.
4. If exterior building modifications are proposed, two sets of building elevations, drawn to scale, indicating the
exterior appearance of the building both before and after the establishment of the accessory use, the type and
color of siding existing and proposed, and other similar features.
5. A copy of the deed for the subject parcel.
C. FLOOD PLAIN ADMINISTRATION.
1. For any land use or development activity in a floodplain, the Zoning Enforcement Official shall:
a. Review all permit applications to determine that the proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
b. Advise permittees that additional federal or state permits may be required.
c. Record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved or flood-proofed structures.
d. Obtain certification from a Connecticut registered professional engineer or architect when flood- proofing
is utilized for a particular structure.
e. Require applicants to provide such information as is necessary to establish certification of compliance.
f. Maintain a record of such applications.
g. Provide the Commission a report on each application approved and certified, specifying the nature of the
application, the location of the property and the essential details which establish compliance.
2. For any land use or development activity in a floodplain involving alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the
Zoning Enforcement Official shall also:
a. Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Environmental Protection, Water Resources Unit.
b. Provide evidence of notification to FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency).
c. Ensure that maintenance shall be provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so
that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
3. In considering applications for development in portions of the flood plain for which base flood water surface
elevation or floodway data are not provided by the Flood Insurance Study, the Zoning Enforcement Official
shall obtain, review and utilize any flood elevation or floodway data available from Federal, State or other
sources, the accuracy of which is certified by a registered professional engineer or by the supplying agency,
until such data are provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
4. When utilizing data other than that provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Zoning
Enforcement Official shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen
for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without increasing the water
surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any point.
111
10.3. Enforcement.
A. AUTHORITY
1. These Regulations shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Official as the Commission’s duly authorized
agent for enforcement of these Regulations.
2. The Zoning Enforcement Official is hereby authorized to inspect and examine any building, structure, place, or
premises and to order, in writing, the remedying of any condition found to exist there in violation of any
provision of these Regulations.
B. VIOLATIONS
1. If the Zoning Enforcement Official shall find that any of the provisions of these Regulations are being violated,
he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation, and
ordering the action necessary to correct it.
2. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall:
a. Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, structures, additions, alterations, or structural
changes thereto,
b. Order discontinuance of any illegal work being done, or
c. Take any action authorized by these Regulations to ensure compliance with, or to prevent violation of, its
provisions.
3. The Zoning Enforcement Official may institute an action or proceeding to prevent the erection, construction,
alteration or conversion of any building or structure or the use of any building, structure or land in violation of
any provision of this chapter.
4. The Zoning Enforcement Official may institute an action or proceeding to restrain, correct or abate such
violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building or prevent any illegal act conduct, business or use in or
about such premises.
5. Penalties for illegal acts shall be as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes.
6. The owner, agent, lessee, or tenant of a building or premises or any part thereof where a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall have been committed or shall exist or shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine as provided by Town ordinance or other regulation.
10.4. Zoning Board Of Appeals.
A. ESTABLISHMENT
A Zoning Board of Appeals, hereinafter called the Board, shall be formed and shall serve as provided by the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
B. DUTIES
The Board shall have the following powers and duties, which shall only be:
1. To adopt such rules and procedures as may be necessary to carry out its responsibilities under these
Regulations.
2. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in an order or decision of the Zoning
Enforcement Official in the enforcement of these Regulations.
3. To vary the application of these Regulations, subject to the provisions of this Section of these Regulations;
a. In harmony with the general purpose and intent of these Regulations,
b. With due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convenience and property values,
c. Solely with respect to a parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel, but not
affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of such regulations would result
in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship,
d. So that substantial justice will be done and the public safety and welfare secured.
4. Such other powers and duties as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes.
112
C. PROCEDURES
1. Applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Official on forms prescribed by the Board and with
supporting plans, materials, and other information required by these Regulations no later than 15 days before a
regularly scheduled meeting.
2. Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee.
3. An appeal from any order or decision of the Zoning Enforcement Official must be taken within 15 calendar
days of the date of receipt of such order or decision.
4. The Board shall hold a public hearing on all appeals and applications and such proceedings shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes.
5. The applicant shall mail by certificate of mail, return receipt requested, on a form provided by the Town,
notice to all owners of land within three hundred (300) feet of the tract of land that is the subject of the appeal,
variance or other application not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. The applicant shall submit
the following information to the Clerk of the Commission at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing:
evidence of the required mailing in the form of U.S. Postal Service Certificates of Mailing, a list showing the
names and addresses of the owners of all such properties, and a copy of the notification form which was
mailed to the land owners. The owners and their addresses shall be determined from the latest real estate list of
the Town in the Tax Assessor’s Office.
6. The applicant shall post signage on the premises in accordance with the requirements of these regulations.
7. With regard to an appeal from any order or decision of the Zoning Enforcement Office, the Board, to the extent
in conformity with the terms of this Regulation, may:
a. Reverse, affirm, or partly affirm the order or decision,
b. Modify the order or decision, or
c. Make such order or decision as ought to be made, and to that end shall have powers of the administrative
official from whom the appeal is taken.
8. The concurring vote of four members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Enforcement Official, to decide in favor of the
application of any matter upon which the board is required to pass under these Regulations, or to vary the
application of these Regulations.
9. In granting a variance, the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with these
Regulations.
10. Where the Board finds or has reason to believe that circumstances or conditions upon which a variance is
warranted may change over time to the detriment of public health, safety or general welfare, it may limit the
time during which the variance shall remain valid and cause the review and substantiation of the justifying
circumstances or conditions at periodic intervals or when occupancy or tenancy of the premise changes.
11. Any action required of the appellant as a result of decisions or orders of the Board must be taken within the
time affixed by said Board.
12. Approval of a variance under this Section shall be conditioned upon the applicant's filing of the variance on the
Wethersfield Land Records as required by the Connecticut General Statutes following publication of the notice
of the approval.
13. Any action required of the appellant as a result of variances granted by the Board must be taken within one
year from the effective date or the variance shall become null and void.
14. No petition for a variance which has been rejected by the Board shall be heard again within one year from the
date of rejection except that the Board may grant a re-hearing before one year if it finds, on facts presented in
writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this action in the interest of the public as well as the
petitioners. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material change in
the situation for the purpose of this section.
D. VARIANCES
No variance of the strict application of any provision of these Regulations shall be granted by the Board unless it
finds all of the following:
1. That there are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land or building for which the variance is
sought which:
a. Are peculiar to such land or building and do not apply generally to land or buildings in the neighborhood
or in the zoning district at large,
113
b. Have not resulted from any act, of the applicant or anyone in privity with the applicant, subsequent to the
adoption of these Regulations whether in violation of these provisions or not,
c. Are not temporary in nature, and
d. Preclude the use of the property for that which it is reasonably adapted.
2. That the aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the literal enforcement or strict application of the
provisions of the Regulations would:
a. Result in exceptional difficulty,
b. Result in unusual hardship,
c. Deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district, or
d. Deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land.
3. That the difficulty or hardship complained of:
a. Is caused by the restrictions contained in the Regulations,
b. Was not created by the applicant or any predecessor in title, and
c. Is not primarily financial in nature.
4. That the use applied for is not impliedly or expressly prohibited by the Zoning Regulation.
5. That these circumstances justify the granting of the variance.
6. That the granting of the variance:
a. Is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or buildings,
b. Is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose,
c. Will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege or use that is denied by these Regulations to other
lands, structures, or buildings in the same district,
d. Will be in harmony with the purposes and intent of these Regulations,
e. Will accomplish substantial justice,
f. Will not be injurious to the neighborhood, and
g. Will not be otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare.
E. VARIANCES TO FLOOD PLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
1. A variance shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
2. If a variance in a flood plain is granted, the Board shall notify the applicant in writing over their signature that:
a. The issuance of such variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance, and
b. Construction below the base flood level increases risk to property and life.
3. The Zoning Board of Appeals will maintain a record of all such flood plain variance actions, including
justification for their issuance and report such variances issues in the annual report submitted to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
F. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR USE VARIANCES
1. A variance shall not be granted which would permit a use that would not otherwise be allowed unless the
applicant demonstrates that no reasonable use of the subject property is possible under any permitted use.
2. No use variance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals which would permit:
a. A use prohibited either implicitly or explicitly by these Regulations;
b. The expansion of a non-conforming use;
c. Any multi-family use or development by way of variance in any zoning district,
d. The number of dwelling units on a lot to exceed the maximum allowed in the zone in which the lot is
located; or,
e. A use otherwise allowed by Special Permit in the zone in which the use is located.
3. In instances where a use variance is proposed, written notice shall also be given, by registered or certified mail,
of said hearing, by the applicant to all owners of property abutting any boundary of the property which is the
subject of the application;
4. Prior to any action on a use variance the Zoning Board of Appeals shall submit the application for such use
variance to the Planning and Zoning Commission and any report submitted by the Commission shall be read at
the Public Hearing and be a part of the record of application.
114
G. LIMITATIONS
1. No non-conforming use of the neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district, and no permitted
or non-conforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the
issuance of a variance.
10.5. Validity & Effective Date.
A. REPEALER
1. Any previously enacted "Zoning Regulations of the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of
Wethersfield", and all amendments thereto are hereby repealed and replaced with these Regulations as of the
effective date hereof.
2. This repeal shall not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or
any liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the times such repeal took effect, but the same
may be enjoined, asserted, enforced, or prosecuted as fully and to the same extent as if such repeal had not
been effected.
B. SEPARABILITY
1. Should any phrase, clause, or section of these Regulations be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other phrase, clause or section
of these Regulations.
2. If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision of these Regulations to any use, land
or improvement to be invalid or ineffective in whole, or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to
the person, property or situation immediately involved in the controversy and the application of any such
provision to other persons, property or situations shall not be affected.
C. EFFECTIVE DATE
1. These Regulations, and any amendment or change hereto, shall be in full force and effect from the date
established by the Commission in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes.
115
APPENDIX A - SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
1. General Requirements
Each plan submitted shall:
1. Be prepared by, and bear the seal(s) of a licensed design professional as appropriate
for the type of drawing submitted,
2. Be on a sheet size of 24" by 36", 18” by 24”, or 11” by 17”.
3. be drawn to an appropriate scale generally as follows:
a. 20 feet to the inch (but not more than 40 feet to the inch) for a site plan
application,
b. Not more than 100 feet to the inch in the case of an earth removal application,
c. Not more than 200 feet to the inch for a zone change application
4. Contain a title block with property address, names of applicant and owner, date of
map, project name, proposed use and zoning district.
5. Contain a north arrow, graphic and written scales, and an approval block.
6. Contain n a location key map, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, showing the
property and all surrounding property, zoning districts, Town lines, and streets
within 500 feet.
7. Be updated to reflect the date, number, and content of any revision.
8. Contain a legend.
2. Site Plan Requirements
A. NUMBER OF DRAWING SETS
Sixteen (16) copies of site plans shall be submitted showing the following information.
B. PROPERTY SURVEY
1. Unless specifically waived by the Zoning Enforcement Official or the Commission, a
boundary survey shall be submitted showing the following information:
a. Certification and seal of a land surveyor licensed in the State of Connecticut,
b. Date of survey,
c. Property boundaries, locations of setback lines, and total acreage of the parcel.
d. Location and names of owners of record of abutting property and subdivisions,
including those located across public or private streets.
e. Location of all existing monuments and pins and the Town Line, where
applicable.
f. Lengths and directions of present property lines, with dimensions on all lines to
the hundredth of a foot; all bearings or interior angles to the nearest second, and
the central angle, tangent distance and radius of all curves.
g. Rights-of-way, easements, or other property encumbrances or appurtenances
including the names of the affected party and the volume and page where the
instrument evidencing such right is recorded in the land records.
2. A boundary survey, when required, shall conform to the Class A-2 requirement of
the Regulation for Connecticut State Agencies, Section 20-300b (Regulations) and
the Standards for Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut (standards) adopted
by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors, Inc.
116
C. SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
1. A site development plan shall show the following information :
a. The seal of a licensed land surveyor, professional engineer or a licensed
landscaped architect, as appropriate.
b. A zoning schedule clearly showing that the minimum requirements of the
Regulations for the applicable zone (lot area, coverage, yards, parking, etc.)
have been complied with.
c. A map showing abutting property owners within 300 feet.
d. A list of owners and mailing addresses within 300 feet.
e. An approval block for the signature of the Chairman of the Commission.
2. Natural Resource Information
a. Existing and proposed contours at two foot intervals or less to Class T-2
accuracy,
b. Existing waterbodies, water courses, swamps and marshes,
c. Accurate delineation of all soil types designated as Inland Wetlands,
d. Delineation of flood hazard areas,
e. Any existing trees greater than 12 inches in caliper.
f. Location of rock outcrops and tree lines.
g. Location of all flood boundaries.
3. Infrastructure Information
a. Existing and proposed water, sewerage, and natural gas systems.
b. Existing and proposed storm drainage systems (including pipe size, top of
frame, and invert elevations),
c. Existing and proposed electrical service systems.
d. Existing and proposed utility easements.
e. Proposed refuse disposal area(s) and screening details.
f. Design calculations for utility systems.
g. Location and size of all utility mains and services.
4. Development Information
a. Existing and proposed buildings.
b. Location, height, square footage, and dimensions of all existing and proposed
buildings and structures including walls, and fences.
c. Location, dimensions, areas, type, color, materials, and illumination of all
proposed exterior signs.
d. Location, height, design and intensity of all proposed exterior lighting.
e. Permanent elevation bench mark.
5. Traffic and Parking Information
a. Existing and proposed roads and driveways.
b. Location of loading and parking areas showing the number of spaces.
c. Proposed interior traffic circulation system, adequately designed to provide safe
accessibility to all required off-street parking as well as providing police and fire
protection to all structures, equipment and materials.
d. Proposed provisions for pedestrian traffic including concrete sidewalks and/or
easement where required by the commission.
e. Limits of areas to be permanently paved and provided with lip curbing, and
parking and planting islands.
f. Construction details for roads, drives, parking areas, curbs and other
improvements.
117
D. LANDSCAPING PLAN
A landscaping plan shall be submitted showing the following information unless
specifically waived by the Zoning Enforcement Official or the Commission:
1. The seal of a licensed landscaped architect or professional engineer, as appropriate.
2. Existing Conditions
a. Significant existing trees with a caliper of 12 inches or more,
b. Name, location and size of existing vegetation to be preserved ,
c. Present wooded areas indicated by a foliage line,
d. Existing stone walls,
e. Significant rock outcrops.
3. Proposed Conditions
a. Details of landscaping showing the type, common name, scientific name, size at
planting, number, location and extent of all proposed planting or vegetation, or
otherwise provided for on the site.
b. Buffer areas and means of screening development from the view of highway
traffic and neighboring property owners.
c. Other proposed landscape features.
4. Proposed measures for guaranteeing survival of proposed plantings.
5. Planned maintenance of landscaped areas.
6. A table which includes the calculations used to demonstrate compliance with the
landscaping requirements.
7. Relevant planting specifications.
E. ARCHITECTURAL PLANS
Architectural plans shall be submitted showing the following information unless
specifically waived by the Zoning Enforcement Official or the Commission:
1. The seal of a licensed architect.
2. Schematic architectural floor plans
3. Exterior building elevations for all building faces showing:
a. Proposed structures and/or changes to existing structures
b. All exterior building materials and colors, clearly labeled.
4. Proposed signage.
F. TECHNICAL INFORMATION
The following additional information shall be submitted unless specifically waived by the
Zoning Enforcement Official or the Commission:
1. Construction details, including cross-sections where appropriate, detailing the
construction of proposed sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, storm drainage
structures, and other site improvements.
2. Storm drainage data showing drainage areas and estimated run-off of the area to be
served by existing and proposed drainage facilities.
3. A timber cutting plan if site planning involves land within the Connecticut River
Assembly Conservation Zone.
118
G. DESIGN REVIEW.
The applicant shall prepare and submit adequate information to demonstrate compliance
with design guidelines and principles. The following items are required in addition to the
site plan prepared in accordance with these Regulations:
1. The applicant shall demonstrate how the criteria in Section 6.12 are achieved by
submitting street views of the property and surrounding properties showing
buildings, parking, loading and landscape areas in relationship to the public street
and adjoining properties.
2. The overall architectural design of the proposed structure(s), including elevations of
all exterior elevations, showing all fenestrations, signs and other architectural
features, including the color and style of the building materials (and samples, if
necessary) and any architectural peculiarities.
3. Color renderings, if necessary.
4. The height, locations, fixture design, and intensity of all exterior lighting; expected
illumination off the site.
5. The height, location and design of all signs.
6. Perspective drawings to show relationship after development of the site to off-site
features, if necessary.
7. Elevation drawings from all streets abutting the site with all proposed plantings
superimposed. Plantings shall be shown at the height at which they are proposed to
be installed. Applicant is also encouraged to provide elevations showing expected
height of plantings in ten years.
8. All artwork sculpture, fountains and other ornamental or decorative features visible
from surrounding properties.
9. All provisions for and design of the following appurtenances if visible from the
exterior:
a. Balconies, sunshades, awnings, louvers, roof leaders, downspouts, utility
lines/meters/boxes
b. Loading docks, loading spaces, stairs, ramps refuse storage and pickup areas,
visible mechanical equipment, flues, chimneys, exhaust fans
H. EROSION & SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS
Unless specifically waived by the Zoning Enforcement Official or the Commission, an
erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted clearly showing information as
required by the Wethersfield Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations.
I. POSSIBLE ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The following additional information shall be submitted if specifically requested by the
Zoning Enforcement Official or the Commission:
1. Traffic analysis or parking demand study of the proposed development. (12/8/08)
2. The Commission shall also have the right to request that any applicant conduct other
studies or impact analysis (including fiscal) that would allow the Commission to
adequately determine the potential impacts of the proposed development to the site
and to the community. (12/8/08)
3. Zone Change Map Requirements
1. An overall plan at no less than 100 scale for the entire parcel showing:
a. Boundaries of the property certified to an A-2 Survey standard.
b. Boundaries of the existing and proposed zoning.
119
c. the location of significant natural features (wetlands, watercourses, steep slopes,
flood plain) and other relevant information.
d. A key map to the scale of the then current zoning map showing the proposed
change.
2. Applications shall be accompanied by:
a. Three (3) copies of a Compilation survey map prepared at 24" x 36" at the same
scale as the Assessor's maps and,
b. The names, addresses and zip codes (when available) of all parcel owners as per
the latest Assessor's records, keyed by parcel number, and
c. The appropriate application fee, except that the Commission shall be exempt
from any application fee.
3. The maps shall show:
a. Existing zone district lines
b. Property for which the zone change is requested
c. A line representing areas within 500 feet in all directions from the parcel(s) for
which the change in classification is requested
d. Lots and streets lying wholly or partially within 500 feet in all directions
e. Lot or parcel numbering consistent with the system used by the Assessors office.
f. North arrow and location key map at a scale of 1" = 1000'
g. The Town line, when located within 500 feet of a proposed zone change
4. Earth Filling & Removal Plan Requirements
For applications involving the excavation, removal or filling of earth materials, the
following additional information shall be submitted unless specifically waived by the
Zoning Enforcement Official or the Commission:
1. The quantity of material to be removed,
2. The limits of the proposed excavation, removal, filling, grading or processing with
limit markers spaced a maximum of 200 feet apart and tied to the property boundary
and/or major reference points with accurate bearings and distances.
3. Detail of the proposed limit markers that shall equal or exceed 2" x 2" wood posts,
brightly painted extending minimum of two feet above the surface of the ground.
4. The proposed location of a permanent bench mark plus an additional permanent
elevation reference for every five acres, or part thereof.
5. Storm drainage data showing all existing and proposed drainage facilities to ensure
proper drainage of the premises both during and after completion of the proposed
operation.
6. Buffer areas and adequate provision for lateral support of adjacent properties.
7. Fences or embankments where necessary for the protection and safety of vehicular
and pedestrian traffic.
8. Proposed vehicular access to and egress from the site and proposed work roadways
within the site.
9. The limits of any proposed processing and the specific location of any proposed
processing equipment.
10. Location of top soil test pits together with individual soil profiles.
120
APPENDIX B - PLOT PLAN REQUIREMENT
1. Scale 1" = 20' (with bar scale)
2. Date
3. Title block with:
a. Title of map or plan
b. Purpose of plan or proposed use (i.e. Site plan, subdivision, etc. )
c. Owner's name
d. Developer
e. Company name
f. Revision block
4. Surveyor's or Engineer's seal, signature, A-2 statement, etc.
5. All perimeter dimensions, bearings or angles
6. Lot corner pins or monuments set, found, to be set, etc.
7. North arrow
8. Adjoining property owners
9. Key map
10. Variances with volume and page indicated
11. Outline of building showing complete zoning compliance
12. Zone occupied
13. Lot area
14. Building area and usage of existing or proposed structures
15. Building line
16. Side yard set backs
17. Rear yard set back
18. Any existing or proposed easements on the property , include dimensions and bearings
19. 100 year flood zone, or flood zone it occupies
20. Wetlands limits, if any
21. Map references, if any
22. Basement floor elevation
23. First floor elevation
24. Garage floor elevation
25. Contours, include existing and proposed
26. Street name, address or lot number
27. Distances from house to property lines
28. Silt fence
29. Anti tracking pad
30. Check for tax or Town liens
31. Lot splits require two new separate plot plans, include deed references
121
APPENDIX C - DESIGN GUIDELINES
The following guidelines are intended to aid applicants in ensuring that their designs are in harmony
with the purposes of the Design Review Advisory Committee and the Planning and Zoning
Commission:
1. Relationship of Buildings to Site
a. All site components shall be organized in a coordinated, functional and safe manner and be
compatible with site features and nearby residential areas.
b. A unified design theme for building massing, exterior treatments and signage shall be
established.
c. The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable streetscape and to provide for adequate
planting, safe vehicular and pedestrian movement, and parking areas.
d. Parking areas shall be treated appropriately in relation to the building, the neighborhood, and
the community.
e. Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district, the height and
scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining
buildings.
f. Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations,
shall be underground.
2. Relationship of Buildings and Site to Adjoining Area
a. Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made compatible by such means
as screens, sight breaks and materials.
b. Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided.
c. Harmony in texture, lines and masses is required. Monotony shall be avoided.
3. Landscape and Site Treatment
a. Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and utility of a
development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification to topography will be
permitted where it contributes to good appearance.
b. Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall provide an inviting
and stable appearance for walking and, if seating is provided, for sitting.
c. Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas
and important axes, and provide shade.
d. Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials
and by correlation with adjacent developments.
e. Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, and color and for its
ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous to the area and others that will be hardy,
harmonious to the design, and of good appearance shall be used.
f. In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic, they
shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices.
g. Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with landscaped spaces containing trees or
tree groupings.
h. Where building sites limit planting, the placement of trees in park-ways or paved areas is
encouraged.
i. Screening of service yards and other places that tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished
by use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of these. Screening shall be equally
effective in winter and summer.
j. Pedestrian walkways shall provide safe and convenient connections within the site and
between adjacent sites and shall be constructed of slate, brick, concrete or paving blocks but
shall not be gravel, earth or loose stone.
k. In areas where general planting will not prosper, other materials such as fences, walls, and
paving of wood, brick, stone, gravel, and cobbles shall be used. Carefully selected plants
shall be combined with such materials where possible.
122
l. Exterior lighting, where used, shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape.
Lighting standards and building fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible with the
building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness
avoided.
m. Existing trees at 4" or greater caliper shall be incorporated into the site plan.
n. For every 5 parking spaces, minimum of 1-3" caliper tree must be planted - Norway;
Crimson Maple; Pine Oak; Sycamore; and Black Locust.
4. Building Design
a. Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based
on the quality of its design and relationship to surroundings.
b. Buildings shall have good scale and be in harmonious conformance with permanent
neighboring development.
c. Structures have well articulated facades to reduce the appearance of bulk.
d. Rooflines shall be varied to provide architectural interest and be articulated with parapet
walls, gables, towers or a mansard roof.
e. Materials shall have good architectural character and shall be selected for harmony of the
building with adjoining buildings.
f. Materials, textures and color used on the exterior walls and roofs shall emphasize the use of
materials associated with New England style architecture. Materials shall be selected for
suitability to the type of buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings shall
have the same materials, or those that are architecturally harmonious, used for all building
walls and other exterior building components wholly or partly visible from public ways.
g. Materials shall be of durable quality.
h. In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall
be compatible within themselves and harmonious with their surroundings.
i. Building components such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets, shall have good
proportions and relationships to one another.
j. Colors shall be harmonious and shall use only compatible accents.
k. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or buildings shall be
screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be so
located as not to be visible from any public ways.
l. Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards, and all
exposed accessories shall be harmonious with building design.
m. Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards, and exterior work areas shall
be screened from view from public ways.
n. Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of
detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects,
variable siting or individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous appearance.
o. Prototype structures (the first new structure in an area which has been designated for a
particular character) shall reflect the desired character of the entire neighborhood.
5. Miscellaneous Structures and Street Hardware
a. Miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall be designed to be part of the architectural
concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale shall be
good, colors shall be in harmony with buildings and surroundings, and proportions shall be
attractive.
b. Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall meet the
standards applicable to site, landscape, buildings and signs.
6. Signs
a. Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and in its visual relationship to
buildings and surroundings.
b. Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to
which it principally relates.
123
c. Design and placement of signs shall consist of materials and colors that are coordinated with
the building facade design and materials, and lettering styles, sizes, and composition shall be
consistent and coordinated with the building architecture.
d. The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the
building and site to which it principally relates.
e. The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey
the sign's major message, and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign face.
f. Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises, and shall not compete for
attention.
g. Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos shall conform to the criteria
for all other signs.
h. Signs shall not advertise brand names or symbols of products unless 50% or more of the
floor space of the premises is directed to the sale or manufacturing of the product. Signs
shall not contain selling slogans or product descriptions.
7. Maintenance - Planning and Design Factors
a. Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of maintenance. The choice
of materials and their use, together with the types of finishes and other protective measures,
must be conducive to easy maintenance and upkeep.
b. Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for their
beauty. Proper measures and devices shall be incorporated for protection against the
elements, neglect, damage, and abuse.
c. Provision for washing and cleaning of buildings and structures, and control of dirt and
refuse, shall be included in the design. Configurations that tend to catch and accumulate
debris, leaves, trash, dirt and rubbish shall be avoided.
124
APPENDIX D - AMENDMENT DATES
Section Title Date
2.3
2.3
2.3
Definition of Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
Definition of Basement
Definition of Car Wash
9/26/08
9/26/08
10/18/05
2.3
2.3
Definition of Cemetery
Definition of Commercial Vehicle
5/6/05
10/15/10
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
Definition of Cost
Definition of Development
Definition of Dispensary Facility
Definition of FEMA
Definition of Finished Living Space
Definition of FIRM
Definition of FIS
Definition of Foot Candle (fc)
9/26/08
9/26/08
3/23/18
9/26/08
9/26/08
9/26/08
9/26/08
12/20/05
2.3 Definition of Full Cut Off 12/20/05
2.3
2.3
Definition of Functionally Dependent Use of Facility
Definition of Glare
9/26/08
12/20/05
2.3
2.3
2.3
Definition of Highest Adjacent Grade
Definition of Historic Structure
Definition of Luminaire
9/26/08
9/26/08
12/20/05
2.3
2.3
23
2.3
Definition of Manufactured Home
Definition of Market Value
Definition of Mean Sea Level
Definition of Mixed Residential and Commercial Uses
9/26/08
9/26/08
9/26/08
12/8/08
2.3
2.3
2.3
Definition of Rear Lot
Definition of Recreational Vehicle
Definition of Residential Development (High-Rise, Mid-
Rise)
Definition of Sheilding
8/7/07
9/26/08
6/8/10
12/20/05
2.3 Definition of Sign, Animated 1/15/08
2.3 Definition of Sign, Flashing 1/15/08
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
3.2.A.3
Definition of Sign, Portable
Definition of Substantial Improvement
Definition of Variance
Definition of Violation
Definition of Water Surface Elevation
Renting of Rooms
1/15/08
9/26/08
9/26/08
9/26/08
9/26/08
5/6/05
3.2.B.1 Open Space Development 5/6/05
3.2.E.5
3.2.1.E
Cemeteries
Congregate Resiential Development – Dimensional
Requirements- New Section - Building Height – 55 and
over – 3 Stories/45 feet
5/6/05
8/8/08
3.4
3.4
3.4.C.2.e
3.5
3.5.1.A.2
Special Residential Development – Various Changes
Special Residential Development – Various Changes
Special Residential Development – Added Congregate
Housing as permitted use
Accessory Uses – Commercial Vehicles -
Accessory Uses – Commercial Vehicles – 10,000 GVWR
5/6/05
6/18/10
8/8/08
5/6/05
9/1/09
3.5.1.A.2
3.5.1.A.2
3.5.1.A.3
Accessory Uses – Commercial Vehicles – Table Legend
Accessory Uses - Parking of Commercial Vehicles
Accessory Uses – Commercial Vehicles - ZEO
10/15/10
10/15/10
10/15/10
3.5.1.A.5 Accessory Uses – Commercial Vehicles - ZBA 10/15/10
125
3.5.1.A.6
3.5.1.B.3
Accessory Uses – Garage Area
Accessory Uses - Parking of RV’s and Trailers
5/6/05
5/6/05
3.5.1.B
3.5.5
Accessory Uses - Outside Storage
Commercial Vehicles
5/6/05
10/15/10
3.6.B.1 Accessory Buildings - Detached Garages 5/6/05
3.7.B.5 Dimensional Requirements - Building Additions 5/6/05
3.9
4.1.B.
Rear Lots
Agricultural Zone – Permitted Uses – Target Ranges
8/7/07
5/5/09
4.2
5.2.A.2
5.2.D.7
5.2.E.5
5.2.F.1
5.2.F.1
Floodplain Regulations – Various Changes
Business Zones – Permitted Uses - Mixed Residential and
Commercial uses
Business Zones – Permitted Uses - Medical Marijuana
Dispensary Facilities – TC Zone
Business Zones – Special Permit Use - Car Wash Facilities
in the GB and Rc Zones
Business Zones - Sit-down or take-out restaurants BP Zone
Business Zones – Permitted Uses - Restaurant with outdoor
dining BP Zone
9/26/08
12/8/08
3/23/18
10/18/05
05/17/11
05/17/11
5.2.H.3. Storage Facilities – Combined Subsections 3 and 4 – RC
and BP Zones – Special Permit
8/16/05
5.3.A.13
5.3.A.13
Business Zones - Accessory Uses – Other Accessory Uses
Business Zones - Accessory Uses – Commercial Vehicles
5/6/05
10/15/10
5.3.B
5.4.B.1
Business Zones - Accessory Buildings – Reference to
Section 3.6
Business Zones - Special Provisions – Silas Deane Vision,
Action Items and Design Guidelines
5/6/05
12/8/08
5.9
5.10
5.11
Business Zones - Car Wash Facilities
Business Zones - Mixed Residential and Commercial Uses
Business Zones – TC – Medical Marijuana Dispensary
Facilities
10/18/05
12/8/08
3/23/18
6.2.C.8.3
6.3
Parking and Loading Regulations – Minimum Parking
Requirements – Multi-Family Dwellings – Reduced
Parking Requirement from 2 to 1.5 spaces/unit
Signs – Various Changes
6/18/10
5/6/05
6.3
6.3
Signs – Various Changes
Signs – Temporary Signs – Special Event – Grand Opening
1/15/08
2/19/08
6.7
6.8
Appendix A.2.I
Outdoor Lighting
Refuse Storage
Site Plan Requirements - Possible Additional Information
12/20/05
5/6/05
12/8/08
TOWN OF WETHERSFIELD
SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS
EFFECTIVE DATE MARCH 16, 1955
AMENDED TO:
APRIL 12, 1968
MAY 31, 1968
APRIL 25, 1969
OCTOBER 7, 1969
MAY 16, 1972
APRIL 27, 1973
JANUARY 18, 1974
MARCH 7, 1975
JULY 4, 1975
SEPTEMBER 12, 1975
JANUARY 30, 1978
OCTOBER 23, 1978
JANUARY 7, 1986
FEBRUARY 15, 1991
JUNE 26, 2000
TOWN OF WETHERSFIELD
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
History: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Wethersfield as Secs.
1001 through C.1.5 of Chapter 3-2 of the Code of 1972. Sections 143-2,143--
4,143-6, 143-20 143-26D and 143-41 amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. Other amendments noted where applicable.)
ARTICLE I
§ 143-1. Purpose.
For the purpose of providing for orderly growth of the Town of
Wethersfield and establishing standards for the design and construction of
streets and improvements in new subdivisions and in accordance with the
provisions of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, the Planning
and Zoning Commission of the Town of Wethersfield hereby adopts the following
regulations for the subdivision of land, to become effective July 8, 1966.
§ 143-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of interpretation and enforcement of these regulations,
certain words contained herein shall be defined as follows:
COMMISSION - The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Wethersfield.
ENGINEERING DIVISION - The Engineering Division of the Town of Wethersfield.
RESUBDIVISION - A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision
or resubdivision if such change affects any street layout shown on such
map or affects any area reserved thereon for public use or diminishes
the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building
lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the
approval or recording of such map.
STREET - Includes and means streets, avenues, lanes or any right-of-way
dedicated or used for the purpose of public travel and, for the purpose
of these regulations, shall meet the minimum requirements set forth in §
143-6. (Amended 1-7-86)
SUBDIVIDER - The owner of record at the time of filing of an approved
subdivision plan or the person holding an option to purchase such land
or an agreement to purchase such land.
SUBDIVISION - The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3)
or more parts or lots made subsequent to the adoption of subdivision
regulations for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or
building development expressly excluding development for municipal,
conservation or agricultural purposes, and shall include resubdivision.
2
ARTICLE II
Requirements for Subdivision or Resubdivision
§ 143-3. Plan required.
No subdivision of land shall be made and no land in any subdivision
shall be sold or offered for sale and no street or utility construction shall
be started until a plan of subdivision, prepared in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations, has been approved by the commission and has
been filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 143-4. Effect on streets.
In the case of subdivisions requiring construction of new streets, any
existing street which provides either frontage to new lots or access to new
streets shall meet the minimum standards established and defined in S 143-6.
Where a subdivision requires expenditures by the town to improve existing
streets to conform to minimum requirements, the Commission may disapprove such
subdivision until the Town Council has approved such expenditures or until
other provisions have been made to assure that such existing streets will be
improved to the required minimum standards.
§ 143-5. Extension of public water.
The Commission shall require extension of public water to all subdivisions.
§ 143-6. Street specifications.
For the purpose of these regulations, streets shall meet the following
minimum requirements:
A. The layout of the street right-of-way shall have been approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall have at least one (1)
intersection with another town street or state highway.
B. The street right-of-way shall have a minimum width of fifty (50)
feet.(Amended 1-7-86)
C. The street shall be one that is not under consideration for
discontinuance or realignment by the authority having jurisdiction.
D. The street alignment and grades shall be in harmony with existing
and proposed streets and the pilot plan of development of the town
and shall conform substantially to these regulations.
E. Street construction (subbase and base courses) shall be sufficient to
carry safely and adequately potential future traffic computed on
the basis of land areas to be served and population density
based on zoning requirements.
F. Storm drainage disposal shall be adequate for present uses, and
additional storm drainage created by new subdivisions shall not
increase the town's obligation for additional storm drainage
3
disposal on existing streets or other private or public lands.
G. State highways shall be considered to meet the above standards.
H. No subdivision containing a provision for private streets shall be
approved. (Amended 1-7-86)
§ 143-7. Land to be usable for building purposes. (Amended 1-30-78)
All land to be subdivided shall be, or shall be capable of being
properly changed, in the judgment of the Commission, to such a character that it
can be used for building purposes without danger to public health or safety or
to the environment. Land subject to periodic flooding, poor drainage or
other hazardous conditions shall not be subdivided. Land with inadequate
capacity for sanitary sewage disposal shall not be subdivided unless connected
to public sewers. Plans for the subdivision of land shall conform to all
ordinances and regulations of the Town of Wethersfield, the town plan of
development, as may be amended, the overall storm drainage plan of the town
and all applicable state laws and regulations. (Amended 1-7-86)
§ 143-8. Sidewalks.
Provision shall be made for sidewalks in all subdivisions. Construction of
sidewalks is required on the subdivision side of existing streets without
sidewalks and on both sides of new subdivision streets, except that no
sidewalk will be required on permanent dead end streets less than six hundred
(600) feet in total length as measured from the street line of the
intersecting street to the center of the cul-de-sac. (Amended 1-7-86)
§ 143-9. Water and drainage provisions.
A. All subdivisions shall make adequate provisions for water
supply (both for domestic and for fire-fighting purposes),
hydrants, stormwater and sanitary sewage disposal and required
utilities and improvements. All utilities shall be installed
underground. All underground utilities shall be installed within
the right-of-way according to specifications outlined in these
regulations and as shown on Drawings No. 1 and 2 of § 143-43.
Conduits, wires, etc., for all underground utilities, whether for
immediate or future use, shall be installed during the
construction of the roadway.
B. In subdivisions to which underground utilities are to be
furnished from a public source, all necessary mains, branch offsets
to each lot and fire hydrants shall be installed by the subdivider,
as approved by
4
the corporation or municipal department having jurisdiction,
and to the satisfaction of the recognized authorities of the
town and without expense to the town.
C. An adequate subsurface stormwater drainage system for the
entire subdivision area shall be provided, unless in the
judgment of the Commission, the natural topography and/or
easy access to natural watercourses makes storm drainage
unnecessary. Storm drainage shall be carried to existing
watercourses or connect to existing storm drains and shall
conform to the town's overall storm drainage plans.
§ 143-10. Street lighting.
A complete street lighting system, including excavations, cable,
poles and fixtures approved by the operating utility company, shall be
installed without cost to the town. All costs relating to the
installation of this system, including all energy charges incurred until
the acceptance of the public utilities and improvements by the Town
Council, shall be those of the developer. Street lights shall be energized
prior to street acceptance where, in the opinion of the town, they are
required for reasons of safety. The developer shall make
arrangements with the utility company to have all street light costs
charged at the overhead rate. (Amended 1-7-86)
§ 143-11. Erosion and sedimentation control.
An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be provided as
part of any application for subdivision where the disturbed area of
development is more than one-half (1/2) acre. Such plan shall show
proper measures to control erosion and reduce sedimentation as set forth
in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil and Erosion Control, published by
the Connecticut Council on Soil and Water Conservation, January 1985, as
may be amended, and the specific requirements of § 143-24. (Amended 1-7-
86)
§ 143-12. Passive solar energy.
A plan of subdivision shall make provision for use of passive
solar energy techniques or demonstrate that such techniques have been
considered in the development of the plan. Site design techniques for
passive solar energy use shall include but not be limited to house
orientation, street and lot layout, vegetation, natural and man-made
topographical features and protection of solar access within the
development. (1-7-86)
§ 143-13. Sanitary sewage disposal
A. The subdivider shall install a complete sanitary sewer
system under the supervision of the Metropolitan District
Commission.
5
B. The subdivider shall install laterals from the sewer in the
street to the street property line of each building lot.
C. Any habitable buildings constructed in the subdivision shall have
house connections installed and shall have such connections
extended inside the building.
§ 143.14. Open space generally.
A. Except as provided in § 143-15C, a subdivision of any tract or
parcel of land containing ten (10) acres or more shall
provide public open space for parks and playgrounds or for
conservation, in places deemed proper by the Commission, at the
proportionate rate of one (1) acre for twenty-five (25)
families. Where a subdivision containing less than fifteen
(15) acres of land is located less than one-half (1/2) mile
from and readily accessible to public open space reserved for
such purposes and where there are no brooks, streams or other
natural features requiring preservation in open space, the
Commission may waive this requirement.
B. When only a part of such tract is to be developed immediately and
the subdivision shall agree to dedicate an area of land in the
undeveloped portion of such tract equal to the requirements for
open space in the developed portion and shall grant to the
town an option to accept such dedication when such
undeveloped portion is hereafter subdivided, then the
Commission may waive the requirements for immediate
provisions of open space in a subdivision which is a part of a
larger tract of land
C. Such open spaces shall abut or have direct access to a
public street through a right-of-way dedicated to public
use. The right-of-way shall not be included in the required
playground area, shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide and
shall be leveled off in a manner suitable for foot and
vehicle traffic, with a maximum grade of twelve percent
(12%).
D. When a property line of a subdivision abuts an existing
public open space, the Commission may require the new public
open space lines to form a continuation of the existing area to
provide a single large unified area.
E. No required public open space shall abut any town boundary
line of the Town of Wethersfield.
F. Required public open space shall be contained in a rectangle
whose average greatest dimension is not more than three (3)
times its lesser dimension wherever possible.
6
G. (1) Any subdivision or resubdivision application which
requires a provision for public or private open space
under the terms of this section shall contain a site
improvement plan for such public or private open
space, and such plan shall be subject to the approval of
the Commission.
(2) Except as otherwise permitted, in writing, by the
Commission, there shall be no depositing, dumping or
storage of waste or other natural or man-made
materials, supplies or equipment on any subdivision
land designated as open space. No work nor removal nor
filling shall be done nor shall the existing natural
characteristics of open space land be altered from its
original condition until a site improvement plan,
prepared by a competent professional person, shall have
been approved by the Commission.
(3) Land to be used as public or private open space shall be
left in condition for the purpose intended.
Undesirable growth and debris shall be removed from all
such areas. Wooded and brook areas should be left
natural, where appropriate. Open space shall be
graded to properly dispose of surface water and shall be
seeded in a manner directed by the Commission.
(4) Any security deposit or bond for the completion of
work shown on the public utilities and improvement
plan shall also be available for completion of public or
private open space requirements in the event of a default
of performance by the subdivider or his successor.
§ 143-15. Open space in Special Residence Zones.
A. In addition to land designated by the Commission as parks and
playgrounds under § 143-14, a subdivision plan submitted under
the Special Residence Zone shall provide additional land
dedicated for parks and playgrounds, or conservation in places
deemed proper by the Commission.
B. The purposes of such open space are to provide, through the
design and layout of streets, lots and open spaces:
(1) Conservation and improvement of natural features and green
areas, including areas along roads, the banks of rivers,
streams and lakes and ridgetops to provide visual
barriers to restrict urban sprawl.
(2) Provision, in appropriate areas of population
concentration, of areas of land for active recreational
use.
7
(3) Retention of fish and wildlife refuge areas and nature
observation areas; protection of the quality of water
bodies.
(4) Protection of natural drainage ways and floodwater
retention areas.
(5) The provision of adequate controls to assure the
permanence of open space use in areas so designated,
through public acquisition or by easement or other
suitable type of agreement.
C. Such areas shall contain not less than ten percent (10%) of the
gross area of the subdivision, and the proposed use
thereof, whether public or private, shall be stipulated on the
subdivision plan.
D. Such area, where approved by the Commission, may be retained in
private ownership, in which case the use of the open space
shall not be prohibited to any residents of the
subdivision.
E. Where private ownership of open space may be approved by the
Commission, such open space along watercourses and water
bodies shall be subject to easements to the town to permit
maintenance to preserve stormwater flow.
F. No single area required above shall contain less than one(1)
acre except that where, in the judgment of the Commission, a
smaller area is appropriate to a particular subdivision and
provides for the most desirable subdivision of land.
G. No subdivision containing a provision for private open space
shall be approved unless restrictive covenants burdening all the
related land in the subdivision have been approved by the
Commission, and the approved subdivision map shall not be
released by the Commission for filing with the Town Clerk
unless such approved restrictive covenants are filed
simultaneously with the subdivision map and unless such
restrictive covenants have priority over all other interests in
the land not specifically excused by the Commission.
H. In order to verify that the restrictive covenants referred to
in Subsection G are not subordinate to any unexcused
encumbrances, the subdivider shall provide a certificate of
title signed by an attorney and dated as of the date of
filing of such restrictive covenants.
§ 143-16. Reserved strips.
No privately owned reserved strips will be permitted which control
8
access to land dedicated to public use or which may be so
dedicated or which limit or control development potential of or
access to private lands. (Amended 1-7-86)
§ 143-17. Natural features.
Due regard shall be given to the preservation and
potential enhancement of existing natural features, large trees,
scenic points and other assets of a community nature.
§ 143-18. Commission approval for certain lots.
Where the total of lots under separate ownership and lots
occupied by buildings is greater than eighty percent (80%) of the
original number of lots in a subdivision, no plan of resubdivision
that results in a lot size substantially smaller than the typical
lot originally established shall be approved except by a twothirds
(2/3) affirmative vote of the Commission.
A R T I C L E I I I
Procedures and Plan Requirements
§ 143-19. Subdivider to be familiar with regulations.
Before submitting a proposal for the subdivision of land,
the subdivider shall familiarize himself with these regulations and
with any existing or proposed plans of the Commission or other
town authorities in the neighborhood of the land to be
subdivided that will have an influence on the street and/or
lot layout and the installation of utilities and storm drainage.
§ 143-20. Proposal to be submitted; application.
A proposal for the subdivision of land shall be submitted to
the Commission at any regular meeting of the Commission and shall
include all of the required information, maps, data, application
and fees. The engineering division may receive, for the
developer's convenience and for administration review as to
completeness, an application for subdivision approval prior to
the regular Commission meeting, provided that the date of
submission shall be considered to be the next following regular
meeting of the Commission or thirty-five (35) days after such
submission, whichever is sooner.
§ 143-21. Application fee. (Amended 10-23-78)
The fee for each application shall be fifty dollars ($50.00)
or ten dollars ($10.00) per lot, whichever sum is greater.
Editor’s Note: Preliminary Study Section (Deleted 1-7-86)
9
§ 143-22. Subdivisions within inland wetlands (Amended 10-23-78)
An applicant with a subdivision involving land regulated as an
inland wetland or watercourse shall file an application with the
Wethersfield Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission within ten (10)
days after filing such application with the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall give due
consideration to any report filed with it by the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission prior to rendering a decision on such application.
§ 143-23. Public hearing.
The Commission may hold a public hearing regarding any subdivision
proposal if, in its judgment, the specific circumstances require such
action. No plan of resubdivision shall be acted upon by the Commission
without a public hearing.
§ 143-24. Erosion and sedimentation control. (Amended 1-7-86)
A plan for erosion and sedimentation control shall contain but not
be limited to:
A. A narrative describing:
(1) The development.
(2) The schedule for grading and construction activities,
including:
(a) The start and completion dates.
(b) The sequence of grading and construction activities.
(c) The sequence for installation and/or application
of soil erosion and sediment control measures.
(d) The sequence for final stabilization of the
project site.
(3)The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and
sediment control measures and stormwater management
facilities.
(4) The construction details for proposed soil erosion and
sediment control measures and stormwater management
facilities.
(5) The installation and/or application procedures for
proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and
stormwater management facilities.
10
(6) The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil
erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater
management facilities.
B. A Site Plan Map at a sufficient scale to show:
(1) The location of the proposed development and adjacent
properties.
(2) The existing and proposed topography, including soil
types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies.
(3) The existing structures on the project site, if any.
(4) The proposed area alterations, including cleared,
excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed
structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new
property lines.
(5) The location of and design details for all proposed soil
erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater
management facilities.
(6) The sequence of grading and construction activities.
(7) The sequence for installation and/or application of
soil erosion and sediment control measures.
(8) The sequence for final stabilization of the development
site.
C. Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by
the applicant or requested by the Commission or its
designated agent.
§ 143-25. Plan to be certified; inspections.
A. Where an erosion and sedimentation control plan is required,
no building permits may be issued and no site work may be
started unless and until the erosion and sedimentation
control plan is certified by the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission of the Town of Wethersfield.
Certification shall be based upon compliance with the
principles, minimum standards and methods contained in the
Connecticut Guidelines for Soil and Water Conservation,
above, as judged appropriate by the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission. That Commission may refer an
erosion and sedimentation control plan to the Hartford
County Soil and Water Conservation District for review prior to
acting on a request for certification.
11
B. Measures undertaken in accordance with a certified erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be inspected periodically
during development to assure proper installation and
maintenance. Failure to install or maintain control
measures in a manner consistent with the certified plan
shall be grounds for issuance of a cease and desist order
applicable to those construction activities to which defective
or deficient control measures pertain.
§ 143-26. Subdivision plan specifications.
A. A subdivision plan shall contain all of the information
required in § 143-41 of Article VI of the Engineering
Division of the Town of Wethersfield, except that where all of a
parcel of land on an existing street is subdivided into not more
than three (3) lots, only the applicable data in § 143-41 of Article
VI need be furnished.
B. A subdivision plan shall be submitted in twenty (20) copies,
blue-line paper prints drawn at a scale of one (1) inch
equals forty (40) feet on the following sheet sizes:
twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x 36) inches, twenty-four by
eighteen (24 x 18)inches or eighteen by twelve (18 x 12)inches.
Where more than one (1) sheet is required, a key map at a
scale of one (1) inch equaling not more than two hundred
(200) feet shall be included on each sheet, with the lots
shown on the 40-scale map identified on the key map. (Amended 10-
23-78)
C. The subdivision plan shall be drawn in ink on .003-mil Mylar or a
reproduction of equivalent quality. Two (2) copies shall be
furnished to the Planning and Zoning Commission, at the
subdivider's expense. Affixed to this plan shall be a
transparent copy of the letters of approval from all
commissions and boards acting on said subdivision. (Amended 10-23-
78)
D. Application for approval of a subdivision plan shall cover
all of the land in a tract under one (1) ownership on the
effective date of this regulation.
§ 143-27. Public improvement and utilities map.
A plan-profile map or maps shall be considered a part of the
Subdivision Map and shall contain all of the information required
in Article VI of the "Design and Construction Standards for
Public Improvements" of the Engineering Division of the Town of
Wethersfield. Elevations shall be based on an indicated bench
mark referencing metropolitan district datum. Plans and profiles shall be
drawn at a
12
scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet horizontally and one (1)
inch equals four (4) feet vertically. Said map shall be no longer than
thirty-six (36) inches. The original shall be drawn in ink and a
reproducible Mylar supplied to the town of equivalent quality at the
subdivider's expense. (Amended 10-23-78)
§ 143-28. Drainage analysis maps. (Amended 1-7-86)
A drainage analysis map based on Coast and Geodetic Survey (CGS)
datum showing the tributary watershed at a scale of one (1) inch equals
two hundred (200) feet shall be furnished to the Engineering Division.
§ 143-29. Consideration and approval of plans.
A. No subdivision proposal shall be approved until all the
required plans, maps and data are complete to the satisfaction
of the Commission and Engineering Division.
B. The Commission shall approve, modify and approve or
disapprove any subdivision application or maps and plans
submitted therewith within sixty-five (65) days after the
submission thereof, unless the applicant shall consent, in
writing, to an extension of such time limit. The Commission
shall include in its minutes the reasons for disapproval of a
subdivision plan.
C. Upon approval of a subdivision plan, the Chairman or Clerk
shall sign the original linen or linens, and the Engineering
Division will procure the necessary copies for the town at
the subdivider's expense.
§ 143-30. Filing of approved plan. (Amended 10-23-78)(Amended 2-5-1991)
A. Notice of the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission
concerning a subdivision application shall be sent to the
applicant by certified mail within fifteen (15) days after
the decision is rendered. Within thirty (30) days after the
Planning and Zoning Commission approves a subdivision, the
subdivider shall submit to the Engineering Division two (2)
three-mil black line Mylar transparencies of the subdivision
map with affixed transparencies of letters of approval of
all town boards and commissions having rendered decisions on
matters related to the subdivision and bearing a block for
the endorsement and date of endorsement by the Chairman of
the Planning and Zoning Commission. Failure of the
subdivider to submit the two (2) Mylar transparencies of the
approved subdivision map within thirty (30) days of the date of
the Commission's approval shall cause such approval to become
null and void.
B. Upon receipt, the Engineering Division shall submit the
Mylar transparencies for endorsement by the Chairman of the
13
Commission. The subdivision map shall be available to the
applicant for filing as of the date of endorsement, subject to
the fulfillment of the requirements of § 143-31, and shall be
considered delivered as of the date of endorsement. As required
by the Connecticut General Statutes, approved plans for
subdivision must be placed on file in the office of the Town
Clerk within ninety (90) days of the date the Mylar
transparencies are endorsed by the Chairman of the
Commission.
§ 143-31. Final Subdivision Map. (Amended 10-23-78)[Amended 2-5-1991]
The Engineering Division shall hold the endorsed Mylar
transparencies of an approved plan of subdivision until the subdivider
submits the following to the Engineering Division.
A. A warranty deed covering all roads, easements, open space,
etc., to the town.
B. A certificate of title for the above.
C. A letter stating that the subdivider acknowledges that
although the town may record the deed and take legal title to
the public utility improvements, the recording and
acceptance of the deed will not constitute formal acceptance of
these improvements, which acceptance can only be
accomplished by action of the Town Council; the subdivider will
accept a reconveyance of any conveyance if the town so elects
at any time up to the time of formal acceptance of the
improvements by the Town Council.
D. A performance bond or bank book (including a signed withdrawal
slip) if building permits are desired.
E. An executed declaration of restrictions and covenants covering
the private open space, if any, in a form acceptable to the
Commission.
F. If the subdivider chooses to proceed under § 143-34A of the
subdivision regulations, he must also submit a covenant
prohibiting the sale of any lots until proper surety is
posted for that lot. Surety submitted must be approved by
the Town Manager as well as the Commission.
§143-32. Submission to Town Attorney; signing by Commission Chairman.
A. The Engineering Division will submit all the items mentioned
in § 143-31 above to the Town Attorney for his review and
approval. It is recommended that the subdivider's attorney
contact the Town Attorney prior to drafting the above
documents.
14
B. Upon approval of the Town attorney of the items referred to in §
143-31, the engineering Division will release the endorsed
Mylar transparencies to the subdivider for filing. (Amended 2-
15-91)
§ 143-33. Time extensions. (Amended 10-23-78)
The Planning and Zoning Commission may extend the time for filing
of plans for subdivision for two (2) additional periods of ninety (90)
days, and the plans shall remain valid until the expiration of such
extended time.
§ 143-34. Securities and bonds. (Amended 10-23-78) (6-26-00)
A. The Commission, in order to assure the Town of the
completion of all work and installations required by these
regulations, the public utilities and improvements plan of
subdivision, the public or private open space plan and the
stipulations of any subdivision approval, may require any
one (1) of the following methods for securing completion, or any
reasonable combination of them:
(1) The completion of all or a specified portion of such work
and installation before any lot of a subdivision is sold
and before any building permits are issued. Notice of
any requirement under this subsection will be filed
in the land records at the time the Subdivision
Map is filed.
(2) The deposit with the Finance Director of the town of
cash or of a certified check in an amount to be
specified by the Commission but in no event to exceed one
hundred and ten percent (110%) of the cost of completing
the required work and installations as estimated by
the Engineering Division of the town.
(3) An assessment method to be secured by lien against all
the real property of the project or such parts as the
Commission specifies. (Amended 6-26-00)
15
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall refer the matter of security
for completion of required work and installation to the Director of
Public Works or his designee for his recommendation and/or
comments.
C. Each security provision in this Article shall make provision for a
management fee to be paid to the Town of Wethersfield, which fee
shall be ten percent (10%) of the cost of completing any
required work or installation after default by the subdivider or
his successor.
D. The Commission shall specify with particularity in its minutes
the details of any security requirements and shall specify the time
or times within which such requirements are to be satisfied.
E. A performance bond and any cash security deposit filed
pursuant to these regulations shall not be released until the
Engineering Division has certified completion of the public
utilities improvements and applicable public or private open
space improvements in substantial accordance with the requirements
of the subdivision approval and the street or streets and public
open space and any required easements have been legally
accepted by the town. Application for release or reduction of
the security deposit and performance bond shall be made to the
Engineering Division for recommendation and/or advice. A
reduction of any bond or cash security deposit will be allowed only
if, after Engineering Division inspection, the Commission finds that
the remaining security or bond is adequate to cover the then
estimated cost of completion, plus ten percent (10%) of such cost.
In no event shall security delivered to the town for completion of
public improvements be reduced below twenty-five percent (25%)
of the amount of the total cost of improvements, as shown on the
cost estimate prepared by the Engineering Division, until acceptance
of the road and all public improvements by the Town Council has
been obtained. The decision on any application for a release or
reduction of a security deposit or bond shall be made by
the Commission.
F. Upon acceptance of the public utility improvements and release
of the bond by the Town Council, the subdivider will post a
maintenance bond with the Town Manager to be in force for a period
of one (1) year. The amount of the maintenance bond will be ten
percent (10%) of the total cost of the public utilities and
improvements, excluding sewer, water, gas, electricity, telephone
and any other similar utility.
G. The subdivider, if directed by the town, shall not install the
two-inch dense graded bituminous concrete wearing course
16
until eighty percent (80%) of the approved lots have received
certificates of occupancy.
H. If the town so orders, the subdivider shall have the option of
negotiating with the town for the purpose of having the town accept
payment in lieu of placing the finished pavement. The town
would then accept responsibility for the installation of this
pavement.
A R T I C L E I V
Improvements and Modifications
§ 143-35. Streets.
A. Proposed streets shall be appropriate to the topography and
location and shall conform to the objectives of the plan of
development and the Commission's tentative street layouts, where
they are developed. Street patterns shall give due consideration
to contours and nature features. Where required by the
Commission, provision shall be made for the extension of the street
pattern to abutting undeveloped property.
B. Permanent dead end streets shall generally not exceed six
hundred (600) feet in length as measured from the street line of
the intersecting street to the center of the cul-de-sac. Permanent
dead end streets shall terminate in one of the two following cul-desac
types as proposed by the developer and shown on the
subdivision/resubdivision application plan submittal: (Amended 1-7-
86) (Amended 6-26-00)
(1)A cul-de-sac street with a turnaround right of way of not less
than one hundred (100) feet in diameter without an island and
providing a paved diameter of not less than eighty (80) feet
wide.
(2)A cul-de-sac street with a turnaround right of way of not less
than one hundred and ten (110) feet in diameter with an island
of natural vegetation or landscaping in the center. The
island shall be thirty (30) feet in diameter providing a paved
circumferential lane not less than thirty five (35) feet wide.
C. Temporary dead-end streets, where required by the Commission or where
indicated on the plan, may exceed six hundred (600) feet in length
but in general shall provide required street frontage for not more
than twenty (20) dwellings. In such cases, the full width of the
right-of-way to the subdivision property line shall be dedicated to
the town, but the town will require only an easement to the
segments to the turnaround outside the normal road right-of-way
width.
D. The easement on segments of the turnaround shall provide that
the town or its agent may enter the property within such segments
for the purpose of continuing and removing turn-around improvement
17
when the street is to be extended.
E. Extensions.
(1) When a street ending in a temporary cul-de-sac is to
be extended as a continuance street, the subdivider
constructing such street extension shall be responsible for
and shall include in the bond all work related thereto,
including:
(a) Removal outside of the final paved road rightof-
way of all road materials and facilities not
needed and replacement with earth loam and
seeding as required.
(b) Extension of all utilities and improvements,
including sidewalks, where required.
(c) Repair and replacement of any change on public
or private property directly related to the
removal of the cul-de-sac, in accordance with
town standards and subject to the concurrence of
the abutting property owner to the extent that
his permission is needed to complete the cul-desac
repair and replacement on this private
property outside the temporary easement.
(2) The above work shall be completed within two (2)
months from the date of notification by the Director
of Public Works certifying that the existing culde-
sac is no longer needed.
F. Where a street may now or in the future carry other than the
neighborhood traffic and where shown on the plan of
development and tentative overall street layouts, a right-of-way
width greater than the required minimum may be required,
and such requirements will be determined by the Commission during
review of the preliminary plan. No street shall have a right-ofway
with less than fifty (50) feet.
G. The subdivision plan and the public improvement and utility map
of any proposed subdivision shall show all work required to
connect and complete the improvements and utilities between
proposed street pattern and any non-improved connecting
street in any existing subdivision.
§ 143-36. Lot layout.
Layout of lots shall conform to modern standard practices and
shall be appropriate for the intended construction. Corner lots shall
have extra width to permit a front yard on each street, which will be
required in all new subdivisions. Wherever possible, key lots shall be
used at the narrow end of a block. Side lot lines shall generally be at
right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
18
Except in cases of unusual topography or property lines, through lots
bounding on two (2) generally parallel streets will not be permitted.
§ 143-37. Planting of trees. (Amended 1-7-86)
All dead and diseased trees shall be removed from land to be
dedicated to public use. Existing trees in land required for public
open space, § 143-14 shall be preserved unless otherwise directed by the
Commission. Existing trees on building lots shall be preserved
whenever feasible.
§ 143-38. Construction specifications.
A. Streets.
(1) Streets shall be graded to the full width of the rightof-
way.
(2)Streets or curbs, gutters and sidewalks, where
required, shall be constructed in accordance with the
best modern practice, as more fully described in
Design and Construction Standards for Public
Improvements of the Engineering Division of the Town
of Wethersfield, which are included herein as § 143-42
and the materials shall meet the specifications of the
State of Connecticut Department of Transportation.
B. All storm drainage lines and structures shall be constructed
in accordance with the best modern practice, as more fully
described in Design and Construction Standards for Public
Improvements of the Engineering Division of the Town of
Wethersfield, which are included herein as § 143-43, and
materials shall meet the specifications of the State of
Connecticut Department of Transportation.
C. Sanitary sewer and water installation shall be made in
accordance with the standards and requirements of the
Metropolitan District Commission.
D. Where a site grading plan is required by the Commission,
land shall be brought to final grades shown, and lot grades
exceeding five percent (5%) or subject to erosion shall be
stabilized with an existing cover crop.
§ 143-39. Modification conditions. (Amended 10-23-78)
A. Where, in the Planning and Zoning Commission's judgment, the size
of the subdivision or specific conditions of
topography, property lines or proposals for development of
adjoining properties create conditions limiting the most
19
effective subdivision of land, the Commission may waive or modify
certain requirements under these regulations by a three -fourths
(3/4) vo te of all the mem bers o f t he Commission, provided
that the public interest and safety are not adversely affected and land
in the subdivision can be more effectively subdivided. The
Commission shall state upon its records the reason for which a
waiver is granted in each case.
B. Where conditions governing a subdivision or the time of year
construction indicate, in the judgment of the Engineering
Division, minor modifications in construction materials and
techniques, the Engineering Division may modify specific
construction requirements contained in § 143-41, 143-42 and 143-43
herein, in the interest of obtaining better work and/or
materials, provided that such modifications shall not increase the
scope of the work or conflict with the general purpose and intent of
these regulations.
A R T I C L E V
Enforcement
§ 143-40. Enforcement.
These regulations shall be enforced under the provisions of any
ordinance enacted in accordance with the General Statutes of
Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended.
ARTICLE VI
Design and Construction Standards for Public Improvements
§ 143-41. Data required to be furnished for the subdivision of land.
The following design and construction standards are hereby adopted
a n d m a d e p a r t o f t h e s u b di v i s i o n r e g u l a t i o n s o f t h e T o w n o f
Wethersfield:
A. Subdivision plan. A subdivision plan shall be so designated in
the title block and shall be prepared at a scale of one (1) inch
equals forty (40) feet in accordance with Class A-2 requirements of
the Code of Recommended Practice for Standards of Accuracy of
Surveys and Maps by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors,
Inc., and certified by a registered land surveyor in the State
of Connecticut. The plan shall show two (2) coordinate ties
referenced to the National Geodetic System and shall contain the
following:
Editor’s Note: Preliminary Study Section (Deleted 1-7-86)
20
(1) The name of the owner or owners or assignee,
subdivider, North point, scale of map and date and
revised dates.
(2) Boundaries of the subdivision from a boundary survey
conforming to Class D, as set forth by the Connecticut
Association of Land Surveyors, Inc.
(3) Total acreage of the parcel to the nearest tenth of an
acre.
(4) Names of abutting property owners and property lines
abutting the subdivision boundaries and proposed
street names.
(5) Indication of zones and zone boundary lines.
(6) Topography, flow line of watercourses and existing
structures and culverts.
(7) Layout of existing and new streets, buildings and
lots, public open spaces, easements and encroachment
lines with approximate dimensions.
(8) Proposals for furnishing improvements and utilities.
(9) In land of difficult topography, where most of the lots
are to be developed by the subdivider, a preliminary
site grading plan may be required.
(10) Where sewage disposal is proposed through septic
tanks, seepage and groundwater tests shall be made to
the satisfaction of the Director of Health, whose
report thereon shall be submitted with the preliminary
study.
(11) Data on streets, as defined in § 143-2 above, shall be
complete.
(12) A key map at a scale of one (1) inch equaling not more
than two hundred (200) feet shall show the street or
streets giving access to the subdivision extending to
the intersections of at least two (2) other streets.
(13) Layout of streets to be constructed with accurate
placement of merestones at all PT (point of tangency)
and PC (point of curvature) points and within sight of
the next nearest merestone. The merestone is to be
set in accordance with Class A-2 of the Connecticut
Association of Land Surveyor, Inc., and under the
direction of a Connecticut registered land surveyor.
Merestones shall be supplied by the Town of
21
Wethersfield at the developer's expense.
(14) Street names.
(15) All easements, rights-of-way and encroachment lines.
(16) building lines on all lots and side and rear yard
lines on odd-shaped lots. On curved streets, the
chord distance of the building line (front yard) shall be
shown.
(17) When more than (1) sheet is required, a key map of the
entire subdivision shall be included on each sheet.
B. The subdivider shall provide that all maps which show
horizontal and vertical dimensions data and the design of street
patterns and lot layouts and the staking of such data in the field
shall be performed by a land surveyor registered in
Connecticut, and such professional engineer shall:
(1) Supervise construction of all improvements and utilities
shown on such plans; and
(2) Submit for approval to the Engineering Division an asbuilt
drawing upon completion of all public
improvements. This plan shall be on a .003-mil Mylar and
certified by a Connecticut registered land
surveyor. Certification shall show the public utility
improvements in substantial agreement with the
approved public utility improvement plans.
C. The public utilities and improvements plan shall contain:
(1) The name of the owner or owners or assignee,
subdivider, North point, scale of map, and date and
revised dates.
(2) Boundaries of the subdivision from a boundary survey
conforming to Class D, as set forth by the Connecticut
Association of Land Surveyors, Inc.
(3) Total acreage of the parcel to the nearest tenth of an
acre.
(4) Names of abutting property owners and property lines
abutting the subdivision boundaries and proposed street
names.
(5) Indication of zones and zone boundary lines.
22
(6) Topography, flow line of watercourses and existing
structures and culverts.
(7) Layout of existing and new streets, buildings and
lots, public open spaces, easements and encroachment
lines with approximate dimensions.
(8) Proposals for furnishing improvements and utilities.
(9) In land of difficult topography, where most of the
lots are to be developed by the subdivider, a
preliminary site grading plan may be required.
(10) Where sewage disposal is proposed through septic
tanks, seepage and groundwater tests shall be made to
the satisfaction of the Director of Health, whose
report thereon shall be submitted with the preliminary
study.
(11) Data on streets, as defined in § 143-2 above, shall be
complete.
(12) A key map at a scale of one (1) inch equaling not more
than two hundred (200) feet shall show the street or
streets giving access to the subdivision extending to
the intersections of at least two (2) other streets.
(13) Plan-profile map or maps showing all streets to be
constructed with stations every fifty (50) feet, curve
data with vertical curve stations every twenty-five
(25) feet, widths of right-of-way paving and sidewalks
where required. Where required, in the judgment of
the Engineering Division, street intersections shall
be developed at a larger scale, showing catch basins
gutter, road center line, curb and sidewalk
elevations.
(14) Plan-profile maps may also show all utility lines,
encroachment lines and all easements for utilities,
drainage, walks and other rights-of-way with location,
size and inverts of existing and new culverts or the
entire drainage system, except for detail required in §
143-41C(13) above, may be shown on a separate map at a
scale of one (1) inch equaling not more than forty
(40) feet.
(15) Drainage analysis map shall show the tributary
watershed area and downstream area affected by runoff.
Drainage computations shall consider the entire
watershed area and criteria and computations used in
determining pipe sizes shall be submitted in writing.
23
(16)When a site grading plan is required by the
Commission, such plan shall become part of the public
utilities and improvement plan.
§ 143-42. Construction of streets, curbs gutters and sidewalks.
A. All streets shown on the public utilities and improvements
plan shall be constructed in conformance with standard cross
sections of the Engineering Division of the town.
B. Streets grades at the center line shall not exceed seven percent
(7%) for primary streets nor ten percent (10%) for residential
streets. No street grades shall be less than one percent (1%)
except in a specific case where the Engineering Division
agrees that there is practical difficulty, in which case
grades not less than five-tenths percent (0.5%) may be
permitted.
C. Street specifications. (Amended 1-7-86)
(1) Road pavements shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications of the State of Connecticut Department
of Transportation.
(2) Subbase gravel: Six (6) inches or more thick after
compaction (if required by the engineering division).
(3) Base course: eight (8) inches processed stone applied
in two (2) courses four (4) inches thick after
compaction, well-keyed and dry-bound, and two (2)
inches bituminous concrete binder.
(4) Surface: two (2) inches dense graded bituminous concrete
pavement.
D. Branch offsets for all underground services to be individual
parcels shall be extended by the developer beyond the street
right-of-way lines prior to installation of the bituminous
surface course.
E. Bituminous concrete curbs shall be constructed on both sides of
all streets in accordance with the Design and Construction
Standards for Public Improvements, Wethersfield, Connecticut.
Wherever possible, curb cuts for driveways shall be formed as
the bituminous lip is installed. (Amended 10-23-78)
F. Gutters and shoulders shall be formed as a continuation of
street paving, as shown on typical cross-section sheets.
24
G. Sidewalks, where required, shall be portland cement concrete, as
shown on the standard details of the Engineering division and
in accordance with the sidewalk specifications of the Town
of Wethersfield. Pedestrian access ramps are to be installed
at all intersecting streets as shown on the detail typical
intersection. Ramps are to be portland cement concrete and
shall not have a slope greater than one (1) foot rise in
twelve (12) feet, or eight and thirty-threehundredths percent (8.33%), unless ot
H. All of the area which is not covered by sidewalk or pavement
within the street right-of-way shall be graded, loamed and
seeded in conformance with Form 811 and amendments thereto of
the Connecticut State Highway Department specifications.
§ 143-43. Construction of storm drainage lines and structures.
A. A complete system of storm drainage shall be constructed in
accordance with the best standard practice and in accordance
with the typical standard details of the Engineering Division
and the following design criteria:
(1) Design storm (return frequency): (Amended 10-23-78)
(a) Residential drainage systems:
(1) Pipe design: ten-year storm.
(2) Major ditches and channels: twenty-five
year storm.
(3) Positive flood relief without property
damage: one-hundred-year storm.
(b) Existing streams or their improvements:
(1) Encroachment lines based on the 100 year
floodplain.
(2) Time of concentration shall be computed on the sum of
overland flow time (sheet flow), plus time-in
swales and gutters, plus time in pipes (pipes assumed
flowing full), with minimum of ten (10) minutes to be
used for storm sewer design.
(3) Runoff factors:
(a) Areas containing pavement, sidewalks and roofs:
ninety percent (90%). Areas containing lawns
and natural ground: fifteen percent (15%) to
thirty percent (30%), depending on the slope of
the ground.
(b) Weighted runoff factors are to be used in
drainage computations. Runoff factors for
25
adjacent undeveloped land are to be based on
ultimate development of the land in accordance
with existing zoning and the Table of Weight and
Runoff Factors.
Table of Runoff Factors
Types of Terrain Value C
Impervious surfaces 0.90-0.95
Steep barren surfaces 0.80-0.90
Rolling barren surfaces 0.60-0.80
Flat barren surfaces 0.50-0.70
Rolling meadow 0.40-.065
Deciduous timberland 0.35-0.60
Conifer timberland 0.25-0.50
Orchard 0.15-0.40
Rolling Farmland 0.15-0.40
Flat farmland 0.10-0.30
Types of Surface
Watertight surfaces such as roofs and pavements
Block pavements with open joints
Macadam pavements
Gravel surfaces
Parks, cultivated lands, lawns, etc., depending
on slopes and character of soil
Wooded areas
(4) Design method: The Rational Method shall be used,
where "Q" equals "Air."
B. Storm sewer design. (Amended 1-7-86)
(1) Minimum size pipe: fifteen (15) inches' diameter.
(2) Roughness coefficient:
(a) Reinforced concrete pipe:
[1) Twelve (12) inches through twenty-four (24)
inches: n equals 0.015.
[2) Thirty (30) inches and larger: n equals
0.013.
(b) Asphalt-coated corrugated pipe:
[1] All sizes: n equals 0.021.
26
Value C
0.70-0.90
0.50-0.70
0.25-0.60
0.15-0.30
0.50-0.30
0.01-0.20
(3) Minimum slope shall be sufficient to provide velocity
of two (2) feet per second when flowing one-fourth
(1/4) full:
Size RCP RCP RCP
(inches) (n=0.015) (n=0.013) (n=0.021)
12 .0054 .011D
15 .0040 .0080
18 .0032 .0060
21 .0025 .0050
24 .0021 .0042
30 .0012 .0031
36 .00095 .0024
42 .00075 .0019
48 .00062 .0018
54 .00053 .0014
60 .00045 .0012
70 .00035 .00098
(4) Maximum spacing of structures.
(a) On lines of diameters of thirty-six (36)inches
or less: four hundred (400) feet.
(b) On lines of diameters of forty-two (42) inches and greater:
five hundred (500) feet.
(5) All reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) shall have gaskets. All
trenches shall be covered with six-mil (.006 inch) polyethylene wrap.
27









DWG. No. 10 Removed


INLAND WETLANDS AND
WATERCOURSES
REGULATIONS
OF THE
TOWN OF WETHERSFIELD
Effective November 24, 2009
TOWN OF WETHERSFIELD, CONNECTICUT
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
96-1 Title 1
96-2 Preparation of Regulations, statutory authority 1
96-3 Permit issuance 1
96-4 Soil erosion and sedimentation plan 1
96-5 Definitions 1
ARTICLE II -PERMITTED USES AS OF RIGHT AND NON-REGULATED USES
96-6 Uses permitted by right 5
96-7 Non-regulated uses 6
ARTICLE III - LICENSING OF ACTIVITIES
96-8 License required for certain activities 6
96-9 Regulated activities 6
96-10 Copies of regulations to be available 7
96-11 Activities Regulated by the State 7
96-12 Boundary amendments 7
96-13 Disputed designations 8
ARTICLE IV - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
96-14 Application submission 8
96-15 Contents of application 9
96-16 Notification of other municipalities 10
96-17 Date of receipt 11
96-18 Additional information 11
96-19 Filing of evidence 11
96-20 Public inspection 11
96-21 Incomplete applications 11
96-22 Permitted operations; waivers 11
96-23 Summary ruling 12
96-24 Plenary ruling 12
96-25 Public hearings 13
96-26 Permit fees 13
96-27 Considerations for Decision 13
96-28 Grant or denial of permit 16
96-29 Permit process 16
ARTICLE V - APPEALS
96-30 Appeals procedure 18
96-31 Notification of Commissioner 18
ARTICLE VI - OTHER PERMITS AND LICENSES
96-32 Obtaining additional permission 18
ARTICLE VII - ENFORCEMENT
96-33 Stipulations of permit application 18
i
96-34 Actions upon violations 18
ARTICLE VIII - BONDS AND INSURANCE
96-35 Bonds 19
96-36 Insurance 20
ARTICLE IX - CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE
96-37 Greater restrictions to govern 20
96-38 Regulations to control over maps 20
ARTICLE X - CONFORMITY WITH STATE REGULATIONS;
ACTIONS OF COMMISSIONER
96-39 Regulations to be submitted 20
96-40 Notice of non-conformance; actions 20
96-41 Regulations for non-conformance 21
96-42 Written approval required 21
ARTICLE XI - AMENDMENT PROCUEDURE
96-43 Regulations for amendments 21
96-44 Petition for change 21
ARTICLE XII - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL CERTIFICATION
96-45 Plan 22
96-46 Eligibility for certification 22
96-47 Issuance or denial of certification 23
96-48 Conditions 23
96-49 Monitoring and Inspection 24
96-50 Amendments to plan 24
96-51 Model Signature Block 24
ARTICLE XIII – VIOLATIONS & CITATIONS
96-52 Authorization to issue citations. 24
96-53 Schedule of Fines and Violations 25
96-54 Uncontested payment of citation 25
96-55 Procedure to contest citations 25
96-56 Appointment of Hearing Officers 27
96-57 Severability 27
96-58 Applicability 27
APPENDIX A - APPLICATION TO CONDUCT REGULATED ACTIVITY 28
APPENDIX B - PETITION APPLICATION REGULATION/BOUNDARY CHANGE 31
APPENDIX C - CONSERVATION EASEMENT - MODEL 34
APPENDIX D - SCHEDULE OF FEES 37
APPENDIX E – APPLICATION EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CERTIFICATION 38
APPENDIX F – ORDINANCE FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS 39
ATTACHMENTS
1. Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission Rules and Procedures 41
EFFECTIVE DATE
Effective Date of Regulations - June 6, 1997 Date of Last Revision – November 24, 2009
ii
1
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
OF THE TOWN OF WETHERSFIELD, CONNECTICUT
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§96-1. Title.
These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the
Town of Wethersfield."
§96-2. Preparation of regulations; statutory authority.
These regulations have been prepared by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission in
accordance with the provisions of an Act concerning Inland Wetlands and Watercourses, Sections
22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and authorized by
the Town Council of the Town of Wethersfield in an ordinance adopted on December 18, 1972.
§96-3. Permit issuance.
Pursuant to said General Statutes, the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission shall issue,
issue with modifications or deny Permits for all Regulated Activities within the Town.
§96-4. Soil erosion and sedimentation plan.
A Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be submitted with any application for development
when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half (½) acre.
§96-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACT - The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of
the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
AGENCY - The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Wethersfield.
BOG - A poorly drained area containing an accumulation of organic material and
characterized by an association of plants recognized as bog species.
CERTIFICATION - A signed, written approval by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission that the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as presented complies with
minimum acceptable standards established in the publication entitled “2002 Connecticut
Guidelines For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control” as amended.
CERTIFICATION AUTHORITY – Under 143-22 and §143-24 and §143-25 of the
Wethersfield Subdivision Regulations and 6.6 of the Wethersfield Zoning Regulations, the
responsibility for all Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plans rests with the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Wethersfield.
CLEAR-CUTTING - The harvest of timber products in a fashion which removes all species of
trees down to a two-inch diameter at breast height.
2
COMMISSIONER - The Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT - An area designated by the Agency as having significant
value to the regulated wetlands, watercourses or habitats. Such an area shall be designated
and a conservation easement covenant placed on the land records as a deeded easement
that preserves land or inland wetlands or watercourses predominately in their natural, scenic
or open condition or in agricultural, farming, forest or open space use. For an example of a
typical easement, see Appendix D attached thereto.
CONTINUAL FLOW - means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time;
this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the
annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession.
DEPOSIT - Includes, but shall not be limited to, fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or emit.
DESIGNATED AGENT - means the individual designated as the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission Coordinator to carry out its functions and purposes.
DISCHARGE - The emission of any water, substance or other material into regulated areas
of the Town, whether or not such substance causes pollution.
DISTURBED AREA - An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed such that
cumulatively more than one-half (½) acre is affected.
DISTURBING THE NATURAL INDIGENOUS CHARACTER OF THE LAND - Any activity
that will significantly disturb a regulated area by reason of deposition or removal of materials;
cause the alteration or obstruction of waterflow; clear-cutting; or result in the pollution of
wetlands or watercourses of the Town.
EXECUTIVE SUB-COMMITTEE - A three member sub-committee consisting of the
Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Commission (or their designee) and the Designated
Agent of the Commission.
EROSION - The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or
gravity.
EXEMPTION(S) - A single -or duplex- family dwelling which is not part of a subdivision of
land approved after January 1, 1986, shall be exempt from these soil erosion and sediment
control regulations.
FARMING - Using any tract of land for growing crops, raising livestock or other agricultural
use.
FEASIBLE - Able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound engineering
principles.
GARDENING - The tilling of soil, planting, cultivating and harvesting of vegetable matter.
GRAZING - Using any tract of land to feed or supply farm animals with grass or pasture, to
tend farm animals or feeding or growing silage and herbage.
HARVESTING OF CROPS - Gathering plants or animals or plant or animal products which
have been grown to be harvested.
LICENSE - The whole or any part of a permit, certificate of approval or similar form of
3
permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of these regulations or the
Act.
MARSH - An area normally covered with shallow water or aquic moisture regime subject to
seasonal variations and containing an association of herbaceous, soft-stemmed plants
recognized as marsh vegetation.
MANAGEMENT PRACTICE - A practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility designed to
prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to maintain or enhance
existing environmental quality.
MATERIAL - Any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not limited to
soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, sand, refuse or waste.
MAINTENANCE - (related to drainage pipes) The removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and
other debris whether by hand or machine, while the pipe stays in place, generally within 15
feet of the pipe end.
MUNICIPALITY - means the Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut.
NURSERY - Land used for propagating trees, shrubs or other plants for transplanting, sale or
for use as stock for grafting.
PERMIT - A decision letter and an official form that states the nature of the permitted activity,
duly signed by an authorized agent of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
PERSON - Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or
legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations, government agencies or
subdivisions thereof.
POLLUTION - Contamination or the harmful thermal effect or the rendering unclean or
impure of any regulated areas located in the town by reason of any waste or other materials
discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or
indirectly to come in contact with any waters.
PRUDENT - Economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be
derived from the proposed regulated activity; provided cost may be considered in deciding
what is prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean
an alternative is imprudent.
REGULATED ACTIVITY - Any operation within, or use of a regulated area, or which may
have an effect upon a regulated area, involving removal or deposition of material or causing
any obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution of such wetland or watercourse therein,
except as otherwise indicated in Article II and Section 96-11 of these regulations.
REGULATED AREA - All areas within the Town of Wethersfield containing inland wetlands
and/or watercourses, as defined in these regulations or the Connecticut General Statutes,
those areas stream-ward of established local encroachment lines, and those areas which lie
at or below the limits of the one-hundred-year flood, as defined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency Flood Insurance Study, effective date: September 26, 2008.
"Regulated Areas" are generally shown on the maps entitled "Official Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map," CGS Topographic Series, Wethersfield, dated July 1, 1986 and as
hereinafter revised or amended. In each instance, however, the actual type of soil or
character of the area, or elevation of the land for flood plain delineation, as determined by the
4
Inland Wetlands Commission or its designated agent, shall determine the "Regulated Area.".
(Rev. August 1, 1998)
REMOVE - Includes but shall not be limited to draining, excavating, mining, digging,
dredging, sucking, clear-cutting of timber, bulldozing, drag-lining or blasting.
RENDERING UNCLEAN OR IMPURE - Any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological
properties of any of the waters of the town or State of Connecticut, including but not limited to
change in color, odor, turbidity or taste.
SEDIMENT - Solid material, either mineral or organic, that was in suspension, transported or
otherwise removed from its site or origin by erosion and deposited away from its site of origin.
SIGNIFICANT IMPACT OR MAJOR EFFECT - Any activity, including but not limited to the
following activities which may have a major effect or significant impact:
A. Any activity involving a deposition or removal of material that will or may have a
significant impact or major effect on the regulated area or on another part of the
inland wetland and watercourse system.
B. Any activity that substantially changes, alters, or inhibits the natural channel or
dynamics of a regulated area or watercourse system.
C. Any activity that substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetland or
watercourse to support desirable biological life, prevent flooding, supply water,
assimilate waste, facilitate drainage, and/or provide recreation and open space.
D. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial turbidity,
siltation, or sedimentation in a regulated area.
E. Any activity that causes a substantial diminution of flow of a natural watercourse, or
ground water levels of the regulated area.
F. Any activity that causes or has the potential to cause pollution of a wetland or
watercourse.
G. Any activity which creates conditions which may adversely affect the health, welfare or
safety of any individual of the community.
H. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas having
demonstrable scientific or educational value.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN - A scheme that minimizes soil erosion
and sedimentation resulting from development and includes but is not limited to the minimum
standards established in the publication entitled “ 2002 Connecticut Guide Lines For Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control” as amended.
SOIL SCIENTIST - An individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the
Federal Office of Personnel Management.
SWAMP - An area with a water table at or near the surface of the ground throughout most of
the year and containing vegetation dominated by an association of trees and/or shrubs
recognized as swamp species.
TOWN - The Town of Wethersfield, Connecticut.
5
WASTE - Sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which may pollute
or tend to pollute any regulated areas of the town.
WATERCOURSE(S) - Rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes,
swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public
or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the Town or any portion
thereof not regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the
Connecticut General Statutes. Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined
permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following
characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the
presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident,
and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
WETLAND(S) - Land, including submerged land, not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28
through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, which consists
of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and/or
floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time,
by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA). Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic
(saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.
ARTICLE II
Permitted Uses as of Right and Non-Regulated Uses
§96-6. Uses permitted by right.
The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses as of
right:
A. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds
of three (3) acres or less, essential to the farming operation, and activities
conducted by, or under the authority of, the Department of Environmental
Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse restoration or
enhancement, or mosquito control.. The provisions of this subdivision shall not
be construed to include road construction or the erection of buildings not directly
related to the farming operation; relocation of watercourses with continual flow,
filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow; clearcutting
of timber except for the expansion of agricultural crop land; the mining of
topsoil, peat, sand, gravel or similar material from wetlands or watercourses for
the purposes of sale. (Rev. August 1, 1998)
B. A residential home on a subdivision lot approved by the Town of Wethersfield
Planning and Zoning Commission as of July 1, 1974, (the original adoption of
local wetland regulations), provided that the building permit was obtained on or
before July 1, 1987. The applicant shall be prepared to document the validity of
said right by providing a certified copy of the building permit and approved site
plan showing proposed and existing topographic contours, houses and well
locations, septic systems, driveways, approval dates or other information.
C. Boat anchorage or mooring, not to include dredging or dock construction.
D. Uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of a residential property, such
property being the largest minimum residential lot size permitted anywhere in the
6
town, and containing a residence. Incidental uses shall include maintenance of
existing structures and landscaping but may not include removal or deposition of
substantial amounts of material from or into a wetland or watercourse, or
diversion or alteration of a watercourse.
E. Construction and operation by water companies, as defined in Section 16-1 of
the Connecticut General Statutes, or by municipal water supply systems, as
provided for in Chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams,
reservoirs, and other facilities necessary to the impounding, storage and
withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies, except as provided
in Section 22a-401 through 22a-410 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended.
F. The Agency shall exempt from all provisions of the rules and regulations of the
Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Commission any maintenance or repair,
within original specifications, of existing public utilities conducted within public
rights-of-way and easements by the Town of Wethersfield. Improvements
conducted within public rights- of-way and easements which are within inland
wetlands and watercourses by the Town of Wethersfield shall be deemed
regulated activities.
§96-7. Non-regulated uses.
The following operations and uses shall be permitted as non- regulated uses in regulated
areas, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the land and
wildlife:
A. Construction on a site where no activity is to occur on or near a regulated area.
Permission for such construction may be granted without appearing before the
Commission by following the waiver provisions outlined in §96-22A, Declaratory
Ruling.
B. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife. Such
operations or use may include, but is not limited to, minor work to control erosion,
or to encourage proper fish, wildlife, or silvaculture management practices.
C. Outdoor recreation, including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trials,
nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving, camping, boating,
water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing, cross country skiing, and shell fishing
where otherwise legally permitted and regulated.
ARTICLE III
Licensing of Activities
§96-8. License required for certain activities.
Subject to the provisions of Article II and this Article, regulated activities affecting inland
wetlands and watercourses within the town are prohibited except as they may be licensed by
the Agency.
§96-9. Regulated activities.
The Agency shall regulate only those activities which include removing of material from,
depositing material in, constructing, obstructing or polluting a regulated area.
7
§96-10. Copies of regulations to be available.
Copies of these regulations required for the protection and preservation of inland wetlands
and watercourses, and erosion and sediment control of the Town of Wethersfield,
Connecticut, as well as permit applications, and the map of regulated areas entitled "Official
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Wethersfield, July 1986," shall be available for
inspection in the offices of the Engineering Division, Wethersfield Town Hall, Town of
Wethersfield, Connecticut during normal business hours.
§96-11. Activities Regulated by the State
The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall regulate activities in or affecting
wetlands or watercourses subject to the following jurisdiction: any permit decision or order
issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall be binding upon the Agency
as to those matters within the jurisdiction of the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over
regulated activities and other activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses undertaken
by any department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or
regional board of education, pursuant to sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
A. Construction and modification of any dam, pursuant to Sections 22a-401 and
22a-411 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
B. Construction or placement of any obstruction within stream channel
encroachment lines, pursuant to Sections 22a-342 to 22a-349a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
C. Construction or placement of any structure or obstruction within tidal, coastal and
navigable waters, pursuant to Sections 22a-359 to 22a-363
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
D. Diversion of water in excess of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons per day or any
surface waters of the state where the tributary watershed area above the point of
diversion is one hundred (l00) acres larger pursuant to Sections 22a-365 through
22a-378 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
E. Discharges into waters of the State, pursuant to Section 22a-430 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
F. Discharges of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the
state pursuant to Section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for
activities regulated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers under Section
404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
G. All regulated activities undertaken by any department, agency or instrumentality
of the State of Connecticut.
§96-12. Boundary amendments.
The Agency shall establish or amend area boundary maps only in accordance with the
procedures of Section 22a-42 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. Such maps
are on file in the office of the Engineering Division, and titled "Official Inland Wetlands and
Water Courses Map" dated July 1986..
8
§96-13. Disputed designations.
Wetlands and watercourses are defined in §96-5 of these regulations:
A. If any person disputes the designation or failure to designate any wetland or
watercourse as a regulated area, such person may be required to produce such
information as the Agency deems necessary to permit an informed decision.
B. To meet the burden of proof for wetlands exemption under Subsection A, the
petitioner may be directed to present documentation by a soil scientist that the
wetland in question or a portion of it does not have a soil type classified by the
National Cooperative Soils Survey as poorly drained, very poorly drained,
alluvial, or floodplain.
C. To meet the burden of proof for exemption under Subsection A of a swamp, bog
or marsh, or regulated area, the petitioner may be directed to present
documentation by a professional biologist, ecologist, hydrologist, or botanist, who
is competent in plant identification or wetland ecology classification systems
and/or geology and hydrology, that the area in question does not contain
botanical species or hydrogeology or geologic condition as a swamp, bog or
marsh.
ARTICLE IV
Application Requirements
§96-14. Application submission.
No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit for
such activity from the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of
Wethersfield.
A. Applications must be submitted five (5) business days prior to regularly
scheduled meeting of the Agency in order to be included on the meeting agenda.
The application shall be formally received only at a regularly scheduled meeting
of the Agency.
B. No application shall be deemed complete unless it shall be in such form and
contain such information as the Agency deems necessary for fair determination
of the issues. The Agency shall inform all applicants of such necessary
information without delay.
C. The information required by the Agency shall be furnished in sufficient copies to
permit the Agency to carry out its duties under these regulations. In no case will
fewer than fifteen (15) copies be accepted for a final review of an application
proposal.
D. All information submitted in the application shall be considered factual, and, in the
case of anticipated activity, it shall be considered binding. A failure on the part of
the applicant or any of the applicant’s agents to provide correct information or
performance exceeding the levels of anticipated activity may be sufficient
grounds for the revocation of any permit issued under these regulations and/or for
penalties to be imposed.
9
E. For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation
restriction or preservation restriction, the following shall apply:
1. For purposes of this section, “conservation restriction” means a
limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement,
covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or
on behalf of the owner of the land described therein, including, but not
limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of
taking such land whose purpose is to retain land or water areas
predominantly in their natural, scenic or open condition or in agricultural,
farming, forest or open space use.
2. For purposes of this section, “preservation restriction” means a
limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement,
covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or
on behalf of the owner of land, including, but not limited to, the state or any
political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking of such land whose
purpose is to preserve historically significant structures or sites.
3. No person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in
an existing building or for exterior work that does not expand or alter the
footprint of an existing building, relating to property that is subject to a
conservation restriction or a preservation restriction unless the applicant
provides proof that the applicant has provided written notice of such
application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding
such restriction not later than sixty days prior to the filling of the permit
application.
4. In lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection 96-14(E)(3.) the applicant
may submit a letter from the holder of such restriction or from the
holder’s authorized agent, verifying that the application is in
compliance with the terms of the restriction.
§96-15. Contents of application.
All applications shall include the following information, in writing, and shall be on a form
provided by the Agency, available from the office of the Town’s Engineering Division:
1. The applicant’s name, home and business addresses, and telephone numbers.
2. The owner's name (if not the applicant), home and business addresses, telephone
numbers and written consent to the proposed activity set forth in the application and
written consent from the owner to file the application.
3. The applicant's interest in the land.
4. The geographical location of the property affected by the proposed activity, including a
description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the property on the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map.
5. The purpose and description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and
sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures which
may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity
including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other
environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in
10
the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or
watercourse resources;
6. Alternatives considered by the applicant and why the proposal to alter wetlands as set
forth in the application was chosen.
7. A site plan showing existing and proposed conditions in relation to wetlands and
watercourses and identifying any further activities associated with, or reasonably related
to, the proposed activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity
and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses.
8. Assurance, by written certification of a professional engineer registered to practice in
the State of Connecticut, that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any floodway is maintained.
9. The Agency will notify adjacent communities when an applicant petitions to relocate or
alter a floodway when such floodway exists across the town line or the Town of
Wethersfield. The applicant will notify the State Coordinator's office and the Federal
Insurance Administration prior to any relocation or alteration of a floodway and submit
copies of such notification to the Agency.
10.Names and mailing addresses of adjacent land owners
11.A statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information
provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through
deception or through inaccurate or misleading information;
12.Authorization for the members and Designated Agents of the Agency to inspect the
subject land, at reasonable times, both before and after a final decision has been
issued;
13.Any other information the Agency deems necessary to the understanding of what the
applicant is proposing; and
14.Submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established in the
Appendix of these regulations.
15.If the proposed activity involves a significant impact activity as determined by the
Agency, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the
activity, including but not limited to that outlined in 96-24, is required.
§96-16. Notification of other municipalities.
A. When an application to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an
inland wetland or watercourse is filed and any portion of such wetland or watercourse
is within five hundred feet of the boundary of another municipality, the applicant shall
give written notice of the application by certified mail, return receipt requested, on the
same day to the inland wetlands agency of such other municipality.
B. The Agency shall, in accordance with PA 87-307, notify the Clerk of any adjoining
municipality of the pendency of any application to conduct a regulated activity when:
1. Any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located
within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
11
2. Traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the
adjoining municipality to directly enter or exit the site;
3. Sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and significantly
impact the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or
4. Water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
C. Notice of the pendency of such application shall be made by registered mail and shall
be mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the application.
§96-17 Date of receipt.
The date of official receipt of any application shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Agency immediately following the day of submission to the Agency, or thirty-five
(35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
§96-18. Additional information.
At any time during the review period, the Agency may require the applicant to provide
additional information about the regulated area or regulated activity which is the subject of
the application or wetlands or watercourses affected by the regulated activity.
§96-19. Filing of evidence.
If a public hearing is to be held on any application for a permit, all documentary evidence in
support of the application shall be filed with the Agency and available for public inspection prior to
the hearing or any reconvening thereof.
§96-20. Public inspection.
All applications shall be open for public inspection.
§96-21. Incomplete applications.
Incomplete applications may be denied.
§96-22. Permitted operations; waivers.
A. Declaratory ruling. To carry out the purpose of this section, any person proposing to
carry out a permitted or non-regulated operation or use within a regulated area shall,
prior to commencement of such operation or use, notify the Agency by completing an
application form and sufficient information to enable a proper determination that the
proposed activity and use is permitted or non-regulated use of the regulated area, as
defined in §96-5 of these regulations.
B. Waiver provisions may be made by two (2) of the following three (3) representatives of
the Wethersfield Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Commission Executive
Subcommittee: The Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson of the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses or the Watercourses Designated Agent. Two of the three may rule that
the proposed activity is or is not a regulated activity and determine if a full permit
procedure is required. Such ruling shall be in writing and shall be made no later than
the next regularly scheduled meeting. Two (2) of the three (3) representatives for the
12
Commission may make such a ruling on behalf of the Commission at any time. The
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Designated Agent shall submit to the Commission a
description of any waiver authorized under the provisions of this sub-section at the next
regularly scheduled meeting. Initiation of the permitted use or operation shall be within
one (1) year of any ruling pursuant to this section and shall expire in one (1) year from
the date of issuance unless otherwise extended by the Agency.
§96-23. Summary Ruling.
If the Agency finds that a proposed activity is a regulated activity not involving significant impact or
major effect on the regulated areas, as defined in §96-5 of these regulations, it may allow the
activity with or without conditions after initial review. In order to grant a permit at this stage, the
Agency (after full review of the considerations set forth in §§96-24 and 96-25 of these regulations
and other pertinent factors) shall issue an opinion presenting the reasons for granting the permit
with or without conditions.
The Agency may issue a permit without a public hearing provided no petition provided for in
Section 96-24 is filed with the agency not later than fourteen (14) days after the date of receipt of
such application. (Rev. September 21, 2001)
§96-24. Plenary Ruling.
If the proposed activity involves a significant activity as defined in §96-5 of these regulations,
additional information as outlined in 96-15 , based on the nature and anticipated effects of the
activity, including, but not limited to the following:
A. Site plan for the proposed use or operation showing the property that will be affected,
indicating existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, land
contours, boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and
watercourses and other pertinent features of the development drawn by a licensed
surveyor, professional engineer or architect registered in the State of Connecticut or in
an adjoining state, or by such other person acceptable to the Agency.
B. Engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the proposed
project and any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to watercourses.
C. Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National
Cooperative Soils Survey by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the USDA.
D. A description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or
watercourses involved with the application and the effects of the proposed regulated
activities on these communities and wetland functions.
E. A description of how the proposed activity will change, diminish, or enhance the
ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the
application and with each alternative.
F. Analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material.
G. Management practices which would mitigate the impact of the proposed activity.
H. In the case of any application which is subject to the notification provisions of §96-
16A(1) of these regulations, a public hearing shall not be conducted if the Clerk of the
adjoining municipality(s) has not received notice of the pendency of the applications.
13
§96-25. Public hearings.
The Agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the Agency determines
that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, or a
petition signed by at least twenty-five persons requesting a hearing is filed with the Agency
not later than fourteen (14) days after the date of receipt of such application or the Agency
finds that a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public interest. Such
hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five days after the receipt of such application. (Rev.
September 19, 2001)
All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public
inspection. Any person may appear and be heard at any public hearing.
A. All public hearings shall commence no later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the
application.
B. Notice of hearings shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2)
days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days and not fewer than ten (10) days, and the
second, not less than two (2) days before the date set for the hearing, in a newspaper
having a general circulation in the Town.
C. All applications, maps, and documents relating to this public hearing shall be open for
public inspection in the office of the Engineering Division. Notice of the hearing shall be
sent by the Agency to the applicant and to owners of record of abutting land provided by
the applicant, no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the day of the hearing.
D. Where possible, public hearings shall be completed in a single session. The Agency
shall complete the public hearing within thirty-five (35) days of the commencement of the
public hearing. The Agency shall act upon the application within 65 days after the
completion of the public hearing. However, the hearing may be continued where
necessary for the full development of evidence or for the full adequate participation of
the parties, or for such other substantial purposes. The applicant may consent to extend
the time frame for any of the steps, but the total of all extensions together cannot exceed
65 days. In no case shall continuances be used as a device for delay.
§96-26. Permit fees.
The Agency shall collect permit fees by check or money order at time of application to the
Agency, to help defray the costs and expenses of carrying out its duties under these
regulations. The application fee is not refundable. Boards, Commissions, Councils and
Departments of the Town of Wethersfield are exempt from all fee requirements.
Application fees shall be based on the fee schedule included in the Appendix.
In addition, an applicant whose application is deemed to involve an extraordinarily large,
complex or significant development shall be subject to the additional fees authorized by
Chapter 100 of the Town of Wethersfield Municipal Code. (Attached herein as an Appendix)
§96-27. Considerations for Decision.
A. Due consideration shall be given to any reports from staff, other boards or commissions
and/or federal or state agencies, including the Natural Resources Conservation Service,
14
the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, and the Flood Insurance
Study, Town of Wethersfield, latest revision, by the US Department of Homeland
Security, Federal Emergency Management Agency, and the Wethersfield Watershed
Management Study, by Milone & MacBroom.
The Commission shall also have the right to request that any applicant conduct other
studies or impact analysis that would allow the Commission to adequately determine the
potential impacts of the proposed development to the site and community.
Said studies or impact analysis to be done in accordance with Chapter 100, Article IComplex
Land Development Applications of the Code of the Town of Wethersfield.
(Attached herein as an Appendix )
B. Additional requested information.
C. All relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to the following:
Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of sections 22a-36 to
22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to
regulating, licensing and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into
consideration all relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to:
a. the environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or
watercourses;
b. the applicant’s purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the
proposed regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no
environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses;
c. the relationship between the short term and long term impacts of the proposed
regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and
enhancement of long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses;
d. irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would
be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such
activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such
resources, and any mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition
of issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1)
prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or
enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority:
restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
e. the character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the
reasonable use of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed
regulated activity; and
f. impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside
the area for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or
reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable
by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or
watercourses.
In the case of an application which received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by
the Agency that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or
watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of
the record that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this
finding the Agency shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in section 96-
27. The finding and the reasons therefor shall be stated on the record in writing.
In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may
15
be feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have
less adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the Agency shall propose on the
record in writing the types of alternatives which the applicant may investigate
provided this subsection shall not be construed to shift the burden from the applicant
to prove that the applicant is entitled to the permit or to present alternatives to the
proposed regulated activity.
D. For purposes of this section,(1) “wetlands or watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or
animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas
or environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or
occurs.
E. A municipal inland wetlands agency shall not deny or condition an application for a
regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an
impact or effect on aquatic, plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact
or affect the physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
F. Measures which would mitigate the impact of the proposed activity and may be
imposed as conditions of the permit. Such measures include the availability of further
technical improvements or safeguards which could feasibly be added to the plan or
action to avoid the reduction of the natural capacity of the wetlands or watercourse to
support desirable biological life, prevent flooding, supply water, control sedimentation
and/or prevent erosion, assimilate wastes, facilitate drainage, and provide recreation
and open space.
G. In the case of any application which has received a public hearing, a permit shall not
be issued unless the Agency finds that a feasible and prudent alternative does not
exist. In making this finding, the Agency shall consider the facts and circumstances
set forth in this section of these regulations. This finding and the reasons therefore
shall be stated on the record in the decision of the Agency. A permit shall not be
issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and prudent
alternative does not exist. In making this finding the Agency shall consider the facts
and circumstances set forth in section 96-27. The finding and the reasons therefore
shall be stated on the record in writing.
H. In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall
base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other
material not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its
decision. A conclusion that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist does not
create a presumption that a permit should be issued. The applicant has the burden of
demonstrating that his application is consistent with the purposes policies of these
regulations and sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
I. In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant
to subsection 96-14(E)(3.) of these regulations, the holder of the restriction may
provide proof to the inland wetlands agency that granting of the permit application will
violate the terms of the restriction. Upon a finding that the requested land use violates
the terms of such restriction, the inland wetlands agency shall not grant the permit
approval.
J. In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of
16
subsections 96-14(E)(3.) or 96-14(E)(4.) of these regulations, the party holding the
conservation or preservation restriction may, no later than fifteen days after receipt of
actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the Inland Wetlands Agency,
subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The Inland
Wetlands Agency shall reverse the permit approval upon finding that the requested
land use violates the terms of such restriction.
§96-28. Grant or denial of permit.
The Agency may Grant the application as filed; Grant it upon such terms, conditions,
limitations or modifications necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act; or Deny it.
The Agency, or two of three Executive Subcommittee members acting pursuant to Section
96-22 of these regulations, may, in accordance with these regulations, grant the application
as filed or grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated
activity designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the application.
Such terms may include any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the
regulated activity and which would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental
damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (c) in the following order
of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
§96-29 Permit process.
A. No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Agency may hold a
public hearing on such application. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35)
days of its commencement, and action shall be taken on applications within sixty five (65)
- days after completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action
shall be taken on applications within sixty- five (65) days from the date of receipt of the
application. (See 96-14A and 96-25)
B. The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision and, in the
case of any public hearing, such decision shall be based fully on the record of such
hearing and shall be in writing.
C. The agency shall notify the applicant and any named parties to the proceeding of its
decision within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, and the
Agency shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit to be
published in a newspaper having circulation in the Town wherein the inland wetland or
watercourse lies.
D. If an activity authorized by the inland wetland Permit also involves an activity or project
which requires zoning or subdivision approval, a special zoning permit, variance or special
exception, a copy of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission's decision report
on the application shall be filed with the Town of Wethersfield Planning and Zoning
Commission within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision. This subsection does not
apply to certification of Sediment and Erosion Control Plans.
E. If the agency denies the permit “without prejudice” or if it grants a permit with terms,
conditions, limitations or modifications, the applicant may attempt to modify the proposal
to the Agency's satisfaction. The Agency shall determine whether the proposed
modification requires the filing of a new application. The rejection of a modified or
corrected application by the agency shall be equivalent to the denial of an application for
the purposes of appeal.
17
F. If the agency denies a permit “with prejudice”, the application shall not be resubmitted for
one (1) year following the date of such denial.
G. Permits shall be subject to the following time limits:
1. Any permit issued by the Agency shall be valid for five years provided the Agency
may establish a specific time period within which any regulated activity shall be
conducted.
2. Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Agency in
accordance with Article IV of these regulations at least sixty-five (65) days prior to the
expiration date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend such an existing
permit shall contain the information required under section 96-15 of these regulations
provided:
a. the application may incorporate the documentation and record of the prior
application by reference;
b. the application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing
and the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit;
c. the application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not
initiated or completed within the time specified in the permit;
d. the application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved
with or affecting wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the
permit was issued;
e. the Agency may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely
application to renew such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow
the continuation of work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit
is likely to be renewed and the public interest or environment will be best served
by not interrupting the activity;
3. Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit holder
unless the Agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances
which requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has been
undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued
provided no permit may be valid for more than ten years.
H If the activity authorized by the inland wetland permit also involves an activity or project
which requires zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance or special exception,
no work pursuant to the wetland permit may begin until all other such approvals are
obtained.
I. The Agency may delegate to its Executive Subcommittee the authority to approve or
extend an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such Executive
Sub-committee finds that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater than a
minimal impact on any wetlands or watercourses. Requests for such approval shall be
made on a form provided by the Agency and shall contain the information listed under
Section 96-15 of these regulations and any other information the Agency may reasonably
require. Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and processing applications prescribed
in these regulations, such Executive Sub-committee may approve or extend such an
activity at any time.
18
ARTICLE V
Appeals
§96-30. Appeals procedure.
Any person aggrieved by any regulation, order, decision or action by the Agency pursuant to
these regulations may appeal to the Superior Court in and for the county where the land
affected is located within fifteen (15) days after publication of such regulation, order, decision
or action. All appeals shall follow the procedure outlined in Section 22a-43 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
§96-31. Notification of Commissioner.
The Agency shall notify the Commissioner of Environmental Protection of any such appeals
and enclose a copy of the regulation, order, decision or action upon which it is based. The
notification shall be on a form supplied by the Commissioner and be forwarded within fifteen
(15) days of the commencement of such appeal action.
ARTICLE VI
Other Permits and Licenses
§96-32. Obtaining additional permission.
Nothing in these regulations shall obviate any requirement for the applicant to obtain any other
assent, permit or license required by law or regulation of the government of the United States,
the State of Connecticut or any political subdivision thereof. The obtaining of such assents,
permits or licenses is solely the responsibility of the applicant.
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§96-33 Stipulations of permit application.
Application for a permit shall constitute permission for and consent to Agency inspections of
the site of proposed activity at any reasonable time before or after the granting of a permit.
The owner, applicant or their agent shall have the permit readily available and shall produce it
for inspection by the Agency's representative upon request. The Agency shall be authorized to
seek such necessary court orders as will permit it to inspect land whereon the Agency has
probable cause to believe that a regulated activity is in progress and for which no application
has been filed.
§96-34. Actions upon violations.
A. If the Agency finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any activity, facility or
condition which is in violation of the Act, Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, or any of the regulations of this Agency or if
any applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in a permit or has
exceeded the scope of the work as set forth in the application, the Agency or its duly
authorized agent may:
1. Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person
19
conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately cease
such activity or to correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10) days of the issuance
of such order, the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be
heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Agency shall
consider the facts presented at the hearing and within ten (10) days of the completion of
the hearing, notify the person, by certified mail, that the original order remains in effect,
that the revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Agency
shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the
municipality. The original order shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain in
effect until the Agency affirms, revises or withdraws the order. The issuance of an order
pursuant to this section shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to Section 22a-44(b) of
the General Statutes, as amended.
2. Suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the terms,
conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work as
set forth in the application plans. Prior to revoking any permit, the Agency shall issue
notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting
forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action. At the public hearing the
permittee shall be given an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its permit
and any and all requirements for the retention of the permit. The permittee shall be
notified of the Agency's decision to suspend, revoke or maintain a permit by personal
service or certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The agency
shall publish notice of the suspension or violation in a newspaper having general
circulation in the Town.
3. Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such
facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Agency, and
prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation, including, without
limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourse.
4. In addition to any other remedy allowed by law, any person who violates any provision of
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $1000. Issuance of such fines shall be in accordance with the procedures
established in Town Ordinances, including the citation hearing process. (Added August
1, 1998; see ATTACHMENTS)
B. The Agency may request that the person appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity and/or provide a written reply to the notice
or filing a proper application for the necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s)
directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of the order provided in Subsection
A(1) of this section or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law.
ARTICLE VIII
Bonds and Insurance
§96-35. Bonds.
A. The applicant upon approval of the license and at the discretion of the Agency, may be
required to file a performance bond in an amount and with sureties and in a form approved
by the Agency.
B. The bond and sureties shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of
20
these regulations and conditions imposed on permit approval.
§96-36. Insurance.
The applicant may be required to certify that the applicant has public insurance against liability
which may result from the proposed operation or use covering any and all damages which
might occur within two (2) years of completion of such operations, in an amount to be
determined by the Agency commensurate with the projected operation.
ARTICLE IX
Conflict and Severance
§96-37. Greater restrictions to govern.
If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision which imposes
the most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The
invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of
these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given effect
without such invalid part or parts.
If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the
Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern.
§96-38. Regulations to control over maps.
Where there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the boundaries set
forth on any map now or hereinafter adopted, the provisions of the regulations shall control.
ARTICLE X
Conformity with State Regulations;
Actions of Commissioner
§96-39. Regulations to be submitted.
All regulations, including regulated area boundary maps, promulgated or amended by the
Agency, pursuant to the Act shall be submitted to the Commissioner not later than ten (10)
days after their adoption.
§96-40. Notice of non-conformance; actions.
In the event that the Commissioner shall find any part of the Agency’s regulation not in
conformity, the Commissioner shall issue a notice of non-conformance which shall include:
A. The reasons for holding any part to be non-conforming.
B. The section or sections whose operation and effect shall be suspended until they shall be
amended and resubmitted.
C. The extent to which the Commissioner shall exercise jurisdiction over the municipal
wetlands and watercourses for their protection in the interval between the issuance of a
notice on non-conformance and the resubmission of amended regulations, including
boundary maps.
21
§96-41. Regulations for non-conformance.
A. The Agency shall, pursuant to the provisions for adopting and amending regulations
contained in the Act, initiate proceedings to amend such non-conformance.
B. Upon disapproval of any regulations, the Commissioner shall assume jurisdiction over
those portions of the regulations as may be necessary to assure continuity of wetlands
and watercourse regulation in the town. This jurisdiction shall cease upon approval of the
regulations by the Commissioner.
C. Failure of the Commissioner to issue a notice of non-conformance within sixty (60) days of
the receipt of such regulations, maps, or amendments shall be taken as approval of such
regulations.
§96-42. Written approval required.
If municipal regulations were not submitted to and granted approval by the Commissioner in a
preliminary form prior to adoption, they shall not become effective until granted final written
approval by the Commissioner.
ARTICLE XI
Amendment Procedure
§96-43. Regulations for amendments.
These regulations and inland wetlands and watercourses boundary maps may be amended,
changed or repealed at any time by majority vote of the Agency after the procedure outlined for
the establishment of regulations and boundaries pursuant to Section 22a-42 of the General
Statutes, as amended.
§96-44. Petition for Change.
All petitions requesting a change in the regulations or boundaries of regulated areas shall be
submitted, in writing, on a form provided by the Agency, a copy of which is included as an
Appendix. In addition, the applicant shall pay a fee according to the Schedule of Fees in the
Appendix, to help defray the cost and expenses of advertising. Such petition shall be
considered at a public hearing in the manner prescribed in the Act for the establishment of
regulations and boundaries. A copy of the proposed regulation or boundary change shall be
filed in the Town Clerk’s office for public inspection at least ten (10) days before such hearing.
Such public hearing shall be held within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of such petition. The
applicant shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing by certified mail no fewer than
ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The Agency shall complete the public hearing within thirtyfive
(35) days. The Agency shall act upon the changes requested within sixty-five (65) days
after the completion of the hearing. The petitioner may consent to extension of the periods
provided in this section for holding hearings and for adoption or denial of the requested
change, but the total of all extensions together cannot exceed sixty-five (65) days, or the
petitioner may withdraw the petition.
22
ARTICLE XII
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Certification
§96-45. Plan.
A Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be submitted with any application for
development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half
(1/2) acre.
§96-46. Eligibility for certifications.
A. To be eligible for certification, a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall contain
proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce
the danger from stormwater run-off on the proposed site based on the best available
technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in
the “2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control” as amended.
B. Said Soil Erosion and Sediment Control plan shall include, but not be limited to:
1. A narrative describing:
(a) The development.
(b) The schedule for grading and construction activities including;
[1] The start and completion dates.
[2] The sequence of grading and construction activities.
[3] The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and
sediment control measures.
[4] The sequence for final stabilization of the project site.
(c) The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and
stormwater management facilities.
(d) The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures
and stormwater management facilities.
(e) The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and
sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(f) The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment
control measures and stormwater management facilities.
2. A site plan at a sufficient scale to show the following:
(a) The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties.
(b) The existing and proposed topography, including soil types, wetlands,
watercourses and water bodies.
23
(c) The existing structures on the project site, if any.
(d) The proposed area alterations, including cleared, excavated, filled or graded
areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property
lines.
(e) The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment
control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(f) The sequence of grading and construction activities.
(g) The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment
control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(h) The sequence for final stabilization of the development site.
3. Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested
by the Agency or its Designated Agent.
§96-47. Issuance or denial of certification.
A. The Agency shall either Certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as
submitted, complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation or Deny
certification when the soil erosion and sediment control plan does not comply with these
regulations. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits
for the approval of any application under Chapters 124, 124A or 126 of the General
Statutes.
B. Prior to certification, any soil erosion and sediment control plan submitted to the
municipality may be reviewed by the County Soil and Water Conservation District, which
may make recommendation concerning such plan, provided that such review shall be
completed within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such plan.
§96-48. Conditions.
A. Conditions relating to soil erosion and sediment control. Site development shall not begin
unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is certified and the control measures
and facilities in the certified soil erosion and sediment control plan which are scheduled
for installation prior to site development are installed and functional. If any such site
development is begun prior to the time that such pre-development control measures and
facilities as required under such certified plan are installed and functional and such site
development continues after written notice is provided to the permittee under such
certified plan or such permittee's designated agent advising of the failure to comply with
the certified plan, the Agency may suspend or revoke its certification of such certified
plan.
B. Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as
scheduled according to the certified soil erosion and sediment control plan.
C. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in maintained in effective
condition to ensure the compliance of the certified soil erosion and sediment control
plan.
24
§96-49. Monitoring and Inspection.
Inspections may be made by the Agency or its designated agent during development to
ensure compliance with the certified soil erosion and sediment control plan and that control
measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and maintained. The Agency, the
Designated Agent, or and any agent designated by the Agency or Agent to make inspections
shall be allowed to access the project site at any time.
§96-50. Amendments to plan.
A. Minor amendments to a certified soil erosion and sediment control plan may be approved
by the Agency's designated agent, provided that the proposed amendment:
(1) Involves the replacement of inadequate or failed control materials or
devices with those determined to be more effective by the designated agent.
(2) Does not adversely change an approved restoration schedule.
(3) Is not a substantial redesign of the soil erosion and sediment control plan or
narrative, in the Designated Agent's opinion.
B. The permittee or the Agency's designated agent may petition the Agency for substantial
amendments to the certified soil erosion and sediment control plan.
§96-51. Model Signature Block
C E R T I F I C A T I O N
To verify "certification," as defined in soil erosion and sediment control regulations:
It is hereby certified that this soil erosion and sediment control plan is in compliance with 143-
22§§143-24 and 143-25 of the Wethersfield Subdivision Regulations and § 6.6 of the
Wethersfield Zoning Regulations, as applicable, and that the minimum standards established
in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control are satisfied.
The permittee under this plan is responsible for ensuring compliance with this plan. The Town
of Wethersfield shall not be held liable for improper installation, lack of maintenance or other
neglect on behalf of the permittee.
__________________________________________________
Chairperson
Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Commission
ARTICLE XIII
VIOLATIONS & CITATIONS
§ 96-52. Authorization to issue citations.
A. The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Enforcement Officer, designated in accordance with
Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-44 and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
25
Regulations of the Town of Wethersfield, or any police officer of the Town of Wethersfield
(hereinafter referred to as "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Enforcement Officer") is
authorized to issue citations for violations of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations of the Town of Wethersfield ("Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations") to
the extent and in the manner provided by Part 2 of this chapter.
B. A citation may be issued for those violations specified in § 96-53 of this chapter. The fines set
forth in Part 2 of this chapter shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other penalties or
remedies allowed by law.
§ 96-53. Schedule of Fines and Violations.
The fine for each such citation shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
Nature of Violation
Amount of
Fine
Clear-cutting $500
Placement of material in a regulated area $500
Violation of plans, conditions or other elements of an approved inland wetlands and
watercourses permit
$500
Violation of any element of an approved erosion and sedimentation control plan $150
Conduct, without the issuance of an inland wetlands and watercourses permit, of any
other regulated activity in a regulated area not listed above
$150
§ 96-54. Uncontested payment of citation.
Any person receiving such a citation shall be allowed a period of 60 days from his or her receipt of
the citation to make an uncontested payment of the fine specified in the citation to the Treasurer. If
the citation has been sent by regular mail pursuant to the provisions of § 96-52 of this chapter, the
day of receipt of the citation shall be deemed to be three business days after the day of mailing of
the citation.
§ 96-55. Procedure to contest citations.
A. If a person who has been issued a citation does not make uncontested payment of the fine
specified in the citation to the Town Clerk within the time allowed under § 96-54 of this chapter,
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Enforcement Officer shall send a notice to the person
cited, informing such person:
(1) Of the allegations against him or her and the amount of the fines;
(2) That the person cited may contest liability before a Hearing Officer appointed by the Town
Council, as provided in § 96-56 of this chapter, by delivering, in person or by mail, within
10 days of the date of the notice, a written demand for a hearing;
(3) That if the person cited does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment
shall be entered against him or her; and
(4) That such judgment may issue without further notice.
B. If the person who is sent notice pursuant to the preceding subsection wishes to admit liability
26
for any alleged violation, he or she may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of
the fine, either in person or by mail, to the Town Clerk. All fines shall be made payable to the
Town Clerk of the Town of Wethersfield. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any
proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the
payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within 10 days
of the date of the notice described in Subsection A of this section shall be deemed to have
admitted liability, and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Enforcement Officer shall certify
to the Hearing Officer that such person has failed to respond. The Hearing Officer shall
thereupon enter and assess the fines provided for by Part 2 of this chapter and shall follow the
procedures set forth in Subsection E of this section.
C. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for
the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the
date of the mailing of notice, provided that the Hearing Officer shall grant, upon good cause
shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement or continuance. The
presence of the issuing official or police officer shall be required at the hearing if requested by
the person who was issued the citation. A person wishing to contest liability shall appear at the
hearing and may present evidence in his or her behalf. The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Enforcement Officer may present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If the person who
received the citation fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may enter an assessment by default
against him or her upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable provisions of
the Wetlands Regulations. The Hearing Officer may accept written information by mail from the
person who received the citation and may determine thereby that the appearance of such
person is unnecessary. The Hearing Officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and
with such methods of proof as he or she deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the
admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath
or affirmation. The Hearing Officer shall announce his or her decision at the end of the hearing.
If the Hearing Officer determines that the person who received the citation is not liable, the
Hearing Officer shall dismiss the matter and enter that determination in writing accordingly. If
the Hearing Officer determines that the person who received the citation is liable for the
violation, the Hearing Officer shall forthwith enter and assess the fines against such person as
provided by Part 2 of this chapter.
D. Any person who files an appeal to the Wethersfield Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes § 8-6, which appeal contests the interpretation of the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations employed by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Enforcement Officer in the subject citation, shall not be excused from requesting a hearing in
accordance with Subsection C hereinabove. The filing of an appeal to the said Board without
also requesting a hearing hereunder shall not stay, defeat or negate the procedures and
penalties prescribed by Part 2 of this chapter, except as provided in this subsection. The
hearing set forth in the preceding subsection shall proceed, and the Hearing Officer shall make
a determination as to liability of the person who received the citation, based upon the facts as
determined at that hearing, and assuming the validity of the interpretation of the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations as determined by the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Enforcement Officer. However, the Hearing Officer shall not enter and assess
the fines provided by Part 2 of this chapter unless and until a final, unappealable decision of the
said Zoning Board of Appeals has been rendered upholding the interpretation of the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations as employed by the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Enforcement Officer. In the event that such a final, unappealable decision of the
said Zoning Board of Appeals has been rendered overturning the interpretation of the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations as employed by the Inland Wetlands and
27
Watercourses Enforcement Officer, the Hearing Officer shall dismiss the matter and enter that
determination accordingly.
E. If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the Hearing Officer shall send by firstclass
mail a notice of the assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30
days nor more than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment
with the Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area 15, together with an entry fee of $8.
Further proceedings may then be held pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
F. A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this section may appeal
within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment in accordance with Connecticut
General Statutes § 7-152c(g).
§ 96-56. Appointment of Hearing Officers.
The Town Council shall appoint one or more citation Hearing Officers to conduct the hearings
provided by Part 2 of this chapter. Neither the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Enforcement
Officer, the Building Inspector, nor any employee of the Town of Wethersfield exercising zoning
authority may be appointed as a Hearing Officer pursuant to Part 2 of this chapter.
§ 96-57. Severability.
In the event that any part or portion of Part 2 of this chapter is declared invalid for any reason, all
other provisions of Part 2 of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. In any case where a
provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other provision of law, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the people of the Town of Wethersfield shall prevail.
§ 96-58. Applicability.
Part 2 of this chapter shall not apply to citations issued by Town enforcement officers for violation
of state statutes. The provisions of Part 2 of this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other codes, ordinances or regulations of the Town of Wethersfield.
28
A P P E N D I X A
Application No._______
Date Filed ___________
APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO CONDUCT A
REGULATED ACTIVITY WITHIN AN INLAND WETLAND
OR WATERCOURSE AREA IN THE TOWN OF WETHERSFIELD
S E C T I O N 1
1. Name of Applicant_________________________________________
Home Address______________________________________________
Business Address__________________________________________
Telephone No._____________________________________________
2. Applicant's interest in the property
____ ____ ____ ____
/___/Owner /___/ Lessee /___/Lessor /___/Other________
3. Name of Property Owner (if not applicant)
__________________________________________________________
Home Address______________________________________________
Business Address__________________________________________
Telephone No._____________________________________________
(Attach a written, witnessed consent to the proposed activity by the owner, if applicant is not
the property owner a written consent form from the owner to file the application.)
4 Name and address of licensed professional engineer, land surveyor, or architect as applicable.
______________________ ________________________________
Name Address
5. Geographical location of the property detailed enough to allow identification of the property on
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map:
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
Specific Directions
29
(Use an additional sheet, if necessary, to draw a sketch showing the property in relation to
surrounding roads.)
6. Purpose and description of activity for which authorization is requested.
a) Proposed activity will involve the following within an inland wetland or watercourse area
(check appropriate box or boxes):
____ ____ ____
/___/alteration /___/construction /___/ deposition material
____ ____
/___/pollution /___/ removal of materials
b) Attach a general description of the proposal and identification of each regulated activity
for which a permit is sought, including the nature and volume of material to be placed,
removed, or transferred.
c) Attach a sketch showing location of proposed activity on property.
d) Please submit a detailed plan of the proposal, if available at this time.
e) Purpose of the proposed activity (i.e., addition to existing dwelling, new business,
industrial park, etc.):
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
7. Names and addresses of adjacent property owners (or attach separate sheet).
8. The property to be affected by the proposed activity contains a:
____ ____ ____ ____
/___/ swamp /___/ marsh /___/ bog /___/ lake or pond
____ ____
/___/ stream or river /___/ flood plain
____
/___/ other regulated area; Describe__________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
30
The undersigned states that under the penalties of false statement, the information supplied in
the completed application is accurate, to the best of his knowledge and belief.
___________________________________________
Signature of Applicant(s)
___________________________________________
Date Application Filed
WARNING: An application that requires local inland wetlands approval may also be regulated by the
federal government under the Clean Water Act which is administered by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers under the 404 permit program. The responsibility for
obtaining federal and/or state permits is a responsibility of the applicant as are any
fines, penalties and delays due to the applicant's failure to seek permits or to question
their applicability to the proposed activity.
31
A PP E N D I X B
Application No.________
Date Filed_____________
PETITION APPLICATION
REQUESTING A CHANGE IN THE REGULATIONS OR BOUNDARIES OF
AN INLAND WETLAND AREA IN THE TOWN OF WETHERSFIELD
Please fill in and return this form along with all maps, exhibits, etc., to the Engineering Division, Town
Hall, 505 Silas Deane Highway, Wethersfield, Connecticut 06109.
1. Name of Petitioner____________________________________________________
Home Address__________________________________________________________
Business Address______________________________________________________
Telephone No._________________________________________________________
2. Petitioner requesting change in
____
a.) /___/ regulations
____
b.) /___/ boundaries of an inland wetland area
3. If Box 2a is checked, proceed with the following:
a.) Cite section of regulation proposed for change:
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
b.) State how the proposed change is to read:______________________
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
c.) Give reasons for change:_______________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
If Box 2b is checked, proceed with the following:
32
4. The applicant shall submit a 200 scale M.D.C. Topographical map showing the outline of the
inland wetland as it now exists and as proposed by the petitioner.
a.) This property on which the boundary change is requested may be
reached from
________________________________________________________(Street)
by proceeding (north) (east) (south) (west)
on Route No. ____________or_______________________________________
and the following specific directions:
b.) Lot number (or other designation) as shown on the Tax Assessor's
Map (Zoning Map, Subdivision Map, etc.)
________________________________________________________________
Specify map source______________________________________________
c.) Petitioner's Interest in the Property
____ ____ ____ ____
/___/Owner /___/ Lessee /___/ Lessor /___/ Other
d.) Full disclosure shall be made by the applicant or applicant's agent for a change of inland
wetlands boundaries regarding the ownership of all parcels of land involved within the
confines of any area under application for a change of inland wetland boundaries and
the names of all parties having a legal or equitable interest therein. This disclosure
shall be made at the time the application for hearing is submitted.
I hereby certify that the following list reflects the names of all parties owning or having a legal
or equitable interest in the property/properties described in this application. Use additional
sheets if necessary.
Name Address Interest
___________________ _________________ __________________
___________________ _________________ __________________
e.) Names and addresses of abutting property owners
(Attach separate sheet).
5. The following information shall be supplied on a petition for a boundary change:
a.) Fifteen (15) copies of the existing inland wetlands map as noted
in Section 4 above.
b.) Soil sample data including a profile description of the soil done by a soil scientist duly
qualified in accordance with standards set by the Basic Qualifications, as outlined by the
Society of Soil Scientists of Southern New England, Certification Standards.
c.) Fifteen (15) boundary survey maps, scale 1"=40', 24"x36", certified by a land surveyor
registered in the State of Connecticut. These maps shall conform to the standards of
33
accuracy Class D of the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors, Inc. and shall show
the following:
Petitioner's property with all existing water courses; abutting owners; and an accurate
line identifying the inland wetland boundary based on the latest Metropolitan District
Geodetic and Topographical Survey. Proposed lines shall be based on Connecticut
Coordinate grid and plotted to the nearest foot, northerly and easterly. These lines shall
show distance and bearing. Also shown shall be boring locations and relevant
information supporting any boundary change.
A filing fee in accordance with Fee Schedule (for cost of legal notices) is required at time of filing the
petition application with the Engineering Division.
The undersigned states that under the penalties of false statement, the information supplied in the
completed application is accurate, to the best of their knowledge and belief.
_________________________________________
Signature of Applicant(s)
_________________________________________
Date Application Filed
WARNING: AN APPLICATION THAT REQUIRES LOCAL INLAND WETLANDS APPROVAL MAY
ALSO BE REGULATED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT UNDER THE CLEAN
WATER ACT WHICH IS ADMINISTERED BY THE UNITED STATES ARMY CORPS
OF ENGINEERS UNDER THE 404 PERMIT PROGRAM. THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR
OBTAINING FEDERAL AND/OR STATE PERMITS IS A RESPONSIBILITY OF THE
APPLICANT, AS ARE ANY FINES, PENALTIES, AND DELAYS DUE TO THE
APPLICANT'S FAILURE TO SEEK PERMITS OR TO QUESTION THEIR
APPLICABILITY TO THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY.
34
A P P E N D I X C
CONSERVATION EASEMENT
THIS INDENTURE made this ______ day of _____________ 20___, by and between
_____________________________ of the Town of ________________________ County of
___________________, and State of Connecticut, hereinafter referred to as "Grantor", and the
TOWN OF WETHERSFIELD, a municipal corporation having its territorial limits within the County of
Hartford, hereinafter referred as the "Grantee";
W I T N E S S E S
WHEREAS, the Grantor is the owner of certain real property, hereinafter referred to as "the
Property," situated in the Town of Wethersfield, County of Hartford and State of Connecticut; more
particularly described as (insert description)
and:
WHEREAS, Grantor by and through this instrument conveys an easement to Grantee of a
portion of the property designated as a "Conservation Easement," which is more specifically
described as
(Insert description)
and:
WHEREAS, the Grantor and Grantee agree that the easement described herein is to, and shall
run with, the land; and
WHEREAS, the Grantee, acting through its Inland Wetlands and Water- courses Commission,
has determined that the preservation of the easement area as open space in its natural state would
be in the public interest; and
WHEREAS, by Act of the Connecticut General Assembly, General Statutes, Revision of l958,
Revised to l985, Section 22a-42(b), as amended, the Grantee is empowered to acquire wetlands and
watercourses within its territorial limits by easement or covenant; and
WHEREAS, the Grantee, acting through its Inland Wetlands and Water- courses Commission,
has determined that the preservation and maintenance of the easement area as open space in a
natural condition can best be accomplished by securing, by Grantee, of a conservation easement
over, across, and upon the said Property of the Grantor;
NOW, THEREFORE, for good and valuable consideration delivered by the Grantee, receipt of
which is hereby acknowledged by the Grantor, the Grantor does hereby freely give, grant, assign,
bargain, sell and convey unto the Grantee, its successors and assigns forever, a conservation
easement and restriction over the easement area and property consisting of:
The right of the Grantee to act in the public interest to preserve the easement area in its
natural condition, free from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses and protected
from disturbance and destruction; the right of the Grantee, or its authorized agents, in a reasonable
35
manner and at reasonable times, to enter, inspect, and perform such work in the easement area as
Grantee deems desirable for the maintenance of the easement area or to assure the protection of its
open condition, water quality, natural vegetation and wildlife habitats, and the right of the Grantee to
enforce by proceedings in law or equity the covenants hereinafter set forth.
IN FURTHERANCE of the foregoing affirmative rights, the Grantor, on behalf of himself, his
heirs and assigns, covenants and agrees:
1. The easement area shall be used for conservation, educational, and limited recreational
(not including the use of motorized recreational vehicles) purposes only. No buildings,
roads, parking areas, signs, billboards or other structures, temporary or permanent,
shall be constructed on or in the easement area.
2. The easement area shall not be subdivided, now or hereafter, in order that the aims set
forth in the above declaration shall not be placed in jeopardy.
3. No alteration shall be made to the surface of the easement area other than that caused
by the forces of nature, unless such alteration is approved in advance and in writing by
the Inland Wetland and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Wethersfield or its
authorized representative. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following
activities are specifically prohibited on or in the easement area:
a.) The dumping or placing of soil or other substance or material as landfill or the
dumping or placing of trash, ashes, waste, rubbish, garbage, junk, or unsightly or
offensive materials.
b.) The excavation, dredging or removal of loam, peat, gravel, soil, rock or other
mineral or organic substance.
c.) The removal or destruction of trees, shrubs, or other natural vegetation.
d.) The killing of wildlife.
e.) The spraying of pesticides.
f.) Any activity or use detrimental to water quality, water conservation, drainage,
flood control, erosion control, soil conservation, wildlife or the maintenance of
the easement area in its natural scenic and open condition.
4. There is retained in the Grantor the following rights and obligations:
a.) The right to post the Property to control unauthorized use.
b.) The right to erect temporary signs to advertise the Property for sale or rent.
c.) The right to clear dead wood and brush from and otherwise maintain the
easement area after giving notice to and receiving written approval from the
Grantee, acting through its Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
5. Grantor understands and expressly agrees that Grantee shall, through this instrument,
have the right of ingress to and egress from the easement area from and through the
property for the purpose of using the easement area for all purposes provided and
assisting in the maintenance of same.
36
6. Should circumstances so change in the future that the purpose and intent of this grant
can no longer be fulfilled, or that the fulfillment of said purposes would no longer be
appropriate, the Grantor or its successors and the Grantee or its successors may
mutually agree to alter the rights, covenants and restrictions of this easement at any
time.
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the above-granted rights, privilege or authority unto said Grantee, its
successors and assigns forever, to its and their proper use and behalf.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Grantor has hereunto set or caused to be set his/her and seal
this ___day of______________, 20_____.
GRANTOR
___________________________
___________________________
___________________________
STATE OF CONNECTICUT)
) ss.
COUNTY OF HARTFORD )
Personally appeared, _____________________________ signer(s) of the foregoing instrument, and
acknowledged the same to be _________________________free act and deed before me this____
day of______________, 20_____.
_________________________________
Commissioner of the Superior Court
Notary Public
37
APPENDIX D
Town of Wethersfield
Schedule of Fees
a. Declaratory Rulings. Exemption : No fee.
b. Summary Ruling. One hundred thirty - five ($135.00)*or as
amended
c. Plenary Ruling. One hundred eighty- five (185.00)* or as
amended
d. State Impact Fee : Sixty ($60.00) or as amended
e. IW Map or regulation change One hundred twenty five dollars($125.00)
f. IW Regulations - purchase copy Ten dollars ($10.00)
g. IW Map - purchase copy Seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50)
h. Erosion and Sedimentation
Certification Exemption No fee.
i. Complex Application See Appendix F
* Includes State Impact Fee
(Rev. November24, 2009)
38
APPENDIX E
APPLICATION
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CERTIFCATION
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATER COURSES COMMISSIONS
APPLICATION NO. ES DATE
DATE ACTION TAKEN
TO BE COMPLETED BY THE WETHERSFIELD ENGINEERING DIVISION
PLEASE FILL IN AND RETURN THIS APPLICATION WITH (15) EROSION AND
SEDIMENTATION PLANS OUTLING ADEQUATE CONTROL MEASURES TO MINIMIZE
ACCELERATED EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION AND REDUCE THE DANGER FROM
STORM WATER RUNNOFF ON THE PROPOSED SITE WHERE MORE THAN ONE-HALF
ACRE OF CUMULATIVE AREA IS TO BE DISTURBED. FOR INFORMATION NECESSARY TO
DETERMINE THE REQUIRED NARRATIVE REFER TO ARTICLE XII OF THE INLAND
WETLANDS AND WATER COURCES REGULATIONS AMENDED December 2007
NAME OF APPLICANT
HOME ADDRESS
BUSIESS ADDRESS
TELEPHONE NUMBER
NAME OF PROPERTY OWNER (IF NOT APPLICANT)
39
APPENDIX F
ORDINANCE FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
Be it ordained that Chapter 100, Article I –Complex Land Development Applications be added
to the Code of the Town of Wethersfield.
[HISTORY: Planning & Zoning Regulations, ZBA, Inland Wetlands/Watercourse Regulations,
Design Review Advisory Committee and Historic District Commission Regulations]
Section 100-1 Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide the Wethersfield Planning and Zoning Commission,
Zoning Board of Appeals, Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Commission, Design Review Advisory
Committee, Historic District Commission and Town staff with the authority granted in Connecticut
General Statutes Section 8-1c, to establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the processing of
land use applications that are extraordinarily large, complex or significant and which may pose
environmental, traffic and/or other issues beyond the expertise of the Town’s staff to evaluate and
make appropriate recommendations. Such fees shall be used to cover the cost of retaining
experts to analyze and review the application.
Section 100-2 Procedure
In such instances, the Commission will review the matter with its staff and determine if outside,
independent studies and/or consultations are necessary for the Commission to decide the issues
before it. The Commission shall seek, to the extent practical, to identify the need for such studies
or consultations prior to the commencement of the public hearing process; provided, however, that
the Commission may also make such a determination during the hearing process. The decision to
require the assistance of consultants shall require the affirmative vote of not less than the
following: five (5) votes for Planning and Zoning applications, five (5) votes for Inland Wetlands and
Watercourse applications, four (4) votes for Zoning Board of Appeals applications, three (3) votes
for Historic District Commission applications and three (3) votes for Design Review Advisory
Committee applications. The Board/Commission shall notify the applicant of its determination that
such studies or consultations are needed and the estimated fee costs within 5 business days
following such determination. If the applicant fails or refuses to deposit the consultants estimated
fee with the Town the application will be considered incomplete. At its next regularly scheduled
meeting or hearing on the application the Board/Commission shall note in its minutes that the
application is considered incomplete. Incomplete applications are considered sufficient ground for
denial of the application.
Section 100-3 Consultant Selection
Town staff shall select, after soliciting fee proposals and at its sole discretion, the persons or
entities that are to perform such studies or consultations, and shall direct the performance of such
studies or consultations.
Section 100-4 Fee Required
The Commission shall require an applicant, as a condition of processing its application, to deposit
the fee for any required consultation or special study with the Town prior to the review of such
application. All fees required under this ordinance shall be paid by cash, check or money order
made payable to the Town of Wethersfield. The Commission shall require the applicant to place a
sum into a fee account in an amount reasonably calculated to reflect one hundred twenty-five
percent (125%) of the anticipated actual cost of such studies or consultations. The applicant shall
be provided with invoices of the expenses incurred by the Town for any outside consultant work.
Upon completion of the technical review by the outside consultant and after publication of the
Board or Commission’s decision as required by law the balance of the fee which has not been
expended by the Commission for the study and/or consultation shall be returned or released to the
applicant.
Effective Date
40
This ordinance shall be effective on August 3, 2009.
PURPOSE: To establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the processing of land use
applications that are extraordinarily large, complex or significant; which may pose
environmental, traffic and/or other issues beyond the expertise of the Town staff.
PREPARED BY: Peter Gillespie, Town Planner
INTRODUCED BY: Deputy Mayor Paul Montinieri
Date: June 15, 2009
41
ATTACHMENTS
1. Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission Rules and Procedures
42
ATTACHMENT 1
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATER COURSES COMMISSION
RULES AND PROCEDURES
ARTICLE I
Purpose and Authorization
The objectives and purposes of the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Commission of
Wethersfield are those set forth in The Connecticut General Statutes, and those powers and duties
delegated to the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Commission in the aforementioned Statutes
and by the “Ordinance Establishing an Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Commission” within
the Town of Wethersfield, approved on June 24, 1974.
ARTICLE II
The Commission shall be known as the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Commission, and
may hereafter be referred to as The Commission.
ARTICLE III
Office of Agency
The office of the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Commission shall be at Wethersfield Town
Hall where all Commission records will be kept. Copies of all official documents, records, maps,
etc., will be filed or recorded in the office of the Town Engineer when required.
ARTICLE IV
Membership
The membership and terms of office shall be as specified in the above stated ordinance
establishing The Commission, and the aforementioned General Statutes.
ARTICLE V
Officers and Their Duties
Section 1. The officers of the Commission shall consist of a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman.
Section 2. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings and hearings of The Commission and
shall have the duties normally conferred by parliamentary usage on such officers. The Chairman
shall have the authority to appoint committees, call special meetings, and generally perform other
duties as may be prescribed in these rules and procedures.
43
Section 3. The Chairman shall be one of The Commission members. He/she shall have the
privilege of discussing all matters before The Commission and of voting thereon. It is the
responsibility of the Chairman to assure a “Public Comments” item on the monthly agenda, that
such Public Comments be limited as to time and to issues unrelated to those matters otherwise
scheduled for Public Hearing. (Amended 7-20-88)
Section 4. The Vice Chairman shall act for the Chairman in his/her absence and have the
authority to perform the duties prescribed for that office. He/she shall be a Commission member.
Section 5. The Town Staff shall keep the minutes and records of The Commission and, shall
prepare the agenda of regular and special meetings under the direction of the Chairman, provide
notice of all meetings to Commission members; arrange proper and legal notice of hearings; attend
to correspondence of The Commission, and such other duties as are normally carried out by a
Clerk.
ARTICLE VI
Election of Officers
Section 1. An annual organization meeting shall be held the first meeting after July 1st, at
which time officers will be elected and rules and procedures reviewed and be made a part of the
annual meeting. Officers may be elected by a majority vote of members present.
Section 2. Nominations shall be made from the floor at the annual organization meeting and
elections of the officers specified in Section 1 of Article V shall follow immediately thereafter.
Section 3. A candidate receiving a majority vote of the members present shall be declared
elected and shall serve for one year or until his/her successor shall take office.
Section 4 Vacancies in office shall be filled by regular election procedure as herein specified
with terms to run until the next annual organizational meeting.
Section 5. Resignations from The Commission shall be in written form and transmitted to the
Town Clerk, who will then forward same to the executive officer of the Community.
ARTICLE VII
Meetings
Section 1. Regular meetings will be held at Wethersfield Town Hall on the third Wednesday of
each month, except as may be otherwise noted in the schedule of meetings on file in the office of
the Town Clerk. In event of conflict with holidays or other events, a majority may change the date
of said meeting at the time the annual schedule of meetings is prepared for filing with the office of
Town Clerk as set forth in Public Act 723 (1967). The Town Staff shall notify the membership of
regular meetings, in writing, not less than 48 hours in advance of such meeting.
Section 2. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman, when such meetings are deemed
necessary to the interests and welfare of the Town, provided notice of such meeting is posted in
the office of the Town Clerk not less than 24 hours prior to such meeting; and further, emergency
meetings may be called without such notice provided a copy of the minutes of such meeting,
adequately setting forth the nature of the emergency and the proceedings of The Commission is
44
filed in the office of the Town Engineer not more than72 hours following such meeting (Public Act
723, 1967).
Section 3. A majority of the voting membership of The Commission shall constitute a quorum,
and the number of votes necessary to transact business shall be a majority of members of the
Commission except approval of minutes which shall be by majority of members present, as
otherwise provided by the Connecticut General Statutes. The notice of such meeting shall specify
the purpose of such meeting and no other business may be considered except by unanimous
consent of the members present.
Section 4. In case any member of The Commission is unable to act because of absence,
sickness or self-interest, his place shall be taken by an alternate member selected under the
procedure specified by the Connecticut General Statutes.
Section 5. All meetings of The Commission shall be open to the public when in session and
shall be open to the public when in executive sessions when so voted by the majority of The
Commission members present and voting. In accordance with the “Ordinance Establishing an
Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Commission” within the Town of Wethersfield, all meetings at
which decisions are made shall be open to the public.
Section 6. Unless otherwise specified, “Roberts Rules of Order” shall govern the proceedings at
the meetings of this Commission.
ARTICLE VIII
Disqualification
No members of The Commission shall participate in any hearing or decision or any matter when
he/she is disqualified for self interest, personal, financial or otherwise. In the event of such
disqualification, it shall be entered upon the records of The Commission and the place of the
member disqualified shall be taken by an alternate member designated by the Chairman. The
Chairman shall make the final decision as to the disqualification of a member for self-interest.
ARTICLE IX
Order of Business
Section 1. Unless otherwise determined by the Chairman, the order of business at public
meetings shall be:
a. Call to order.
b. General Comments.
c. Public Hearings.
d. Public Meeting.
e. Old business.
f. New Business.
g. General Business
1. Approval of Minutes
2. Reports of Officers and Committees
3. Correspondence
h. Adjournment.
45
Section 2. A motion from the floor must be made and passed in order to dispense with any item
on the agenda or change the order of business.
ARTICLE X
Public Hearings
Section 1. Public hearings shall be held on the third Wednesday of each month, immediately
preceding the public meeting, except as may be otherwise noted in the schedule of meetings on
file in the office of the Town Engineer. In the event of conflict with holidays or other events, a
majority vote may change the date of said hearings at the time the annual schedule of meetings is
prepared for filing with the office of the Town Clerk in accordance with Public Act 723 (1967).
Section 2. The Commission may hold public hearings, in addition to required hearings, when it
decides that such hearings will be in the public interest, provided that notice of any such hearing is
posted in the office of the Town Engineer not less than 24 hours before such meeting in
accordance with Public Act 723, (1967).
Section 3. All public hearings prescribed by law shall be held in accordance with the
requirements set forth for such hearings in the “Ordinance Establishing an Inland Wetlands and
Water Courses Commission” within the Town of Wethersfield, the aforementioned Statutes and the
aforementioned Public Act 723 of 1967.
Section 4. A competent stenographer shall take the evidence, and/or the evidence shall be
recorded by a sound recording device, at each hearing before The Commission in which the right
to appeal lies to the Superior Court. Proceedings of the hearing shall be incorporated into the
minute book of The Commission to be permanent part of the record.
Section 5. To better expedite the proceedings of the hearing and to cause a better
understanding of the issue involved, The Commission shall have prepared prior to the hearing an
hearing agenda and visual aids for display and presentation during the discussion of the hearing, if
practicable.
ARTICLE XI
Conducting the Public Hearing
Section 1. The Chairman of the Commission shall preside at the public hearing. In the event of
his absence, the Vice Chairman or duly appointed Commission member shall act as presiding
officer.
Section 2. The Town Staff shall read the legal advertisement and note the dates and
newspapers in which the advertisement appeared.
Section 3. The Chairman shall prescribe the method of conduct of the hearing.
Section 4. It shall be made clear to the public that all comments must be directed to the Chair,
and only after being properly recognized by the presiding officer.
46
Section 5. All persons recognized shall approach the hearing table in order to facilitate proper
recording of comments. Before commenting on the matter before the hearing, each person shall
give his name and address.
Section 6. The presiding officer shall assure an orderly hearing and shall take necessary steps
to maintain the order and decorum of the hearing at all times. The presiding officer shall reserve
the right to terminate the hearing in the event the discussion becomes unruly and unmanageable.
Section 7. The show of hands by those persons present shall not be allowed on any general
question present at the public hearing. The hearing shall be conducted only for the purpose of
taking testimony to be considered in deliberations of the public meeting of The Commission.
ARTICLE XII
Special committees may be appointed by the Chairman for purposes and terms which The
Commission approved.
ARTICLE XIII
Public Relations
Section 1. The Chairman or a duly appointed Commission member or staff personnel shall act
as public relations or publicity director for The Commission. His/her duties include the preparation
of all news releases to be distributed to the communications media. All information releases shall
reflect the thinking of the majority of The Commission.
Section 2. In the matter of the press, radio, and television representatives, The Commission
shall comply with Chapter 3, Section 1-19, 1-20, 1-21, of the Connecticut General Statutes, 1958
Revisions, as amended.
ARTICLE XIV
Staff and Their Duties
Section 1. The Commission shall appoint a duly authorized agent to carry out specific
functions and duties as prescribed by The Commission. These duties shall include:
a. making jurisdictional rulings;
b. issuing enforcement orders;
c. making permit compliance inspections;
d. investigating complaints.
Section 2. The duly authorized agent shall make a report to the Commission at its regular
meeting. Such report shall consist of a list and description of all rulings and activities
performed.
Section 3. Any ruling made by the duly authorized agent is subject to final approval by
The Commission.
ARTICLE XV
47
Amendments
These rules and procedures may be amended by a two-thirds vote of the entire voting membership
of The Commission, only after the proposed change has been read and discussed at a previous
regular meeting, except that the rules and procedures may be changed at any meeting by the
unanimous vote of the entire voting membership of The Commission.
DATE OF LAST REVISION November 24, 2009
F:\Wetlands\regulations\November 24 2009 revision.doc

Historic District
CHAPTER 10 ARTICLE XVIII, HISTORIC DISTRICT AND HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
§ 10-41. Purpose.
It is the intent of this Article to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the town through the preservation and protection of buildings, places and districts of historic interest within the town; and to preserve and protect the many architectural phases of a Connecticut River Community on continual growth from the year 1964.

§ 10-42. Impairment of other powers.
All powers of the Town Zoning Commission and the Town Zoning Board of Appeals having to do with the use of land within the historic district shall not be impaired by this Article.

§ 10-43. District created.
There is created a historic district within the town.

§ 10-44. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the historic district shall be as follows: Commencing at a point which is the intersection of the easterly line of the right-of-way of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad and the southerly line of the Wilbur Cross Highway; thence southerly along said easterly line of the right-of-way of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad Company to the intersection of said line with a line parallel to and 150 feet west of the westerly line of Middletown Avenue; thence southerly along said parallel line to its intersection with the Wethersfield-Rocky Hill town line; thence easterly along the Wethersfield-Rocky Hill town line to the intersection of said line with a line parallel to and two hundred (200) feet east of the easterly line of Middletown Avenue; thence northerly along said parallel line to its intersection with the northerly line of the extension of Maple Street constituting the approach to the Putnam Memorial Bridge; thence easterly along said northerly line of the extension of Maple Street constituting the approach to the Putnam Memorial Bridge to the intersection of said line with the westerly line of Interstate 91; thence northerly along the westerly line of Interstate 91 to the Wethersfield-Hartford city line; thence westerly along the Wethersfield-Hartford city line to the intersection of said line with the easterly line of the Wilbur Cross Highway; thence southerly and westerly along the Wilbur Cross Highway to the point of beginning.

§ 10-45. Comprehensive plan.
The Commission shall prepare a plan of appropriateness and protection for the historic district as a standard by which to determine the appropriateness of historic architectural features of any new building or of any modification of existing buildings within the district. The plan shall comprehend construction materials and architectural arrangements considered appropriate for the district, to be illustrative but not necessarily comprehensive or extensive and to serve as a general guide for the information of persons contemplating work involving historic architectural features within the district.

§ 10-46. Commission created; membership; powers and duties.
There is created a Historic District Commission of five (5) members and three (3) alternates who shall be electors of the town holding no public office and who shall be empowered to perform all functions appointed to them by Sections 7-147a through 7-147h of the General Statutes. Members and alternate members of the Historic District Commission shall be appointed by the Council.

§ 10-47. Appointment; terms; officers.
The initial appointments of members of the Commission and alternate members shall be made in such manner that the term of at least one (1) member shall expire each year. Within the month of July each year, the Commission shall elect from its own number a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Clerk.

§ 10-48. Administration.
The Historic District Commission shall administer the provisions of Sections 7-147a through 7-147h of the General Statutes as implemented by this Article within the limits of the appropriation made by the Council and the budgetary allocation made by the Manager. The clerical, technical and consulting services necessary to the work of the Commission shall be provided by the Department of Public Works.

The Commission may adopt rules of procedure, regulations and orders which it deems necessary to carry out the intent of Sections 7-147a through 7-147h of the General Statutes and the intent expressed in § 10-41 above.

All work on any type of structure which would change the appearance of any property within the Historic District when viewed from the street line shall not be begun until the property owner has filed an application with the Building Inspector and has received a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic District Commission. For the purposes of this Article, the Building Inspector shall require the applicant to provide such information on those forms devised by the Historic District Commission as may be adopted or modified from time to time by the Commission. Prior to considering each application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission shall set a date for a public hearing to be held within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the application. Notice of the time and place of said hearing shall be given by publication in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the municipality at least seven (7) days before such hearing. Within sixty-five (65) days of the filing of an application, the Commission shall pass upon such application and shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant. Failure to act within the sixty-five (65) days shall constitute approval of the application. All hearings and all meetings of the Commission at which decisions are made shall be open to the public.

Property Maintenance
CHAPTER 122, PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 122-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the Town of Wethersfield" ("this code") and the standards established by this code shall be referred to as and constitute the minimum property standards of the Town of Wethersfield ("Town").

§ 122-2. Intent; authority.
This code is intended to protect, preserve and promote public health, safety and welfare; to prevent and control the incidence of communicable diseases; and to reduce environmental hazards to health, safety and welfare, insofar as they are affected by the maintenance of residential and nonresidential structures, equipment and premises as provided by this code. This code is also further intended to provide minimum standards governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of occupied and unoccupied premises and establish reasonable safeguards for the health, safety and welfare of the occupants and users of said premises, the community and the general public. This code is further intended to maintain and preserve the beauty of the neighborhoods and to allow for control of blighted premises.
This code shall establish minimum standards and responsibilities for the maintenance of all premises and delegates administrative responsibility and enforcement powers and creates enforcement procedures.
This code is adopted in accordance with the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes §§ 7-148, 7-148aa and 7-152c.
§ 122-3. Scope of provisions.
Applicability.
This code shall apply uniformly to the maintenance, use and occupancy of all premises now in existence or hereafter constructed, maintained or modified and shall include:
Dwellings or dwelling units, including one-family and two-family dwellings and multiple dwellings.
Lots, plots or parcels of land whether vacant or occupied.
Buildings of non-dwelling use, including commercial properties.
Accessory structures accessory to any building.
All apartments, boardinghouses, group homes, lodging houses, rooming houses, tenement houses and unrelated family units.
This code shall not apply to barns as identified in the book "Wonderful Barns of Wethersfield," copyright 1994, by Eleanor Buck Wolf, or to any other barn built before 1900, except when the Town Manager or their designee determines that existing conditions pose a threat to the health, safety and/or welfare of the public.
§ 122-4. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this chapter:

ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
A structure, the use of which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of principal building, structure or use on the same lot.
BLIGHTED PREMISES
Any building or structure, or any part of a structure that is a separate unit, or a parcel of land, or any accessory structure, or fence, in which at least one of the following additional conditions exists:
Town Manager or his/her designee determines that existing conditions pose a serious threat to the health, safety and welfare of the persons in Town;
It is not being maintained, as evidenced by the existence, to a significant degree, of one or more of the following conditions:
Missing, broken or boarded windows or doors;
Collapsing or deteriorating exterior walls, roofs, stairs, porches, handrails, railings, basement hatchways, chimneys, flues, or floors;
Exterior walls which contain holes, breaks, loose or rotting materials;
Foundation walls which contain open cracks and breaks;
Overhang extensions, including but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts, which contain rust or other decay,
Rat infestations;
Garbage or trash improperly stored or accumulated on the premises;
In the case of fence, broken or rotted boards or in an otherwise dilapidated condition; or
Any other exterior condition reflecting a level of maintenance which is not in keeping with community standards or which constitutes a blighting factor for adjacent property owners or occupiers or which is an element leading to the progressive deterioration of the neighborhood.
It is attracting illegal activity as documented in Police Department records;
It is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Marshal or as documented in the Fire Department records; and/or
It is a factor creating a substantial and unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of other premises within the surrounding area as documented by neighborhood complaints, police reports, the cancellation of insurance on proximate properties; or similar circumstances.
Blighted premises shall not include any such building, structure or parcel of land located on any active farm.
COMMUNITY STANDARD
A judgment by a reasonable member of the community.
CONNECTICUT GENERAL STATUTES
Includes any applicable amendments.
OWNER/OCCUPIER
Any person, institution, foundation, entity or authority which owns, leases, rents, possesses, or is responsible for property within the Town.
PROXIMATE PROPERTY
Any premises or parcel of land within 1,000 feet of a blighted premises.
§ 122-5. Signs, awnings and marquees.
Signs. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view permitted by reason of other ordinances or laws shall be maintained in good repair. Any signs which have excessively weathered or faded or those upon which the paint has excessively peeled or cracked or whose supporting members have deteriorated shall be removed forthwith or put into a good state of repair by the owner of the sign.
Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying structural member which extends over any street, sidewalk or other portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event that such awnings or marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the event that said awnings or marquees are made of cloth, plastic or of similar materials, said cloth or plastic where exposed to public view shall be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of excessive weathering, ripping, tearing or other holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
§ 122-6. Removal of weeds and similar vegetation.
Every owner/occupier of properties upon which a building exists, or who is in possession of a vacant lot in an approved subdivision which fronts on a paved public road and to which a public water and/or public sewer lateral has been provided, shall cut, to a height of not more than eight inches, all grass, weeds and similar vegetation not planted as a crop to be harvested or for ornamental purposes.
Every owner/occupier of property shall keep his property free from vegetation of any type which, in the opinion of the Town Manager or his/her designee, is injurious to public health.
Any violation of § 122-6A or 122-6B shall constitute a nuisance which may be abated by the Town at the expense of the owner, lessor, lessee or any other person in possession or any one or more of them to whom the Town Manager or his/her designee has given not less than 10 days written notice of intention to abate such nuisance. Such expense may be collected by the Town in a civil action against any one or more of the above-named persons responsible therefor.
§ 122-7. Storage; littering.
Accumulation restricted. It shall be unlawful for an owner/occupier to allow solid waste to accumulate on premises in the Town in such a manner as to create an offensive, unsightly or unsanitary condition.
Storage requirements. In the event that property usage would result in the stacking or piling of materials, including equipment and appliances, even if wanted and useful, they must be so arranged as to prohibit the creation of a blighting factor to their neighbors. Furthermore, all useful, wanted material, including equipment and appliances, stored out-of-doors shall be stored in an orderly fashion in the rear yard.
Throwing or depositing in Town. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit solid waste, material designated recyclable or recyclables in any part of the Town in such a manner as to create an offensive, unsightly or unsanitary condition. Property owners shall maintain their property litter free.
Throwing or depositing on streets and public grounds. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit solid waste, material designated recyclable or recyclables upon streets or sidewalks, in any catch basin, drain or watercourse or in parks or any public grounds in the Town, except that solid waste, material designated recyclable and recyclables may be deposited in proper containers.
§ 122-8. Complaints; warning
Any individual, civic organization, municipal agency, or Town employee affected by the action or inaction of an owner/occupier of property subject to the provisions of this chapter may file a complaint of violation of this chapter with the Town Manager. The Town Manager or his/her designee, upon his or her determination whether there is a violation of this chapter, shall forward a notice letter to the owner/occupier at the time such determination has been made.
Such a notice letter from the Town Manager or his/her designee shall be issued prior to issuing a citation.
Such notice letter shall include:
A description of the real estate sufficient for identification, specifying the violation which is alleged to exist and the remedial action required;
A due date, within a reasonable time, for the performance of any act required; and
The amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees that may be imposed for noncompliance.
The owner/occupier may not contest a warning.
Delivery of a notice letter or citation to the owner/occupier shall be by one of the following methods:
By personal delivery to the owner/occupier or by leaving the citation or notice letters at the usual place of abode of the owner/occupier with a person of suitable age and discretion;
By certified or registered mail addressed to the owner/occupier at his last known address, with postage prepared thereon; or
By posting and keeping posted for 24 hours a copy of the citation or notice letter in placard form in a conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 122-9. Enforcement
If the corrective actions specified in the notice letter are not taken the Town Manager or his/her designee may issue a written citation to the owner/occupier.
A citation shall be in writing and include:
A description of the real estate sufficient for identification-and a description of the violation which exists
The amount of the fines which may not exceed $100. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and a separate citation may be issued.
A statement that the owner/occupier may contest his liability and request a hearing, in accordance with Chapter 73 of the Wethersfield Code, by delivering in person or by mail written notice of objection within 10 days of the date of the citation
Effective date: February 1, 2011
Delivery of the citation shall be by the manner provided in § 122-8.
In lieu of citation and in accordance with § 7-148(c)(7)(E) of the Connecticut General Statutes, if the owner of any property, the condition of which constitutes an immediate threat to life, health, or safety or is otherwise unfit for human habitation, fails to comply with any order to repair or remove any building or portion thereof, or otherwise remediate the property, issued pursuant to the General Statutes or to the Code of Ordinances of the Town or when there exists actual and immediate danger upon the property, so as to endanger life or property, the official charged with enforcement of such provisions may proceed forthwith to cause to be done all work required to be done in compliance with such an order, and if necessary, to demolish or secure any structure or structures covered by any such order, and the Town shall have a lien on such property for the cost of such work or demolition, except that when no imminent danger exists, the owner of the property shall be given written notice of the Town's intention to undertake said work at least ten (10) days prior to the commencement thereof, and the Town may recover the cost of the work or demolition from the owner of such property by appropriate proceeding on complaint of said official.
§ 122-10. Severability.
In the event that any part or portion of this code is declared invalid for any reason, all the other provisions of this code shall remain in full force and effect.

§ 122-11. Construal of terms and provisions
Where terms are specifically defined or the meaning of such terms are clearly indicated by their context, that meaning is to be used in the interpretation of this code.
Where terms are not specifically defined and such terms are defined in the Charter and Municipal Code of the Town of Wethersfield, such terms shall have the same meaning for the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.
Where terms are not specifically defined in this chapter, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meaning or such meaning as the context may imply.
The provisions of this code shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other codes, ordinances or regulations of the Town of Wethersfield.
In any case where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance, regulation or other provision of the Charter and Municipal Code of the Town of Wethersfield or the State of Connecticut, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people of the Town of Wethersfield shall prevail.