
Boynton Beach, FL Code of Ordinances


PART II
CODE OF
ORDINANCES



Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 1-1.  How Code designated and cited.



   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Boynton
Beach, Florida,” and may be so cited.



(Code 1958, § 1-1)



   Charter reference-Authority to codify ordinances, § 33.



Sec. 1-2.  Rules of construction.



   In the construction of the City Code, Charter, ordinances and
resolutions, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise:



   And. The word “and” means in addition to. Example: An applicant
must submit a driver’s license and birth certification as means of
identification. Interpretation: An applicant must submit both of the two
documents. Compare “or” below.



   City. The words “the city” or “this city” shall be construed as
if the words “of Boynton Beach” followed it and shall extend to and
include its several officers, agents and employees.



   City Council/Commission.  Whenever the words “City Council” are
used, they shall be construed to mean the City Commission of the City of
Boynton Beach, and all references within the Charter and Code of Ordinances
of the City of Boynton Beach to the term “City Council” are henceforth
defined as synonymous to the term “City Commission”; and further, that
any reference to the term “Councilman” shall be synonymous to the term
“Commissioner” as provided for in Ordinance No. 87-4.



   Code 1958. Any reference herein to “Code 1958” shall be construed
to mean the “Code of Ordinances, City of Boynton Beach, Florida”, adopted
October 20, 1958, by Ordinance Number 315, as from time to time amended and
supplemented through and including Ordinance Number 77-37, adopted January 3,
1978.



   Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or
allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default from which the
designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day
of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday
or legal holiday in which event the period shall run until the end of the
next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.



   County. The words “the county” or “this county” shall mean the
county of Palm Beach.



   Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.



   Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.



   Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation
in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath,
and in such cases the words “swear” or “sworn” shall be equivalent to
the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”



   Or. The word “or” means in the alternative. Example: An applicant
must submit a driver’s license or birth certification as means of
identification. Interpretation: An applicant need only submit one of the two
documents.



   Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall
include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership,
joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.



   Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to
associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, co-partnerships, and
bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.



   Personal property includes every species of property except real
property.



   Shall. The word “shall” is mandatory. When used in connection with
action required by the City Commission it denotes required and therefore
ministerial action not subject to discretionary application.



   State. The words “the state” or “this state” shall be construed
to mean the State of Florida.



   Tense.  Words used in the present or past tense include the future as
well as the present or past. (Code 1958, § 1-2; Ord. No. 87-4, § 2, 2-3-87;
Ord. No. 13-018, § 2, 6-18-13)



   State law reference-General statutory definitions and rules of
construction, F.S. Ch. 1.



Sec. 1-3.  Catchlines of sections.



   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface
type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the Section
and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as
any part of the Section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
re-enacted.



(Code 1958, § 1-3)



Sec. 1-4.  Effect of repeal of ordinances.



   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.



   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or
cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.



(Code 1958, § 1-4)



   State law reference-Repealed statute not revived by implication, F.S.
§ 2.04.



Sec. 1-5.  Severability of parts of Code.



   The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code
are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or Section of
this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the
valid judgment or decree of the court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases,
clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.



(Code 1958, § 1-5)



Sec. 1-6.  General penalties; continuing violations; adjudging fines and
imprisonments.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to
comply with any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city and
where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the maximum penalty which may
be imposed upon any person who shall be adjudged to have violated any
provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city shall be a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or a term of imprisonment not in
excess of sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided,
however, that, this Section shall not conflict with any penalties imposed for
any offense under the laws of the State of Florida, and no penalty for
violation of this Code or any ordinance of the city shall exceed the maximum
penalty provided for the violation of a comparable state law. Each day any
violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city shall
continue, shall constitute a separate offense.



   (b)   Whenever the judgment of a court of appropriate jurisdiction
shall, under any of the ordinances of the city, adjudge a person to pay a
fine, or a fine and costs of prosecution, such judgment shall also provide a
period of time for which such person shall be imprisoned in default of the
payment of the same.



   (c)   Whenever the sentence shall be one of both fine and
imprisonment, it shall also provide for an additional period of imprisonment,
for which such person shall be held in default of payment of the fine and/or
costs of prosecution imposed. Such additional period shall commence to run
from the expiration of the other period of imprisonment fixed by the
sentence, provided that in no case shall the imprisonment for failure to pay
a fine, or fine and costs, together with any other imprisonment in the same
case, exceed the period of six (6) months. Nothing in this Section shall
exempt a prisoner from being put to labor during the period of such
additional imprisonment.



(Code 1958, § 1-6)



Sec. 1-7.  Cost assessed for law enforcement education.



   (a)   The court trying city ordinance violations shall assess two
dollars ($2.00) as additional court costs against every person convicted for
violation of a municipal ordinance as authorized by Section 943.25 of the
Florida Statutes. All such sums shall be turned over to the finance director
to be deposited in a fund as established in (b) to be known as the law
enforcement education fund.



   (b)   There is hereby established a fund to be known as the law
enforcement education fund. All funds received by the city from the
assessment of court costs established in this Section shall be segregated
from all other funds of the city and set apart by the finance director in a
separate fund to be known and designated as the law enforcement education
fund. Such funds may, from time to time, in the discretion of the city
commission, be invested. The interest received upon such funds and the
principal thereof may, upon the request of the chief of police, be used for
law enforcement education expenditures for the benefit of members of the city
police department. Expenditures shall be permitted by the city manager, upon
approval of the city commission, when authorized in accordance with law.



(Code 1958, § 2-10.1; Ord. No. 81-23, § 1, 8-4-81)



Sec. 1-8.  Certain ordinances not affected by Code.



   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following
when not inconsistent with this Code:



   (a)   Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any
evidence of the city's indebtedness;



   (b)   Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the
levy of taxes or for a budget;



   (c)   Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or excluding
territory as a part of the city;



   (d)   Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right;



   (e)   Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to
any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument;



   (f)   Any administrative ordinance not inconsistent with this Code;



   (g)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating or repairing any street or
public way or lawfully established bulkheads or bulkhead lines.



   (h)   Any ordinance regulating, restricting or prohibiting traffic
on particular streets or in particular localities;



   (i)   Any ordinance prescribing the street grades of any street in
the city;



   (j)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements or making
assessments therefor;



   (k)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision
in the city;



   (l)   Any ordinance zoning or rezoning specific property;



   (m)   Any ordinance providing for the compensation of officers and
employees;



   (n)   Any temporary or special ordinance;



and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and
effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.



Sec. 1-9.  Ordinances; city laws and codification.



   Ordinances of the city commission adopted in a manner provided by law
shall constitute the laws of the city and shall be in full force and effect
until repealed. The city commission shall have the power to have the city
ordinances codified, and published in book form.



(Ord. No. 91-16, § 3, 4-2-91)



Sec. 1-10.  Reciprocity implied.



   In the construction of this Code, all provisions which establish a
distance requirement between types or kinds of businesses or structures shall
be construed in a manner which makes that distance requirement reciprocal.



(Ord. No. 91-65, § 1, 9-19-91)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 91-65, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 1991, enacted
provisions pertaining to reciprocity, designated as § 1-9. Such Section has
been redesignated 1-10 by the editor in order to avoid duplicative Section
numbers.



Sec. 1-11.  City seal.



   Pursuant to F.S. Ch. 165.043, the City of Boynton Beach does hereby
designate the city seal as the official seal of the City of Boynton Beach and
that the manufacture, use, display or other employment of any facsimile or
reproduction of the county or municipal seal, except by county or municipal
officials or employees in the performance of their official duties, without
the express approval of the governing body is a second degree misdemeanor,
punishable as provided in F.S. Sections 775.082 and 775.083. A copy of the
official seal for the City of Boynton Beach can be viewed in the City Clerk's
office.



(Ord. No. 03-067, § 2, 1-6-04)



Sec. 1-12.   Civil rights.



   (a)   Purpose. The Boynton Beach City Commission desires to secure
for its citizens freedom from discrimination because of race, color, national
origin, religion, sex, gender identity or expression, genetic information,
sexual orientation, disability, marital status, pregnancy, familial status,
or age, and thereby to protect their interest in personal dignity; to make
available to the city their full productive capacities; to secure the city
against domestic strife and unrest; to preserve the public safety, health and
general welfare; and to promote the interests, rights and privileges of
individuals within the city. The City Commission also desires to adopt an
ordinance which is consistent with federal, state and local laws and which
affords its citizens a clear channel of access to remedies in the case of
alleged discrimination, to wit, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,
the Florida Commission on Human Relations and the Palm Beach County Office of
Equal Opportunity.



   (b)   Adoption of Boynton Beach Civil Rights Act. The Florida Civil
Rights Act of 1992, Chapter 760, Sections 760.01 through 760.11 and Section
509.092; Florida’s Fair Housing Act, Chapter 760, Sections 760.20 through
760.37; the Palm Beach County Equal Employment Ordinance, Chapter 2, Article
VI, Division 1, Sections 2-251 through 2-313; and the Palm Beach County
Ordinance for Equal Opportunity to Housing and Places of Public
Accommodation, Chapter 15, Article III, Sections 15-36 through 15-67 are
collectively adopted by reference as the Boynton Beach Civil Rights Ordinance
Act, subject to and including by reference such amendments, corrections and
additions as shall occur therein or as may appear in this chapter.



(Ord. No. 15-007, § 2, 3-2-15)



Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION*




Art. I.   In General, §§ 2-1—2-24.1





Art. II.   City Manager, §§ 2-25—2-40





Art. III.   Elections, §§ 2-41—2-55





Art. IV.   Purchasing and Consultants, §§ 2-56—2-71





Art. V.   Code Compliance Board; Special Magistrate, §§ 2-72—2-100





Art. VI.   Reserved





Art. VII.   Education and Youth Advisory Board, §§ 2-116—2-125





Art. VIII.   Education Advisory Board, §§ 2-126—2-140





Art. IX.   Senior Advisory Board, §§ 2-141—2-147





Art. X.   Personnel Policy Manual, § 2-151





Art.  XI.   Arts Commission, §§ 2-154—2-158





Art. XII.   Art in Public Places Program, §§ 2-159—2-170





Art. XIII.   Civil Emergencies - Employee Compensation, §§ 2-171—2-184





Art. XIV.   Reserved





Art. XV.   Small and Minority Business Enterprises, §§ 2-201—2-220





Art. XVI.   Requirements for City of Boynton Beach’s Property Assessed
Clean Energy Programs (“PACE”), § 2-221





Art. XVII.   Reserved





Art. XVIII.   Reserved





Art. XIX   Requirements for City of Boynton Beach’s Docked Bike Share
Systems §§ 2-222—2-240




   Cross reference-Pensions and retirement for city personnel, Ch. 18.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 2-1.  Personnel and equipment organizational chart adopted.



   Pursuant to the Charter and the ordinances of the city, the following
organizational chart is hereby established and adopted as the personnel and
equipment organizational chart for the city:



   CITY OF BOYNTON BEACH



   ORGANIZATIONAL CHART




You will need Adobe PDF Reader to view chart




[Click here to view Organizational Chart]



(Code 1958, § 2-4.8; Ord. No. 83-21, § 1, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 84-1, § 1,
1-17-87; Ord. No. 88-10, § 1, 3-1-88; Ord. No. 89-9, § 1, 5-2-89; Ord. No.
01-08, § 1, 1-16-01; Ord. No. 03-004, § 1, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 05-062, § 2,
11-1-05)



Sec. 2-1.1.   City council renamed city commission; offices and titles of
mayor and vice-mayor retained.



   It is hereby declared by the city council of the City of Boynton Beach,
Florida, that henceforth the name and title of the legislative body of the
City of Boynton Beach, Florida, shall be the city commission of the City of
Boynton Beach, Florida; and further, that the office of the legislative
members shall be entitled commissioner, with the retention of the offices and
additional titles of mayor and vice-mayor.



(Ord. No. 87-4, § 1, 2-3-87)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 87-4, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1987, has been
included herein as § 2-1.1 by the editors; further, it should be noted that
§ 3 of Ord. No. 87-4 provides in part that the above-mentioned changes will
be included in the Charter and Code of Ordinances at such time as
recodification is required. In the interim, such changes will be made in the
Code as pages are necessarily updated through the supplement service pursuant
to the city's instructions.



   Cross reference-Definitions applicable to Code generally, see Rules of
construction, § 1-2.



Sec. 2-1.2.  Vice-Mayor appointment.



   At the second regular City Commission meeting following the swearing in
of newly elected officers, the City Commission shall appoint one of its
members to serve as Vice-Mayor. Any member of the City Commission who has not
previously served as Vice- Mayor during his or her current term of office may
be selected to serve as Vice-Mayor. No second of the nomination is required.
Voting shall occur in the following manner: Voting shall be by voice vote.
Each member of the Commission shall vote for one nominee in each round of
voting until one person obtains a majority vote. If no nominee obtains a
majority in round one, there is another round of voting but the nominee with
the least number of votes does not move on to round two. If there are four
nominees in round one, the nominee with the most votes wins. If only one
member is nominated to serve as Vice-Mayor, the Mayor shall declare the
nominee appointed by acclamation without the necessity of a vote.



(Ord. No. 03-063, § 1, 12-16-03; Ord. No. 08-005, § 3, 4-1-08)



Sec. 2-2.  Public works department established; divisions; administrator.



   A public works department is hereby established, and the said
department shall include divisions of sanitation, sign shop, shop and garage,
and streets. The superintendent of public works is hereby designated as
administrator of the said department, and he shall be assisted by the
assistant superintendent of public works.



(Code 1958, § 2-4.7.2)



   Cross references-Garbage and trash generally, Ch. 10; streets and
sidewalks generally, Ch. 22.



Sec. 2-3.  Utilities department established; divisions; administrator.



   A utilities department is hereby established, and the said department
shall include divisions of water plant, sewer plant, water distribution and
sewage collection. The utilities director is hereby designated as
administrator of the said department.



(Code 1958, § 2-4.7.3.)



   Cross reference-Water, sewers and city utilities, Ch. 26.



Sec. 2-4.  Engineering department established; administrator.



   An engineering department is hereby established, and the city engineer
is hereby designated administrator of the department.



(Code 1958, § 2-4.7.1)



Sec. 2-4.1.  Information Technology Services/ Geographic Information
Services; functions.



   (a)   A department of Information Technology Services/Geographic
Information Services is hereby established.



   (b)   The department of Information Technology Services/Geographic
Information Services will be utilized to assist and direct in the
organization and development of specialized computer programming for all
departments of the city.



(Ord. No. 80-7, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 01-08, § 2, 1-16-01)



Sec. 2-5.  Position of prosecutor created.



   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 23 of the Charter of the city,
there is hereby created the unclassified position of city prosecutor, said
position to be filled by appointment by the city commission, with said
officer to serve at the pleasure of the city commission. Any person appointed
to the position of city prosecutor shall be duly licensed and authorized to
practice law within the State of Florida.



(Code 1958, § 2-4.4)



Sec. 2-6.  Duty and responsibility of prosecutor.



   The duty and responsibility of the city prosecutor shall be to
prosecute all cases for violation of ordinances of the city, when requested
to do so by the city commission, any police official or officer or the city
manager.



(Code 1958, § 2-4.5)



Sec. 2-7.  Compensation of prosecutor.



   Compensation for the office of city prosecutor shall be established by
resolution of the city commission.



(Code 1958, § 2-4.6)



Sec. 2-8.  Legal defense and indemnification of city officials, employees.



   (a)   Definition. The term “city officials and employees,” as
used in this Section shall include the mayor, city commissioners, all
appointed officers of the city (including members of the housing authority)
all board members, commission members or committee members of the city and
all administrative personnel and employees of the city.



   (b)   Right of representation. The city attorney's office, insurance
defense counsel, if applicable, or other counsel appointed by the city
commission shall undertake the representation or defense without charge of
city officials and employees with respect to any claim or cause of action
arising out of or related to the performance by said city officials or
employees of their public duties.



   (c)   Indemnification. City officials or employees who are
personally liable for the payment of any claims arising out of a civil
action, or settlements, judgements, expenses, costs and awards of attorney's
fees arising therefrom shall be entitled to indemnification from the city
(except to the extent the city's insurance coverage provides payment where
the claim resulted from activities):



      (1)   Which were done in good faith;



      (2)   In which the city has an interest;



      (3)   Which were within the course of employment or in the
course of performance of public duties of the persons so acting; and



      (4)   Where not willful, wanton or malicious.



   (d)   Reservations of rights. The undertaking of legal defense by
the city under subsection (b) above shall automatically be under a
reservation of rights regarding the eligibility of the subject claim for the
benefits provided by this Section.



   (e)   No waiver of defenses. Nothing in this Section shall be
construed to waive any defense in any action which would be available in the
absence of this section to the city or individual city officials or
employees, including but not limited to, those defenses which could be
asserted under Florida Statute 768.28 or any successor statute thereto.



(Code 1958, § 2-4.11)



Sec. 2.9.  Vice-mayor; duties and official designation.



   (a)   The vice-mayor shall, when the mayor is officially absent,
during vacation, on leave, or otherwise, act as head of the city and shall
assume all of the duties and responsibilities of the mayor.



   (b)   The vice-mayor shall, while acting in such official capacity,
designate himself as vice-mayor in any instrument which he may sign in behalf
of the city, including checks, ordinances or other official documents.



(Code 1958, § 2-4, 2-2)



Sec. 2-10.  Reserved.



   Editor's note-The position of mayor pro tem, previously codified as
Section 2-10, was abolished pursuant to Ord. No. 096-09, § 1, passed April
2, 1996.



Sec. 2-11.  Maintaining order, decorum at commission meetings.



   (a)   No person shall willfully interrupt or disturb the proceedings
or meeting of the city commission or any city board.



   (b)   Only those individuals recognized by the presiding officer are
authorized to speak to the commission or to a city board.



      (1)   All other speech, remarks, or comments are unauthorized.



      (2)   Unauthorized speech, remarks, comments, stamping of
feet, whistles, yells and similar actions or demonstrations constitute an
interruption to public meetings, and are prohibited.



   (c)   All persons attending any city meeting shall render inaudible
any beepers, cellular telephones, or other mechanical or electronic devices
while such meeting is in session.



   (d)   The presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum
at all meetings.



   (e)   The chief of police or such member or members of the police
department as the chief may designate shall be sergeant-at-arms at the
regular and special meetings of the city commission or board. The
sergeant-at-arms shall carry out orders and instructions given by the
presiding officer or by a majority of the city commission or board present
for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the city commission
meetings.



   (f)   The city commission shall allow members of the public to
address the commission regarding items not on the Commission agenda.



      (1)   The time for addressing the Commission with non-agenda
comments shall be designated "Public Audience."



      (2)   The commission may, by order of the day, limit the time
that members of the public may address the commission.



      (3)   If no orders of the day are established, the time limit
for addressing the commission is three (3) minutes.



   (g)   The city commission may allow members of the public to address
the commission on non-public hearing agenda items under such rules as are
adopted from time to time by the commission by motion.



   (h)   The city commission shall allow members of the public to
address the commission on public hearing agenda items under such rules as it
adopts from time to time by motion.



   (i)   Any person who causes an interruption of the meeting shall be
warned by the presiding officer that the conduct is interfering with the
order of the meeting and shall be given the opportunity to cease the conduct
that constitutes an interruption.



      (1)   If the individual fails to cease the offending conduct
and continues interrupting the meeting, the individual shall be removed from
the meeting room if the sergeant-at-arms is so directed by the presiding
officer, and such person shall be barred from further audience for the
remainder of the meeting.



      (2)   In case the presiding officer shall fail to act, any
member of the city commission may move to require the presiding officer to
act to enforce the rules, and the affirmative vote of the majority of the
city commission or board shall require the presiding officer to act.



   (j)   Any person who, at a city commission or board meeting,
willfully interrupts or disturbs a city commission or board meeting in
violation of F.S. § 871.01, entitled "Disturbing Schools and Religious and
Other Assemblies," is subject to arrest by those law enforcement officers
present. No action by the presiding officer is required for a law enforcement
officer to enforce F.S. § 871.01.



Sec. 2-12.  Disbursement of federal funds for social services for the poor
or aged.



   (a)   Ten (10) per cent of all federal revenue sharing funds under
the State and Local Fiscal Assistance Act of 1972 (Title I, Public Law
92-512) heretofore and hereafter received by the city shall be expended for
the ordinary and necessary maintenance and operating, expended for social
services for the poor or aged residents of the city, upon the approval of the
city commission as hereinafter provided.



   (b)   Each application for such expenditure shall be submitted to
the community relations board for review, study and investigation.
Thereafter, the community relations board shall furnish its written
recommendation to the city commission as to such application.



   (c)   No portion of the said ten (10) per cent of the revenue
sharing funds shall be disbursed by the city for such ordinary and necessary
maintenance and operating expenses for social services for the poor or aged
unless recommended by a majority of the entire membership of the community
relations board and thereafter approved by the city commission.



   (d)   The said ten (10) per cent portion of the revenue sharing
funds shall be limited to ten (10) per cent of the funds actually received by
the city. When the distribution of the said revenue sharing funds to the city
is terminated, the expenditures by the city for the said ordinary and
necessary maintenance and operating expenses for social services for the poor
or aged shall likewise terminate.



   (e)   Each reference to “revenue sharing funds” in this section
is intended to refer to all federal revenue sharing funds received under the
State and Local Fiscal Assistance Act of 1972 (Title I, Public Law 92-512).



(Code 1958, § 2-62)



   State law reference-Revenue sharing act, F.S. § 218.20 et seq.



Sec. 2-13.  Operating capital improvements fund established; composition.



   (a)   An operating capital improvements fund is hereby created and
established for the city.



   (b)   Whenever deemed feasible from time to time by the city
commission, any portion of the unappropriated funds at the close of each
fiscal year may be transferred and revert to the operating capital
improvements fund.



   (c)   All federal revenue sharing funds received under the State and
Local Fiscal Assistance Act of 1972 (Title I, Public Law 92-512) except the
ten (10) per cent of such federal revenue sharing funds allocated for
ordinary and necessary maintenance and operating expenses for social services
for the poor and aged under section 2-62, shall be deposited into the said
operating capital improvements fund.



   (d)   Whenever deemed feasible from time to time by the city
commission, up to twenty (20) per cent of all state revenue sharing grants
received from the State of Florida shall be deposited into the said operating
capital improvements fund.



   (e)   Whenever deemed feasible from time to time by the city
commission, any portion of the funds remaining in the operating capital
improvements fund at the close of each fiscal year, excepting therefrom all
appropriated or encumbered funds, may be transferred and revert to the
general fund.



(Code 1958, § 2-61)



Sec. 2-13.1.  Redevelopment trust fund; powers of agency, redevelopment.*



   (a)   There is hereby established and created in accordance with the
provisions of Section 163.387, Florida Statutes (1983), a redevelopment trust
fund (hereinafter referred to as the “trust”).



   (b)   The funds allocated to, and deposited into the trust are
hereby appropriated to the Boynton Beach Community Redevelopment Agency
(hereinafter referred to as the “agency”) to finance or refinance each
community redevelopment project it undertakes. The agency shall utilize the
funds and revenues paid into and earned by the trust for all and every
community redevelopment purpose as contained in the plan for redevelopment
and as provided by law.



   (c)   The annual funding of the “trust” shall be in an amount
not less than that increment in the income, proceeds, revenues, and funds of
the city or county derived from or held in connection with its undertaking
and carrying out of community redevelopment projects therein. Said increment
shall be determined and appropriated annually, and shall be that amount equal
to ninety-five (95) per cent of the difference between:



      (1)   The amount of ad valorem taxes levied each year by each
taxing authority, exclusive of any amount from any debt service millage on
taxable real property contained within the geographic boundaries of a
community redevelopment area; and



      (2)   The amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been
produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year by or for each
taxing authority, exclusive of any debt service millage, upon the total of
the assessed value of the taxable real property in the community
redevelopment area as shown upon the most recent assessment roll used in
connection with the taxation of such property by each taxing authority prior
to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived.



   (d)   All relevant taxing jurisdictions' obligation to fund the
trust shall continue until all loans, advances, and indebtedness, if any, and
interest thereon, of the agency incurred as the result of a community
redevelopment project have been paid, but only to the extent that the tax
increment described in subsection (c) accrues. Said taxing jurisdictions
shall make their appropriation to the trust at the beginning of their fiscal
year. The trust shall receive the increment above described, only as, if and
when such taxes are collected. Said taxing jurisdictions shall fund the trust
for the duration of each project undertaken by the agency and approved by the
city. The first appropriation shall begin with tax revenue received
subsequent to October 1, 1984.



      (1)   The revenue bonds and notes of every issue of the agency
shall be payable solely out of revenues pledged to and received by the agency
and deposited to the trust. The lien created by such bonds or notes shall not
attach until the revenues referred to herein are deposited in the trust at
the times, and to the extent that, such revenues accrue.  The holders of
such bonds or notes shall have no right to require the imposition of any tax
or the establishment of any rate of taxation in order to obtain the amounts
necessary to pay and retire such bonds or notes. The trust shall receive the
tax increment described in subsection (c) only as, if, and when such taxes
are collected.



      (2)   Revenue bonds issued by the agency shall not be deemed
to constitute a debt, liability, or obligation of the city or the state or
any political subdivision thereof or a pledge of the faith and credit of the
city or the state or any political subdivision thereof but shall be payable
solely from the revenues provided therefor. All such revenue bonds shall
contain on the face thereof a statement to the effect that the agency shall
not be obligated to pay the same or the interest thereon except from the
revenues of the agency held for that purpose and that neither the faith and
credit nor the taxing power of the city or of the state or of any political
subdivision thereof is pledged to the payment of the principal of, or the
interest on, such bonds.



   (e)   The agency is hereby directed to develop and promulgate rules,
regulations, and criteria whereby the trust may be promptly and effectively
administered, including the establishment and the maintenance of books and
records and the adoption of procedures whereby the agency may expeditiously
utilize said funds for their allocated statutory purpose.



   (f)   The community redevelopment agency shall exercise all powers
and expend all funds in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 163, Part
III, Florida Statutes and those provided for in Article II of Section 1.5 of
the City's Land Development Regulations, and any community redevelopment plan
shall conform with the comprehensive plan of the city, as amended. Further,
in development of the community redevelopment plan, the community
redevelopment agency shall comply in all respects with the height limitations
imposed by the zoning code of the city, and further such plan shall ensure
that the quality of the wetlands and mangroves will not be impaired except in
conformity with the comprehensive plan.



(Ord. No. 83-41, §§ 1—5, 12-20-83; Ord. No. 84-9, § 1, 2-21-84; Ord. No.
85-45, Attach. (b), 8-20-85; Ord. No. 00-69, § 2, 12-19-00)



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 82.13, adopted May 18, 1982, named five members
to the board of commissioners of the community redevelopment agency.
Ordinance No. 85-38, § 1, adopted July 2, 1985, increased the number of
members from five to seven, as permitted by F.S. § 163.356(2). Ord. No.
87-15, §§ 1—4, adopted July 7, 1987, repealed Ord. Nos. 82-13 and 85-38
and provided that the city commission be the board of commissioners of the
community redevelopment agency. Ord. No. 89-11, §§ 1—4, created two
community redevelopment agencies and described the jurisdiction of each, §§
2-13.3 and 2-13.4. Subsequently, Ord. No. 90-21 provided for the
consolidation of such agencies, the city commission being the governing body
thereof. See §§ 2-13.2—2-13.4.



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 83-41, enacted Dec. 20, 1983, as amended, did
not expressly amend the Cede; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—5 as hereinabove
set out in § 2-13.1 was at the editor's discretion.



   Cross references-Planning, Ch. 19 ; taxation, Ch. 23.



Sec. 2-13.2. Governing body of community redevelopment agency.*



   (a)   The Community Redevelopment Agency Board shall consist of the
five (5) members of the City Commission plus two (2) additional members
appointed by the City Commission.



   (b)   The terms of office of the additional Board members shall be
for four (4) years, except that the first person appointed shall initially
serve a term of two (2) years.



   (c)   Any person may be appointed as Board Member if he or she
resides or is engaged in business, which means owning a business, practicing
a profession, or performing a service for compensation, or serving as an
officer or director of a corporation or other business entity so engaged,
within the area of operation of the agency, which shall be coterminous with
the area of operation of the City of Boynton Beach.



   (d)   A certificate of the appointment or reappointment of any Board
Member shall be filed with the City Clerk, and such certificate is conclusive
evidence of the due and proper appointment of such Board Member.



(Ord. No. 90-21, §§ 1—4, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No.
00-59, § 2, 11-8-00; Ord. No. 00-69, § 3, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 01-62, § 1,
12-18-01; Ord. No. 04-008, § 2, 3-16-04; Ord. No. 07-026, § 2, 10-2-07;
Ord. No. 08-003, § 2, 2-19-08; Ord. No. 08-026, § 2, 9-2-08; Ord. No.
09-030, § 1, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § 1, 3-1-11)



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 90-21, §§ 1—4, 6, 7, adopted Aug. 7, 1990,
provided that the city commission be the governing body of the community
redevelopment agency for the entire community redevelopment area, set forth
the scope of its powers and duties, and provided for the consolidation of
previous actions. Such provisions have been codified as superseding former
§§ 2-13.2—2-13.4, which had delegated certain powers and duties to the
community development agency, provided for two boards of commissioners of
community redevelopment: housing and community development (city commission),
and the central business district. Such sections derived from Ord. No. 84-28,
§§ 1, 2, adopted July 3, 1984; Ord. No. 87-15, §§ 3, 4, adopted July 7,
1987; and Ord. No. 89-11, §§ 1—4, adopted Aug. 1, 1989. Further, § 5 of
Ord. No. 90-21 vacated all appointments to the community redevelopment agency
for the control business district and discharged the members of such board
from their duties and responsibilities. See also the editor's footnote to §
2-13.1.



Sec. 2-13.3.  Powers and duties of agency generally.



   The community redevelopment agency shall have all powers provided for
or authorized by general or special laws of the state as amended from time to
time, including but not limited to the specific powers delineated in F.S. §
163.370.



   Note-See the editor's footnote to § 2-13.2.



Sec. 2-13.4.  Consolidation of previous agencies; survival of actions.



   All powers, duties, and responsibilities of the community redevelopment
agency for the central business district shall survive and be deemed merged
and consolidated with the powers, duties and responsibilities of the
community redevelopment agency for housing and community improvement. All
previous actions of the community redevelopment agency for the central
business district shall survive this consolidation unless specifically
revoked by the community redevelopment agency.



(Ord. No. 90-21, § 7, 8-7-90)



   Note-See the editor's footnote to § 2-13.2



Sec. 2-13.5.  Community Redevelopment Area.



   (a)   The boundaries of the Community Redevelopment Area are as set
forth in the following legal description:



   BEGINNING at a point of intersection of the West right-of-way line of
the Intracoastal Waterway with the North line of the South one-half (S ½) of
the North one-half (N ½) of Section 15, Township 45 South, Range 43 East,
said North line being the North boundary line for the City of Boynton Beach,
thence run Westerly along the said North line, said North line being also the
centerline of Northeast 26th Avenue and its eastern extension thereof, said
extension crossing the F.E.C. Railroad, U.S. Highway One (S.R. # 5), and
further being the North line of that part of the South 150 feet of the North
1,455.5 feet of the Northwest 1/4 of said Section 15, Township 45 South,
Range 43 East, to a point on the West line of said Section 15: said West line
being also the East right-of-way line of Northeast 4th Street;



   thence Southerly along the West line of said Section 15 to the
Southwest corner of said Section 15, being also the Northwest corner of
Section 22, Township 45 South, Range 43 East;



   thence continuing Southerly along the West line of said Section 22,
Township 45 South, Range 43 East, to a point on the North right-of-way line
of the Boynton Canal (SFWMD C-16 Canal) as currently laid out and in use;



   thence Westerly along the said North right-of-way line of the Boynton
Canal lying in Sections 21 and 20, to a point of intersection with the
Northerly extension of the West right-of-way line of West Industrial Avenue
as shown on the plat of BOYNTON BEACH INDUSTRIAL PARK NORTH, according to the
plat thereof as recorded in Plat Book 43, Pages 20-22, Public Records to Palm
Beach County,  Florida;



   thence Southerly along the said West right-of-line of West Industrial
Avenue and its continuation  in the plat of BOYNTON BEACH INDUSTRIAL PARK,
according to the plat thereof as recorded in Plat Book 25, Page 232, Public
Records of Palm Beach County, Florida, to a point on the South right-of-way
line of State Road 804 (West Boynton Beach Boulevard) as currently laid out
and in use;



   thence S. 81° 48' 30" E. along the South right-of-way line on West
Boynton Beach Boulevard (based on an assumed bearing of N. 87° 40' 46" E. of
the centerline of West Boynton Beach Boulevard), a distance of 302.68 feet to
a point;



   thence S. 87° 13' 22" E. along said South right-of-way line, a
distance of 309.97 feet to a point;



   thence S 80° 25' 27" E. along said South right-of-way line, a distance
of 50.95 feet to the Southwest corner of Lot 5, Block 1, according to the
plat of LAKE BOYNTON ESTATES PLAT 1, as recorded in Plat Book 13, Page 32,
Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida;



   thence N. 88° 06' 29" E. along the South right-of-way line and the
South line of said Lots 3, 4 & 5, Block 1, LAKE BOYNTON ESTATES PLAT 1, a
distance of 150.00 feet to the Southeast corner of said Lot 3, and a point on
the East line of Section 29 and the West line of Section 28, Township 45
South, Range 43 East, Palm Beach County, Florida;



   thence S. 01° 31' 31" E. along the said West line of Section 28, a
distance of 506.58 feet to the intersection of the centerline of West Ocean
Avenue as currently laid out and in use;



   thence S. 89° 47' 31" E. along the said centerline of West Ocean
Avenue, to its intersection with the West right-of-way line of Seacrest
Boulevard as currently laid out and in use;



   thence Southerly along the West right-of-way of Seacrest Boulevard to
its intersection with the centerline of Southwest 2nd Avenue;



   thence Easterly crossing Seacrest Boulevard and continuing on the
centerline of Southeast 2nd Avenue to the Easterly right-of-way line of the
Florida East Coast Railway (FEC R/R) right-of- way);



   thence Southerly along the East right-of-way line of the FEC R/R, to a
point of intersection with the Westerly projection of the South line of Lot
20, DELRAY BEACH ESTATES, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Plat
Book 21, Page 13, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida;



   thence S. 73° 45' 15" E. along said Westerly projection of the South
line of said Lot 20, the South line of said Lot 20 and its Easterly extension
a distance of 680.21 feet to a point on the Easterly right-of-way line of
South Federal Highway (U.S. #I), said South line being also the corporate
boundary of the City of Boynton Beach;



   thence Northerly along the Easterly right-of-way line of South Federal
Highway (U.S. # 1), to a point of intersection with the South line of the
South 50 feet of the "Not Included" parcel adjacent to Lot A, as shown on the
plat of KING'S SUBDIVISION, as recorded in Plat Book 20, Page 47, Public
Records of Palm Beach County, Florida;



   thence Easterly along said South 50 foot line to a point on the West
line of TRADE WINDS ESTATES, FIRST ADDITION, according to the plat thereof as
recorded in Plat Book 22, Page 44, Public Records of Palm Beach County,
Florida;



   thence Northerly along said West line of TRADE WINDS ESTATES, FIRST
ADDITION, a distance of 50 feet to a point, said point being also the
Southeast corner of said Lot A, KING'S SUBDIVISION;



   thence Westerly along the South line of said Lot A, KING'S SUBDIVISION,
to the Easterly right-of-way of South Federal Highway (U.S. #1) as currently
laid out and in use;



   thence Northerly along the said Easterly right-of-way line of South
Federal Highway (U.S. #1),  to a point on the South line of Lot 8, KINGS
SUBDIVISION, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Plat Book 20, Page
47, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida;



   thence Easterly, Northerly and Westerly along the South, East & North
lines of said Lot 8, KINGS SUBDIVISION, to a point on the said Easterly
right-of-way line of South Federal Highway (U.S. #1);



   thence Northerly along the said Easterly right-of-way line of South
Federal Highway (U.S. #1), to a point that is the Southwest corner (SW) of
the plat of ESTANCIA AT BOYNTON BEACH PUD, according to the plat thereof as
recorded in Plat Book 108, Pages 25 & 26, Public Records of Palm Beach
County, Florida, said point being also on the North right-of-way line of
Bamboo Lane, a private road;



   thence along the following courses (based on the North line of the
previous record plat known as DAKOTA LOFTS, as recorded in Plat Book 97,
Pages 132 to 134, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida being S. 89°
18' 46" W.);



      S. 76° 27' 18" E., a distance of 150.00 feet to a point,



      N. 11° 16' 09" E., a distance of 13.95 feet to a point;



      N. 89° 18' 46" E., a distance of 248.79 feet to a point;



      N. 05° 26' 06" W., a distance of 94.50 feet to a point;



      N. 89° 18' 46" E., a distance of 300.00 feet to a point on the
West right-of-way line of the Intracoastal Waterway as currently laid out and
use;



   thence Northerly and along the West right-of-way line of said
Intracoastal Waterway to the POINT OF BEGINNING.



   LESS all of Lots 39 & 40, Lots 66 & 67, Lots 72 thru 76, and Lots 78
thru 112, including all 20-foot right-of-ways connected thereto, as shown on
the AMENDED PLAT OF TRADE WINDS ESTATES, as recorded in Plat Book 21, Page
73, according to the Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida, and



   LESS all of Lots 1 thru 5, including the 50-foot right-of-way for
Miller Road, as shown on the plat of KILLIAN'S PARK, as recorded in Plat Book
23, Page 195, according to the Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida.



   The following described properties which were annexed into the City of
Boynton Beach subsequent to the adoption of Ordinance 00-59 are expressly
deemed included in the Community Redevelopment Area as of the effective date
of annexation of those properties:



   TICKET CLINIC:



      Lots 2 and 3, Less the Westerly 17 feet thereof, KING'S
SUBDIVISION, according to the Plat thereof, as recorded in Plat Book 20, Page
47, of the Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida.



   BOYNTON BAGELS:



      Lot 8, Less the Westerly 17 feet for road right-of-way, KINGS
SUBDIVISION, according to the Plat thereof, as recorded in Plat Book 20, Page
47, of the Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida.



   BAYFRONT :



      Lots 56 & 57, AMENDED PLAT OF TRADEWINDS ESTATES, according to
the Plat thereof as recorded in Plat Book 21, Page 73, of the Public Records
of Palm Beach County, Florida, Less a portion of Lot 57 for right-of-way of
State Road No. 5 [South Federal Highway] as shown on State of Florida Road
Department right-of-way map Section No. 9301-205.



   THE VILLAS OF BOYNTON BEACH (aka TUSCAN VILLAS):



      Lot 1 and Lot 1A of KINGS SUBDIVISION, according to the Plat
thereof, as recorded in Plat Book 20, Page 47, Public Records of Palm Beach
County, Florida; less the Westerly 17 feet of said lots.



      Together with:



      All that part of Lot C of KINGS SUBDIVISION, in Section 4,
Township 46 South, Range 43 East, Palm Beach County, Florida, as per Plat
recorded in Plat 20, Page 47, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida,
except the following part thereof: Beginning at the Southwest (SW) corner of
said Lot C, thence run Northerly along the West line thereof; a distance of
eighty (80) feet, thence Southeasterly (SE) in a straight line to the
Southeast (SE) corner of said Lot C; thence run West along the South line of
said Lot C to the Point of Beginning. Further less and except the Westerly 17
feet for road right-of-way.



   PALM COVE:



      That part of Lot 59, AMENDED PLAT OF TRADE WINDS ESTATES, a
subdivision, according to the Plat thereof, recorded in Plat Book 21, Page
73, of the Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida; lying west of the
right-of-way of State Road 5 (U.S. Highway No. 1) as conveyed to Palm Beach
County, Florida by a deed recorded in Official Records Book 124, Page 638 of
the Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida.



      Together with:



      Lots 37, 38 and 58 of the AMENDED PLAT OF TRADE WINDS ESTATES,
according to the Plat recorded in Plat Book 21, Page 73, of the Public
Records of Palm Beach County, Florida, less that portion deeded to the State
of Florida by instrument in Official Records Book 104, page 35, Public
Records of Palm Beach County.



      Together with:



      Lot 15, of KILLIAN'S PARK, a subdivision according to the Plat
thereof, as recorded in Plat Book 23, Page 195, of the Public Records of Palm
Beach County, Florida, less that portion of Lot 15, conveyed to the State of
Florida by Warranty Deed in Official Records Book 119, Page 453, of the
Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida.



      Together with:



      All of Lots 6 through 14 and Lots 16 through 29, of KILLIAN'S
PARK, according to the Plat recorded in Plat Book 23, Page 195, of the Public
Records of Palm Beach County, Florida.



      Together with:



      The 30-foot right-of-way of Miller Road as shown on the Plat of
KILLIAN'S PARK, as recorded in Plat Book 23, Page 195, in the Public Records
of Palm Beach County, Florida, adjoining Lots 6 through 14 of said KILLIAN'S
PARK, as abandoned by the City of Boynton Beach Ordinance No. 06-007 dated
January 17, 2006.



   WATERSIDE:



      A parcel of land in Section 4, Township 46 South, Range 43 East,
Palm Beach County, Florida, being more particularly described as follows:



      COMMENCE at the Northeast (NE) corner of Lot 48, TRADE WINDS
ESTATES, FIRST ADDITION, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Plat
Book 22, Page 44, of the Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida, said
corner being on the Westerly right-of-way line of the Intracoastal 
Waterway; thence N. 05° 26' 06" E., on said Westerly right-of-way line, a
distance of 365.92 feet to the POINT OF BEG1NNING; thence S. 89° 18' 46" W.,
a distance of 385.00 feet; thence N. 05° 26' 06" E., a distance of 4.08 
feet; thence S. 89° 18' 46" W., a distance of 35.00 feet; thence S. 05° 26'
06" W., a distance of 174.98 feet; thence S. 89° 18' 46" W., a distance of
236.14 feet to a point of curvature of a circular curve, concave to the
Southeast; thence Southwesterly on the arc of said curve, with a radius of
102.47 feet and a central angle of 34° 34' 00", an arc distance of 61.82
feet to a point of reverse curvature of a circular curve concave to the
Northwest; thence Southwesterly on the arc of said curve, with a radius of
82.59 feet and a central angle of 34° 34' 00", an arc distance of 49.83 feet
to a point of tangency; thence S. 89° 18' 46" W., a distance of 94.20 feet
to the intersection with the Easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway One
(S. R. No. 5), said intersection being on the arc of a circular curve,
concave to the West, the Radius point of which bears N. 73° 25' 48" W.;
thence Northerly on said Easterly right-of-way and on the arc of said curve,
with a radius of 11,509.20 feet and a central angle of 02° 23' 09", an arc
distance of 479.27 feet; thence N. 89° 14' 41" E., a distance of 245.48
feet; thence N. 05° 26' 06" E., a distance of 95.70 feet to the intersection
with a line parallel with and 578.97 feet South of the North line of said
Section 4; thence N. 89° 18' 46" E., on said parallel line, a distance of
274.00 feet; thence S. 06° 36' 55" W., a distance of 40.21 feet to the
intersection with a line parallel with and 618.85 feet South of the North
line of said Section 4; thence N., 89° 18' 46" E., on said parallel line, a
distance of 250.00 feet to the intersection with the aforementioned Westerly
right-of-way line of the Intracoastal Waterway; thence S. 05° 26' 06" W., on
said Westerly right-of-way line, a distance of 315.29 feet to the POINT OF
BEGINNING.



   For purposes of establishing the base year from which tax increment
increases shall be calculated for  the foregoing listed projects, the date
of annexation of the property into the jurisdictional boundaries of the City
shall control as those properties were already in the boundaries of the
Community Redevelopment Area as described in Ordinance 00-59.



   (b)   All property within the boundaries of the Community
Redevelopment Area, including those properties which constitute
unincorporated enclaves, have been found by the City Commission to share the
same characteristics of the slum and/or blighted properties which surround or
are adjacent to them and are therefore suitable for and will benefit from the
community redevelopment programs of the Community Redevelopment Agency.



   (c)   All unincorporated enclaves within the Community Redevelopment
Area which are annexed into the City of Boynton Beach subsequent to the
adoption of this code section shall be considered for inclusion in the
Community Redevelopment Area. At time of annexation, the City Commission
shall expressly state its findings that the property meets the statutory
criteria for inclusion in the Community Redevelopment Area. Contemporaneously
with the annexation of property which is otherwise suitable for inclusion in
the Community Redevelopment Area, the  City shall also adopt (following a
recommendation from the Community Redevelopment Agency  that the property is
statutorily eligible for inclusion in the Community Redevelopment Area) an
ordinance amending the Community Redevelopment Area boundaries. In addition
to a finding that the statutory grounds for inclusion in the Community
Redevelopment Area exist, the ordinance shall include a provision for written
notice of the boundary amendment to the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser.



(Ord. No. 08-026, § 3, 9-2-08)



Sec. 2-14.  Salary incentive program for law enforcement officers.



   The city hereby adopts the salary incentive program for its law
enforcement officers provided by Florida Statutes, Section 943.22.



(Code 1958, § 2-4.9)



Sec. 2-15.  Limitation on board member advocacy and lobbying.



   (a)   For purposes of this section the term “advocate” means to
communicate without economic consideration for the passage or defeat of any
measure that comes before the City Commission or CRA Board for approval.



   (b)   For purposes of this section the terms “lobbying” and
“lobbyist” have the same meaning as set forth in the Palm Beach County
Code of Ethics.



   (c)   The prohibitions and penalties set forth in this section are
supplemental to the lobbying prohibitions and penalties set forth in the Palm
Beach County Code of Ethics.



   (d)   A city board member may not advocate privately or publicly
with a city staff member, member of the City Administration, member of the
City Commission or the Commission as a whole, CRA staff member, member of the
Community Redevelopment Board or the CRA Board as a whole, for or against the
interest of an individual, partnership, corporation, or other business entity
which has an application, request, or any other matter pending for review or
approval with the city when the matter has come before the Board on which the
board member sits or it is reasonably foreseeable that the matter will come
before the Board.



   (e)   A board member may not speak at a City Commission meeting or
CRA meeting on any matter which has been before the member’s Board or is
reasonably expected to come before the member’s Board unless:



      (1)   A member of the City Commission requests that the board
member answer questions regarding the Board’s actions; or



      (2)   The member’s Board has voted in the affirmative to
request that the board member address the City Commission.



   (f)   Violation of the rules set forth in this section constitutes
grounds for removal of a board member by the City Commission, following
notice and opportunity to be heard.



   (g)   A city board member is prohibited from acting as a lobbyist,
as that term is defined by the Palm Beach County Code of Ethics, if the
subject of the member’s lobbying activity may foreseeably be presented for
consideration to a city advisory board, the City Commissioners or CRA Board.



   (h)   In addition to any penalties provided for in the Palm Beach
County Code of Ethics, a violation of the prohibitions set forth in this
section is grounds for removal by the City Commission of the board member
from the city Board(s) to which the board member has been appointed.



(Ord. No. 18-031, § 2, 10-31-18)



   Editor's note—Ord. No. 03-050, passed 9-16-03, deleted § 2-15
pertaining to the per diem and travel expense schedule and was derived and
amended by Ord. No. 84-13, § 1, 3-6-84; the aforementioned schedule is now
located in the Personnel Policy Manual, on file in the City Clerk's office;
Ord. No. 85-45, Attach. (b), 8-20-85; Ord. No. 90-32, §§ 1, 2, 9-5-90; Ord.
No. 97-33, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 6-6-00.



Sec. 2-16.  City boards and commissions; minimum qualifications for
appointment, membership.




   (a)   In order to qualify for appointment to and to serve as a
member of any board or committee of the city, an individual must be an
elector of Palm Beach County, Florida.





   (b)   In selecting individuals to serve on boards and committees of
the city, preference shall be given to individuals who are residents of the
City of Boynton Beach, provided however, that non-residents who own and
operate businesses located within the city may also qualify for appointment
provided they possess qualifications or experience uniquely suited to deal
with the subject matter over which the board or committee has subject matter
review or power.





   (c)   No currently serving member of any board or committee shall be
disqualified for falling to meet the minimum qualifications set forth in this
section. However, at the expiration of the term of each current board of
committee member, the vacancy created by that expiring term shall be filled
with an individual qualified in accordance with the provisions of this
section.





   (d)   Notwithstanding any other provision of city code or procedural
rule, no alternate member of any city board may serve in the capacity of its
Chairperson, Vice Chair, Chair Pro-Tem, or hold any other office on said
board.





   (e)   No alternate member may be moved to a regular member of the
Board unless appointed by the City Commission.




   (f)   When a member of any Board, with the exception of those Boards
that have regularly scheduled meetings more than once a month, has missed
three regular monthly meetings for any reason within one annual  board term,
that member will be notified that one additional absence will cause his/her
Board membership to be terminated and a replacement will be appointed at the
time of the next absence. Those boards that have regularly scheduled meetings
more than once a month shall be permitted to have six absences during any one
annual board term. The seventh absence shall result in removal from the board.



   (g)   No person shall be appointed to a City Board without the
person first submitting an application for appointment. No application for
appointment shall be considered by the City Commission until the application
form has been fully completed and signed by the applicant. All applications
for appointment to a City Board shall be on a form authorized by the City
Commission. The City Clerk shall review all applications for completeness
prior to submitting them to the City Commissioners for consideration.



      (1)   Prior to appointment, a City Commissioner may request
written confirmation of the qualifications listed by any applicant for
appointment. When a request for confirmation of the qualifications is made by
a City Commissioner prior to appointment, the appointment shall be delayed
until the information requested is submitted and made available to the
members of the City Commission. No person shall be appointed to a City Board
when that person is unable to substantiate the qualifications listed on their
application.



      (2)   A member of the City Commission may request written
confirmation of qualifications of a person who has been appointed by the
Commission to a City Board. A request for confirmation shall be made by the
City Commissioner to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall make written
request to the Board member. A copy of the Clerk's written request shall be
provided to all members of the City Commission.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a Board member who
does not submit documentation of the qualifications listed on the Board
member's application for appointment within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the Clerk's written request, or who submits documentation which contradicts,
negates, or fails to substantiate the information listed on the Board
member's application shall automatically be removed from their Board position.



      (4)   A person who is removed from a City Board pursuant to
the procedures set forth in this section shall not be subject to
reappointment to any City Board for a period of thirty-six (36) months.



      (5)   Board members are limited from advocating or lobbying on
matters which have or will come before the board member’s Board.



   (h)   The City Commission shall fill vacancies on city boards by
making appointments in December following the city's November commission
elections, commencing with the City Commission election of November, 2007. 
To the extent necessary to transition from April to November appointment, the
term of office for any board appointee which would expire in April, 2008 or
any April thereafter shall instead expire in the preceding November.



(Ord. No. 90-11, §§ 1—3, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 98-48, § 1, 12-15-98; Ord.
No. 99-03, § 1, 1-19-99; Ord. No. 01-60, § 1, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 03-024, §
2, 6-17-03; Ord. No. 07-004, § 2, 1-16-07; Ord. No. 18-031, 10-31-18)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 90-11, §§ 1—3, adopted June 19, 1990, did
not specifically amend the Code, but has been included as § 2-16 by the
editor.



   Cross references-Procedures for boards, commissions, etc., with
independent purchasing authority, § 2-61; code compliance board, § 2-72 et
seq.; building board of adjustment and appeals, § 5.153 et seq. ; cemetery,
board of governors, § 6-4 et seq.; library board, § 12-1 et seq.; parks and
recreation board, § 16-1 et seq.; planning and zoning board, § 19-1 et seq.
; community appearance board, § 19-38 et seq .; technical review board, §
19-63 et seq.



Sec. 2-17.  City boards, appointment of alternate members.



   All boards of the city with seven (7) or more members, shall have a
minimum of two (2) alternate members, to be appointed by the city commission.
All boards of the city with less than seven (7) members, shall have a minimum
of one (1) alternate member, to be appointed by the city commission. The
alternate members shall hold the same general qualifications as regular
members to be eligible for appointment. The term of alternate members, if not
otherwise provided, shall be for one (1) year and such appointees may be
reappointed.



(Ord. No. 92-55, § 1, 11-17-92)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 92-55, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 1992, enacted
provisions pertaining to appointment of alternate members to city boards.
Such provisions have been designated by the editor as § 2-17.



Sec. 2-18.  Payment of moneys to city; overdraft service fee.



   There is hereby established a service fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) or
five (5) percent of the face amount of any check, draft, or order, whichever
is greater, for the collection of a dishonored check, draft, or other order
for the payment of money to the city or any department thereof. The service
fee shall be in addition to all other penalties imposed by law.



(Ord. No. 91-38, § 1, 6-18-91; Ord. No. 93-35, § 1, 9-21-93)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 91-38, § 1, adopted June 18, 1991, enacted
provisions concerning a service fee for dishonored checks, etc., to the city,
such provisions have been designated as § 2-18 by the editor.



Sec. 2-19.  Drug free work place.



   (a)   Policy statement. The City of Boynton Beach is committed to
provide a safe work environment for its employees, our community and society.
Substance abuse is a national problem which impairs the health and safety of
employees, promotes crime and harms our community. The city is addressing
this problem by instituting a drug free workplace program.



   Substance abuse is a complex, yet treatable disease. The ultimate goal
of this policy is to balance the respect for individual privacy with the need
to keep a safe, productive drug free environment. The intention is to prevent
and treat substance abuse. The city would like to encourage those who use
drugs or abuse alcohol to seek help in overcoming their problem. The city
will attempt to assist an employee in obtaining treatment prior to taking
disciplinary action when such treatment is associated with a first occurrence
of substance abuse. The city considers substance abuse to be an unsafe and
counterproductive work practice.



   The city's policy is in accordance with the Florida Drug Free Workplace
Program as provided in Section 440.102, Florida Statutes and Chapter 38F-9.,
Florida Administrative Code. It is the intent of the city to adopt the
policies and standards set forth in Chapter 38F-9. To the extent of any
conflict between the standards established by this policy and the standards
set forth in Chapter 38F-9 F.A.C., as amended from time to time, the
standards set forth in Chapter 38F-9 shall prevail. Policies and standards
contained herein and not addressed in Chapter 38F-9 F.A.C. shall control.



   To ensure a work place free from the influence of illegal drugs and
alcohol abuse the following policy has been established.



   It is the policy of the city that an employee found with the presence
of alcohol or illegal drugs in his/her system, in possession of, using,
selling, trading or offering for sale illegal drugs or alcohol during working
hours, may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
(City sponsored activities which may include the service of alcoholic
beverages are not included in this provision).



   An employee reporting for work visibly impaired shall be considered
unable to properly perform required duties and will not be allowed to work.
If possible, the supervisor should first seek another supervisor's opinion of
the employee's condition. Then the supervisor together with a representative
from the personnel department should consult privately with the employee to
rule out any problem(s) that may have been caused by prescription drugs.



   When an off-duty employee is called back to work and that employee has
consumed alcoholic beverages, that employee shall disclose such use and
decline callback. An employee shall not be disciplined for refusing to
respond to callback when such employee has reasonable belief that he or she
could not pass an alcohol blood level test. Employees who are on standby may
be subject to callback [and] should not engage in social drinking and may not
decline callback without being subject to discipline.



   If, in the opinion of the supervisor and a representative of the city
manager's office or the personnel director or his or her department
representative the employee is considered impaired, the employee should be
sent home, after drug testing by a medical facility, by taxi or other safe
transportation alternative, depending on the determination of the observed
impairment, accompanied by the supervisor or another employee, if necessary.
An impaired employee should not be allowed to drive. The prescribed test
direction form shall be completed by the supervisor.



   Prescription drugs prescribed by the employee's physician may be taken
during working hours. The employee shall notify the supervisor if the use of
properly prescribed drugs will affect the employee's work performance. Abuse
of prescription drugs will not be tolerated.



   It is the responsibility of the city's supervisors to counsel with an
employee whenever they see changes in performance that suggest an employee
problem. The supervisor may suggest that the employee voluntarily seek help
from the employee assistance program or decide that the severity of the
observed problem is such that a formal referral to the EAP should be made.



   (b)   Definitions. [For the purposes of this section, the following
words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:]



      (1)   Alcohol: Means ethyl alcohol (ethanol) and includes
distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages and intoxicating liquors.



      (2)   Alcohol abuse: An employee shall be determined to be
under the influence of alcohol if the employee's normal faculties are
impaired due to the consumption of alcohol or the employee blood alcohol
level is 0.05 g/dl% or higher.



      (3)   Illegal drugs: Means any drug(s) which is not legally
obtainable, which may be legally obtainable but has not been legally obtained
or which is being used in a manner or for a purpose other than as prescribed.



      (4)   Drugs: Means alcohol, amphetamines, cannabinoids,
cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP), hallucinogens, synthetic narcotics, designer
drugs, or a metabolite of any of the substances listed above.



      (5)   Legal drug: Means prescribed drugs and over the counter
drugs which have been legally obtained and are being used solely for the
purpose for which they were prescribed or manufactured.



      (6)   Job applicant: Means a person who has applied for a
position with the city and has been offered employment conditioned upon
successfully passing a drug test.



      (7)   Employee: Means an individual who works for the city for
compensation and is covered by the Workers Compensation Act.



      (8)   Drug testing: Means any chemical, biological or physical
instrumental analysis for the purpose of determining the presence of an
illegal drug or its metabolites, including alcohol.



         Drug testing may require the collection of blood, urine,
breath, saliva or hair of an employee or job applicant.



      (9)   Initial drug test: Means a screening procedure of the
blood and urine of employees and job applicants for the presence of alcohol
and illegal drugs in accordance with the Florida Drug Free Workplace Program
and appropriate Florida administrative rules. All levels equal to or
exceeding the following shall be reported as positive:



 



Alcohol
 
0.05 g/dl%


Amphetamines
 
1,000 NG/ML


Cannabinoids
 
100 NG/ML


Cocaine
 
300 NG/ML


Phencyclidine
 
25 NG/ML


Methaqualone
 
300 NG/ML


Opiates
 
300 NG/ML


Barbiturates
 
300 NG/ML


Benzodiazepines
 
300 NG/ML


Synthetic narcotics:
 


   Methadone
 
300 NG/ML


   Propoxyphene
 
300 NG/ML




 



      (10)   Confirmation test: Means a second test of all specimens
identified as positive on an initial test in accordance with the Florida Drug
Free Workplace Program and appropriate Florida administrative rules. All
levels equal to or exceeding the following shall be reported as positive:



 



Alcohol
 
0.05 g/dl%


Amphetamines
 
500 NG/ML


Cannabinoids
 
15 NG/ML


Cocaine
 
150 NG/ML


Phencyclidine
 
25 NG/ML


Methaqualone
 
150 NG/ML


Opiates
 
300 NG/ML


Barbiturates
 
150 NG/ML


Benzodiazepines
 
150 NG/ML


Synthetic narcotics:
 


   Methadone
 
150 NG/ML


   Propoxyphene
 
150 NG/ML




 



      (11)   Drug testing methodology: Specimens for drug testing
will be collected, handled, maintained and tested in accordance with the
Florida Drug Free Workplace Program and the procedures set forth in Florida
Administrative Code Section 38F-9.



      (12)   Positive confirmed test or confirmation test: Means a
second procedure which confirms a positive result from an initial drug test.



      (13)   Medical review officer (MRO): Means a licensed
physician with knowledge of prescription drugs, pharmacology and toxicology
of drugs, who may be responsible for receiving and reviewing all positive
confirmed test results and who may be responsible for contacting all
individuals who test positive in a confirmation test to inquire about
possible medications which could have caused a positive result. The MRO need
not be an employee of the city.



      (14)   Prescription or nonprescription medication: Means a
drug or medication obtained pursuant to a prescription as defined by Section
893.02, Florida Statutes, or a medication that is authorized pursuant to a
federal or state law for general distribution and use without a prescription
in the treatment of human diseases, ailments or injuries.



      (15)   Reasonable suspicion drug testing: Means drug testing
based on a belief that an employee is using or has used drugs in violation of
this policy drawn from specific objective and documented facts and reasonable
inferences drawn from those facts in light of experience. Among other things,
such facts and inferences may be based upon:



         a.   Observable phenomena while at work, such as direct
observation of drug use or of the physical symptoms or manifestations of
being under the influence of a drug.



         b.   Abnormal conduct or erratic behavior while at work
or a significant deterioration of work performance, either or both of which
are recognized symptoms of alcohol or drug abuse and which are not adequately
explained by the employee or are not related to the employee's working
conditions.



         c.   A report of drug use, provided by a reliable and
credible source, which has been independently corroborated.



         d.   Evidence that an employee has tampered with a drug
test during his employment with the current employer.



         e.   Information that an employee has caused, or
contributed to, an accident while at work.



         f.   Evidence that an employee has used, possessed,
sold, solicited, or transferred drugs, while working or while on the city's
premises or while operating a vehicle, machinery, or equipment of the city.



      (16)   Specimen: Means a tissue or product of the human body
including blood, urine, saliva, hair, capable of revealing the presence of
alcohol and/or illegal drugs or their metabolites.



   (c)   General procedures.



      (1)   Types of testing. In order to maintain a drug and
alcohol free work environment, the city will test for the presence of alcohol
and drugs in the following circumstances:



         a.   Job applicants: All job applicants who have been
offered a position of employment are required to take a drug and alcohol test.



         b.   Reasonable suspicion: All employees who are
deter-mined to be under reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use (as
defined herein), are required to take a drug and alcohol test.



         c.   Fitness for duty: All employees who are subject to
a routine fitness for duty medical examinations are required to take a drug
and alcohol test as part of their medical examination.



         d.   Follow-up: All employees who have been referred to
an employee assistance program or rehabilitation program by the city for drug
and/or alcohol abuse are required to take drug and alcohol tests on a
quarterly, semiannual or annual basis for two (2) years after return to work.



         e.   Post accident or injury: Employees who are involved
in a job related accident or incident, and whose impairment appears to be
contributory, which results or might have resulted in bodily injury or
property loss or damage.



         f.   The personnel department shall establish forms to
facilitate record keeping and reporting. The forms attached as Attachments 1
through 5 shall be used initially but may be amended from time to time by the
personnel department without further commission action.



         [See the editor's note following this section.]



      (2)   Consequences of refusing a drug test.



         a.   An employee who refuses to submit to a drug test
will be subject to discipline, up to and including termination. An employee
who refuses to submit to a drug test also will forfeit his eligibility for
all worker's compensation medical and indemnity benefits.



         b.   A job applicant who refuses to submit to a drug
test will not be hired.



      (3)   Actions following a positive confirmed test. The city
may institute disciplinary action, up to and including termination, for any
employee who has a positive, confirmed drug test.



      (4)   Confidentiality. Confidentiality of records concerning
drug testing will be maintained except to the extent necessary to comply with
this policy and applicable public records law.  All information, reports,
memos and drug test reports, written or otherwise, received by the city
through the drug testing program will be kept confidential to the extent
provided by law.



      The city, employee assistance program, laboratories, drug and
alcohol rehabilitation programs who receive or have access to information
concerning drug test results shall keep all information confidential. No such
information will be released unless there is a voluntary written consent,
signed by an employee or job applicant, except where such release is
compelled by a court pursuant to an appeal taken under this section, or where
deemed appropriate by a professional or occupational licensing board in a
related disciplinary proceeding.



      The city will maintain records concerning drug testing separate
and apart from an employee's or job applicant's personnel file. Information
on drug testing results shall not be released in any criminal hearing.



      (5)   Reporting of use of medication. Employees and job
applicants may confidentially report the use of prescription or
nonprescription medication both before and after having a drug test. A form
for reporting medication use is attached. [See the editor's note following
this section.]



      (6)   Notice of common medications. A list of the most common
medications, by brand name or common name, as applicable, as well as by
chemical name, which may alter or affect a drug test is attached. Employees
and job applicants should review this list prior to submitting to a drug test.



      (7)   Medication information. An employee or job applicant may
consult with the testing laboratory for technical information regarding
prescription and nonprescription medication.



      (8)   Employee assistance program. Refer to the employee
assistance program policy for the name, address and telephone number of the
current provider.



      Other resources available are:



1 800-356-9996      AL-ANON



1 800-527-5344      AMERICAN COUNCIL OF ALCOHOLISM HELPLINE



1 800-COCAINE      COCAINE HOTLINE



1 800-NCA-CALL      NATIONAL COUNCIL ON ALCOHOLISM



1800-662-HELP      NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE



1 800-843-4971      NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE HOTLINE



      (9)   Drugs to be tested. Drugs that will be tested are as
follows:



         a.   Alcohol, including distilled spirits, wine, malt
beverages and intoxicating liquors



         b.   Amphetamines



         c.   Cannabinoids



         d.   Cocaine



         e.   Phencyclidine (PCP)



         f.   Hallucinogens, provided the only hallucinogen to be
tested for is phencyclidine (PCP)



         g.   Methaqualone



         h.   Opiates



         i.   Barbiturates



         j.   Benzodiazepines



         k.   Synthetic narcotics, but limited to methodone and
propoxyphene



         l.   A metabolite of any substance listed herein



         (A list of drugs by brand names or common names is
attached.)



      (10)   Challenge of test results.



         a.   An employee or a job applicant who receives a
positive confirmed test result may contest or explain the result in writing
within five (5) days of receipt of notification of a positive confirmed test
result.



         b.   If the explanation or challenge of the employee or
job applicant is unsatisfactory to the city, the city within fifteen (15)
days of receipt will provide a written explanation as to why the employee or
job applicant's explanation is unsatisfactory, and a copy of the report of
positive confirmed test results.



         c.   An employee may further challenge the results of
the test in a court of competent jurisdiction or, if the drug test was
administered due to a workplace injury, by filing a claim for benefits with a
judge of compensation claims, pursuant to Chapter 440, Florida Statutes.



         d.   If an employee or job applicant contests the drug
test results he must notify the laboratory.



      (11)   Right under collective bargaining agreements. Employees
who are covered under a collective bargaining agreement between the city and
any collective bargaining unit may have a right to file a grievance regarding
discipline imposed by the city as a result of a violation of this policy. A
grievance of this nature shall not be limited to the discipline imposed, but
discipline based on a positive result shall not be set aside solely on the
basis of error in ordering the test.



   (d)   Policy requirements.



      (1)   Conditions of pre-employment. The city will conduct
preemployment screening examinations designed to prevent hiring individuals
who use drugs.



         a.   To determine the suitability of employees to work
for the city the following pre-employment conditions are established:



         All job applicants will be tested prior to employment for
drug use and alcohol use. Any job offer which a job applicant may receive
from the city is contingent upon successfully completing a required physical
examination.



         b.   Any job applicant who refuses to submit to drug and
alcohol testing as part of the pre-employment testing process will be refused
employment.



         c.   Any job applicant who tests positive for drugs or
alcohol use will be refused employment at that time.



         d.   Confidentiality will be maintained pursuant to this
policy.



         e.   The city will not discriminate against applicants
for employment because of the past abuse of drugs or alcohol. It is the
current abuse of drugs or alcohol that the city will not tolerate.



      (2)   Current employee drug and alcohol abuse screening. The
city will maintain screening practices to identify employees who use illegal
drug(s) or abuse alcohol. It shall be a condition of continued employment for
all employees to submit to drug screening under the following conditions:



         a.   Reasonable suspicion: All employees who are
determined to be under reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use (as
defined herein), are required to take a drug and alcohol test.



         b.   Fitness for duty: All employees who are subject to
routine fitness for duty medical examinations are required to take a drug and
alcohol test as part of their medical examination.



         c.   Follow-up: All employees who have been referred to
an employee assistance program or rehabilitation program by the city for drug
and/or alcohol abuse are required to take drug and alcohol tests on a
quarterly, semi-annual or annual basis for two (2) years after return to work.



         d.   Post accident or injury: Employees who are involved
in a job related accident or incident, and whose impairment appears to be
contributory, which results or might have resulted in bodily injury or
property loss or damage.



      (3)   Employee assistance program. The city maintains an
employee assistance program (EAP) which provides help to employees and their
families who suffer from alcohol or drug abuse. (Refer to EAP policy)



         It is the responsibility of each employee to seek
assistance before drugs and alcohol lead to disciplinary problems.



         To ensure the effectiveness of the drug free workplace
policy, it is the responsibility of all employees to inform supervisory
personnel of any activity that would lead a reasonable person to believe that
drugs or alcohol are being abused in the workplace.



         a.   An employee's decision to seek assistance from the
employee assistance program on a voluntary basis prior to any incident
warranting disciplinary action will not be used as the basis for disciplinary
action or in any disciplinary proceeding.



            On the other hand, using the EAP will not be a
defense to the imposition of disciplinary action where facts providing
violation of this policy are obtained outside of the EAP. Accordingly, the
purpose and practices of this policy and the EAP are not in conflict but are
distinctly separate in their applications.



         b.   Through the EAP, the city will provide appropriate
assessment, referral to treatment and treatment of drug and alcohol abuse
(subject to the provisions of the city's health insurance plan). Such
employees may be granted leave with a conditional return to work depending on
successful completion of the agreed upon appropriate treatment regimen and in
accordance with the career services rules and regulations and any
departmental rules and regulations. An employee's bank of sick or vacation
time shall be used (in that order) for such leave.



         c.   Upon successful completion of a drug and/or alcohol
treatment program an employee may be released to resume work but will be
subject to drug testing on a periodic basis, at least quarterly, for up to
two (2) years thereafter as a condition of continued employment.



         d.   Once a violation of this policy occurs, subsequent
use of the employee assistance program, on a voluntary basis, will not affect
the determination of appropriate disciplinary action.



         e.   An individual's participation in the program will
not be made part of any personnel records, and will remain confidential
except to the extent necessary to comply with this policy. Medical and
insurance records, if any, will be preserved in the same confidential manner
as all other medical records and be retained in a separate file as provided
by law.



      (4)   Management's responsibility. Supervisors are responsible
for implementing the drug and alcohol free workplace policy. It is the
responsibility of the supervisors to observe the behavior of employees on the
job as a precaution against unstable or unreliable behavior which could
threaten the safety and well being of employees and the community.



         a.   Supervisors are responsible for maintaining a safe
work environment by determining employees fitness for duty.



         b.   In the event a supervisor with the concurrence of a
representative of the city manager's office or the personnel director or
his/her department representative, has a reasonable suspicion that an
employee may be affected by drugs or alcohol, the employee must be sent for
drug testing. A form for reporting the reason(s) for drug testing is
attached. [See the editors note following this section.]



         c.   In all cases when an employee is being removed from
duty for drug testing, the supervisor should notify his superior at the
earliest possible time.



      (5)   Employees responsibility.



         a.   It is each employee's responsibility to be fit for
duty when reporting for work and to inform his supervisor if he is under
prescription or nonprescription medication which may affect job performance.



         b.   In the event an employee observes behavior which
raises a doubt as to the ability of a co-worker to work in a safe, reliable
and trustworthy manner, the employee should report this behavior to his
supervisor.



         c.   Employees who voluntarily enter a drug or alcohol
treatment and/or rehabilitation program at the request or insistence of the
city or, as a condition of continued employment, enter a drug or alcohol
treatment and/or rehabilitation program are required to participate and
complete recommended treatment. Any employee who enters a drug or alcohol
treatment and/or rehabilitation program will be responsible for payment of
the treatment and/or program. If the employee fails to comply with the
treatment and/or the program, the employee will be subject to discipline, up
to and including termination.



      (6)   Medical review officer's responsibilities.



         a.   The MRO will review all information from the
testing laboratory in the event of a positive, confirmed test. The MRO will
review any information from the employee or job applicant regarding the use
of medication or other relevant medical information set forth in the form
submitted prior to drug testing.



         b.   The MRO may request that the testing laboratory
provide qualification of test results.



         c.   The MRO will provide his interpretation of
positive, confirmed test results to the personnel director or his/her
department representative.



         d.   The MRO will assist employees in an employee
assistance program, monitor such employees' progress and confirm completion
of the treatment program.



   List of Drugs by Trade or Common Names



      Drugs            Trade or Common Name



      Opium            Dover's powder, Paregoric,
Parepectolin



      Morphine         Morphine, pectoral syrup



      Codeine         Tylenol with codeine, empirin compound
with codeine



      Robitussin         A-C



      Heroin            Diacetyl morphine, horse, smack



      Hydro morphine      Dilaudid



      Meperidine (pethidine)   Demerol, Mepergan



      Methadone         Dolophine, Methadone, Methadose



      Other narcotics      Laam, Leritine, Numorphan, Percodan,
Tussionex, Fentanyl, Darvon, Talwin, Lomotil



      Depressants



      Chloral hydrate      Noctec, Somnos



      Barbiturates         Phenobarbital, Tuinal, Amytal
Nembutal, Seconal, Lotusate



      Benzodiazepines      Atavan, Azene, Clonopin, Dalmane,
Diazepam, Librium, Xanax, Serax, Tranxene, Paxipam, Restoril



      Methaqualone         Quaalude



      Glutethimide         Doriden



      Other depressants      Equanil, Miltown, Noludar, Placidyl,
Valmid



      Stimulants



      Cocaine         Coke, flake, snow, crack



      Amphetamines      Biphetamine, Delcobese, Desoxyn,
Dexedrene, Metiatric



      Phenmetrazine         Preludin



      Methylphenidate      Ritalin



      Other stimulants      Adipex, Bacarate, Cylert, Didrex,
Ionamin, Plegine, Presate, Sanorex, Tenuate, Tepanil, Voranil



      Hallucinogens



      LSD            Acid, microdot



      Mescaline and peyote      Mesc, buttons, cactus



      Amphetamine variants   2, 5-DMA, PMA, STP, MDA, MDMA TMA, DOM,
DOB



      Phencyclidine         PCP, angel dust, hog



      Phencyclidine analogs      PCE, PCPy, TCP



      Other hallucinogens      Bufotenine, Ibogaine, DMT, DET,
Psilocyn



      Cannabis         Trade or Common Name



      Marijuana         Pot, Acapulco gold, grass, reefer,
sinsemolla, thai sticks



      Tetrahydrocannabinol      THC



      Hashish         Hash



      Hashish oil         Hash oil



   Over the Counter and Prescription Drugs



   Which Could Alter or Affect



   the Outcome of a Drug Test



Alcohol



   All liquid medications containing ethyl alcohol (ethanol). Please read
the label for alcohol content. As an example, Vick's Nyquil is 25% (50 proof)
ethyl alcohol, Comtrex is 20% (40 proof), Contac Severe Cold Formula Night
Strength is 25% (50 proof) and Listerine is 26.9% (55 proof).



Amphetamines



   Obetrol, Biphetamine, Desoxyn, Dexedrine, Didrex



Cannabinoids



   Marinol (dronabinol, THC)



Cocaine



   Cocaine HCI topical solution



Phencyclidine



   Not legal by prescription



Methaqualone



   Not legal by prescription



Opiates



   Paregoric, Parepectolin, Donnagel, PG, morphine, Tylenol with codeine,
Empirin with codeine, APAP with codeine, aspirin with codeine, Robitussin
A-C, Guiatuss AC, Novahistine DH, Novahistine Expectorant, Dilaudid
(hydromorphine), M-S Contin and Roxanol (morphine sulfate), Percodan, Vicidin



Barbiturates



   Phenobarbital, Thinal, Amytal, Nembutal, Seconal, Lotusate, Fiorinal,
Fioricet, Esgic, Butisol, Metbaril, Butabarital, Butabital, Phrenilin, Triad



Benzodiazephines



   Atavan, Azene, Clonopin, Dalmane, Diazepan, Librium, Xanax, Serax,
Tranxene, Valium, Verstan, Halcion, Paxipam, Restorial, Centrax



Methadone



   Dolophine, Methadose



Proproxyphene



   Darvocet, Darvon N, Dolene



(Ord. No. 92-51, § 2, 10-20-92; Ord. No. 93-09, § 2, 5-18-93)



   Editor's note-It should be noted that the reporting forms referenced in
§ 2-19 are not set out at length in this Code, but are on file and available
for inspection in the office of the city clerk. Such forms are designated as
attachments 1—5 to Ordinance No. 92-51.



Sec. 2-20.  Quasi-judicial proceedings before city commission or city board;
procedure for reconsideration of decision.



   (a)   For the purpose of this section the term “quasi-judicial
proceeding” shall mean hearings before the City Commission or Planning
Development Board, and limited to the following specific types of proceedings:



      (1)   Variances;



      (2)   Rezonings;



      (3)   Appeals from administrative decisions of the building
official or the planning director;



      (4)   Master plan approvals;



      (5)   Site plan approvals;



      (6)   Modifications of site plans.



      (7)   Relief from requirements of the sign code.



      (8)   Conditional use approvals.



      (9)   Site plan extensions;



      (10)     Abandonment;



      (11)   Other land development matters announced as
quasi-judicial hearings.



   (b)   Quasi-judicial hearings shall be conducted in a manner which
provides all interested parties with the opportunity to testify, call
witnesses, introduce evidence and cross-examine witnesses.  Testimony shall
be under oath or affirmation.  When a proposed development order comes
before the City Commission having first been afforded a quasi-judicial
hearing before a city board, the testimony and evidence submitted to a city
board constitute part of the record of testimony and evidence before the City
Commission.



   (c)   No quasi-judicial proceeding shall proceed until proof of
notice of the proceeding, in affidavit form, has been filed with the office
of the City Clerk. Proof of notice must include the name and address of each
property owner to whom notice was mailed and a photograph of each sign
posted, as hereinafter required.  The following notices must be paid for and
provided by the applicant:



      (1)   All property owners, homeowner associations, and
condominium associations that own property within four hundred (400) feet of
the boundary line of the property which is the subject of the quasi-judicial
hearing shall be mailed, by first class mail, a notice of hearing postmarked
no less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing.



      (2)   One (1) sign for each street frontage of the property
shall be posted no less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing.  The sign
shall be legible from a distance of one hundred (100) feet and shall contain
a description of the approval being sought, the date, time and location of
the hearing, and a statement that the application being considered is
available for inspection in the Development Department of the city.



      (3)   When a quasi-judicial hearing is tabled or continued at
the request of an applicant, re-notice of the hearing shall be provided by
the applicant in the same manner as original notice.



   (d)   The City Commission may reconsider its decision arising from a
quasi-judicial proceeding only upon a motion to reconsider made at the
meeting at which the decision was rendered or during the next regular City
Commission meeting.  No quasi-judicial decision shall be considered final
until the conclusion of the next City Commission meeting, or if a motion to
reconsider has been made and passes, the conclusion of the reconsideration of
the matter, and the entry of a written order approved by the City Attorney
and signed by the City Clerk.



   (e)   When a motion for reconsideration is made and approved at the
Commission meeting at which the decision was rendered, the Commission may
immediately reconsider the matter before them or, the Commission may
reconsider the matter at a later time certain which shall be announced, at
the meeting, to the applicant and the public. No additional notice of the
matter shall be necessary.



   When a motion for reconsideration is made following the close of the
Commission meeting at which the decision is made, only the motion to
reconsider shall be heard at the next regular City Commission meeting. If the
motion to reconsider is adopted by the Commission, the matter which is the
subject of the motion to reconsider shall be placed on the next regular City
Commission meeting agenda. The agenda item shall be noticed in the same
manner  as the notice provided when the item was originally considered.



   (f)   Any board may reconsider its decision arising from a
quasi-judicial proceeding only upon a motion to reconsider at the meeting at
which the decision was rendered.



   (g)   Reserved.



   (h)   To the extent of any conflict between the procedures set forth
herein and Robert's Rules of Procedure, the procedure set forth herein shall
prevail.



(Ord. No. 93-20, §§ 1—6, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 94-02, §§ 1—3, 2-1-94; Ord.
No. 97-32, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 01-23, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 04-007, § 1,
3-16-04; Ord. No. 05-004, § 1, 1-4-05)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 93-20, §§ 1—6, adopted Aug. 3, 1993, did not
specify manner of codification; hence, the provisions have been designated by
the editor as § 2-20.



Sec. 2-21.  Employment screening.



   (a)   As authorized by F.S. § 166.0442, any individual who is
currently being employed, is seeking employment, or is to be appointed to a
position of municipal employment or appointment which the city finds is
critical to security or public safety shall be subject to employment
screening. The employment screening process shall require that each person
applying for, or continuing employment in any such position, or having access
to any such facility, be fingerprinted. The city shall submit the
fingerprints to the Florida Department of Law Enforcement for a state
criminal history record check and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for
a national criminal history record check. The information obtained from the
criminal history record checks conducted pursuant to this section may be used
to determine an applicant's eligibility for employment or appointment and to
determine an employee's eligibility for continued employment. The
fingerprinting and associated criminal history record checks shall be in
addition to any other background screening which the city may lawfully
undertake.



   (b)   As authorized by F.S. § 166.0442, any private contractor, any
employee of a private contractor, vendor, repair person, or delivery person
who has access to any public facility or publicly operated facility that the
City Commission finds is critical to security or public safety shall be
subject to employment screening as described in paragraph (a) above. The
employment screening process shall require that each person having access to
any such facility be fingerprinted. The costs of such employment screening
pursuant to this section shall be borne by the contractor, vendor, repair
person, or delivery person.



   (c)   The positions of municipal employment and appointment that are
critical to security or public safety are listed in Exhibit "A" of Ordinance
03-053.



   (d)   The public facilities and publicly operated facilities that
are critical to security or public safety are listed in Exhibit "B" of
Ordinance 03-053.



(Ord. No. 03-053, §§ 2—4, 10-7-03)



Sec. 2-22.  Policy for naming city facilities.



   (a)   Purpose.  The purpose of this policy is to establish a
systematic and consistent approach for the official naming of streets, parks
and recreational areas and other public facilities, buildings and rooms in
buildings.



   (b)   Objectives:



      (1)   Ensure that streets parks, recreational areas and
facilities, buildings and rooms in buildings are easily identified and
located;



      (2)   Ensure that given names to streets, parks, recreational
areas, facilities, buildings and rooms in buildings are consistent with the
values and character of the area or neighborhood served;



      (3)   Encourage public participation in the naming, renaming
and dedication of streets, parks, recreation areas, facilities, buildings and
rooms in buildings;



      (4)   Encourages the dedication of lands, facilities, or
donations by individuals and/or groups; and



      (5)   Encourages long term monetary sponsorship.



   (c)   Definition.



      Facilities means parks, recreation areas, streets, buildings,
rooms in buildings and other facilities, or parts thereof, which operate for
the benefit of the public and includes all property under the city's
ownership, administration or control including buildings, structures, open
spaces, public parks, natural areas, wetlands, environmental habitat and
land, or parts thereof.



   (d)   Criteria.



      (1)   The policy of the city is to name facilities through an
adopted process utilizing established criteria emphasizing community values
and character, local history, geography, environmental, civics, monetary
support and service to the Boynton Beach community.



      (2)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the
appropriateness of the naming designation:



         a.   Geographic location (neigh- borhood, significant
areas, etc.);



         b.   Natural features;



         c.   A person or place of historical or cultural
significance;



         d.   A person, group, or feature particularly identified
with the land or facility; or



         e.   Commitment for monetary sponsorship.



      (3)   The process to name facilities commences with a
recommendation of the City Manager, Mayor or a City Commissioner that a city
facility be named or renamed.



      (4)   Conditions of property donation as agreed upon by the
donor and the city shall be honored regarding the naming of the facilities
subject to these adopted policies.



      (5)   Names that are similar to existing facilities in the
city should not be considered in order to minimize confusion.



      (6)   The city reserves the right to change the name to
maintain consistency with these policies.



   (e)   Procedure.



      (1)   Naming or renaming of facilities.



         a.   A request for naming of a facility shall be
initiated by a request by the City Manager to the City Commission or by
request of any member of the City Commission through the City Manager.



         b.   City staff as designated by the City Manager will
review the proposal for adherence to the stated criteria and authentication
of statements relative to contributions in the case of an individual before
forwarding to an advisory committee of five (5) persons appointed by the City
Commission.



         c.   The advisory committee shall review the proposed
naming or renaming and will offer the opportunity for public input on the
proposed naming.



         d.   The advisory committee shall forward their
recommendation to the City Commission for final decision.



      (2)   Renaming of parks, recreation areas, facilities,
buildings and rooms in buildings.  Renaming of facilities carries with it a
much greater burden of process compared to initial naming. Tradition and
continuity of name and community identification are important community
values. Each suggestion or request for renaming must meet the criteria in
this policy, but meeting all criteria does not ensure renaming.



(Ord. No. 06-078, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-23.  Code of Ethics.



   The City of Boynton Beach hereby adopts by reference as its own the
Palm Beach County Code of Ethics, Palm Beach County Code, Chapter 2, Article
XII, sections 2-441 through 2-443, section 2-444(c), (d), and (e), section
2-445 through section 2-448, and the Palm Beach County Commission on Ethics,
Palm Beach County Code, Chapter 2, Article V, Division 8, sections 2-254
through 2-260.10, as may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. No. 10-021, § 2, 9-21-10)



Sec. 2-24. Non-discrimination policy.



   The City of Boynton Beach shall not discriminate against any person in
its hiring, promotion, operation or sponsorship of any activities or
programs, or engage in any other discriminatory practice against any person
based on race, age, religion, color, gender, gender identity or expression,
sexual orientation, national origin, marital status, physical or mental
disability, political affiliation or any other unlawful factor.



(Ord. No. 14-029, § 2, 11-18-14)



Sec. 2-24.1   Domestic partnership act.



   (a)   Title. This section may be cited as the “Boynton Beach
Domestic Partnership Act.”



   (b)   Findings and intent.



      (1)   The City Commission finds that there are many
individuals who establish and maintain a significant personal, emotional and
economic relationship with another individual but who choose not to marry.
Individuals forming such domestic partnerships often live in a committed
family relationship. Domestic partners are often denied public and private
sector benefits because there is no established system for such relationships
to be registered and/or recognized. In addition, because of the status of
their relationship, domestic partners in many cases are not extended certain
employment benefits that are otherwise made available to employees who have
entered into traditional, state-sanctioned marriages.



      (2)   The City Commission finds that the provision of domestic
partner benefits promotes employee recruitment, employee retention, and
employee loyalty.



      (3)   The provision of this section shall be liberally
construed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens, residents and employees of the City of Boynton Beach. This act
shall not be construed to supersede any federal, state or city laws or
regulations, nor shall this section be interpreted to bring it into conflict
with federal, state or city laws. Any rules developed to implement the
provisions of this section shall be liberally construed to accomplish the
policies and purposes stated in this section.



   (c)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, these terms shall
be defined, as follows:



      (1)   City employee means currently employed or retired
employees of the City of Boynton Beach, Florida, who are eligible for
benefits pursuant to federal, state, or city laws, city administrative rules,
or collective bargaining agreements.



      (2)   Declaration of domestic partnership means a declaration
prepared by the Department and signed under penalty of perjury, which affirms
that the individuals referenced in the declaration meet the requirements of a
domestic partnership relationship as described in subsection (d). The
declaration of domestic partnership shall only be valid as it relates to the
city employee benefit program.



      (3)   Department means the City of Boynton Beach Human
Resources Department.



      (4)   Domestic partners means only two (2) adults who are
parties to a domestic partnership relationship and who meet the requisites
for a valid domestic partnership relationship as established pursuant to
subsection (d).



      (5)   Dependent, as used with regard to domestic partnership
benefits, pursuant to subsection (g), means the domestic partner of a city
employee.



      (6)   Dependent of domestic partner or dependent of employee,
as used with regard to domestic partnership benefits, pursuant to subsection
(g), means a person who is eligible for coverage under the city’s insurance
plans.



      (7)   Jointly responsible means each domestic partner mutually
agrees to provide for the other partner’s basic food and shelter living
expenses while the domestic partnership relationship is in effect, except
that partners need not contribute equally or jointly to said basic food and
shelter.



      (8)   Mutual residence means a residence shared by the
registered domestic partners; it is not necessary that the legal right to
possess the place of residence be in both of their names. Two people may
share a mutual residence even if one or both have additional places to live.
Domestic partners do not cease to share a mutual residence if one leaves the
shared place but intends to return.



   (d)   Registration of a domestic partnership relationship.



      (1)   A valid domestic partnership relationship may be
registered by two (2) persons, one (1) of whom is a city employee by filing a
declaration of domestic partnership with the Department, which declaration
shall comply with all requirements for establishing such domestic
partnership. The director of the Department, or his or her designee, shall
file the declaration of domestic partnership and issue a certificate
reflecting the registration of the domestic partnership relationship in city.



      (2)   A declaration of domestic partnership shall contain the
name and address of each domestic partner, the signature of each partner, and
each partner shall swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that:



         a.   Each person is at least eighteen (18) years old and
legally competent to contract;



         b.   Neither person is in a current marriage recognized
by the state of Florida nor currently a partner to another domestic
partnership or civil union with any individual other than the other person
signing the declaration of domestic partnership;



         c.   Neither partner is related to the other by blood;



         d.   Consent of either person to the domestic
partnership relationship has not been obtained by force, duress or fraud;



         e.   Each person agrees to be jointly responsible for
each other’s basic food and shelter;



         f.   Each partner considers himself or herself to be a
member of the immediate family of the other partner;



         g.   The partners reside in a mutual residence;



         h.   Each domestic partner agrees to immediately notify
the Department, in writing, if the terms of the declaration of domestic
partnership are no longer applicable or if one (1) of the domestic partners
wishes to terminate the domestic partnership;



         i.   Neither partner has signed a domestic partnership
affidavit or declaration with any other person within the twelve (12) months
prior to designating each other as domestic partners.



      (3)   Any partner to a domestic partnership may file an
amendment to the domestic partnership certificate issued by the city to
reflect a change in his or her legal name. All other amendments must be filed
by both domestic partners with the same formality as the original
declaration, however only one (1) party of the domestic partnership is
required to file a termination of the valid domestic partnership.



   (e)   Termination of registered domestic partnership relationship.



      (1)   Either partner to a registered domestic partnership
relationship may terminate such relationship by filing a notarized
declaration of termination of domestic partnership relationship with the
Department. The director of the Department shall file the declaration and
issue a certificate of termination of domestic partnership relationship to
each partner of the former relationship. The termination shall become
effective immediately from the date the certificate of termination is issued.



      (2)   If any partner to a domestic partnership relationship
enters into a legal marriage, the domestic partnership relationship shall
terminate automatically, and all rights, benefits, and entitlements
thereunder shall cease as of the effective date of the marriage. The marrying
domestic partner shall file a declaration terminating the domestic
partnership relationship within five (5) days after entering into a legal
marriage that is recognized by the State of Florida.



      (3)   The death of either domestic partner shall automatically
terminate the domestic partnership relationship. The surviving partner shall
continue to be entitled to receive all benefits otherwise provided to a
surviving spouse.



   (f)   Maintenance of records. The Department shall, by
administrative rule, prescribe the form of all declarations, amendments, and
certificates required to be filed under this act. The Department shall
maintain a record of all declarations, amendments, and certificates filed
pursuant to this act. The records shall be maintained so that all
declarations, amendments, and certificates shall be filed with the registered
domestic partnership to which they apply.



   (g)   City employees; extension of benefits.



      (1)   Any city employee who is a party to a registered
domestic partnership relationship, pursuant to subsection (d) of this act,
shall be entitled to elect insurance coverage for his or her domestic partner
or a dependent of such domestic partner on the same basis in which any city
employee may elect insurance coverage for his or her spouse or dependents. A
city employee’s right to elect insurance coverage for his or her domestic
partner, or the partner’s dependent, shall extend to all forms of insurance
provided by the city to the spouses and dependents of city employees, unless
such coverage is prohibited by state or federal law. All elections of
coverage shall be made in accordance with the requirements of applicable city
ordinances, administrative rules, and policies. A city employee must make
application for insurance within thirty (30) days of the establishment of a
domestic partnership relationship or will have to wait until the open
enrollment period, as established by the city. The establishment of a
domestic partnership relationship, as provided by the section, shall
constitute a “qualifying event” for the purposes of adding dependents to
the insurance plan outside of the open enrollment period.



      (2)   Any city employee who is a party to a registered
domestic partnership relationship, pursuant to subsection (d) of this act,
shall be entitled to use all forms of leave provided by the city including,
but not limited to, sick leave, annual leave, family illness leave and
bereavement leave to care for his or her domestic partner or the dependent of
the domestic partner as applicable. The use of leave authorized in this
section shall be consistent with the applicable requirements in city
ordinances, administrative rules, and city policies.



      (3)   Unless prohibited by state or federal law, all other
benefits available to the spouses and dependents of city employees shall be
made available on the same basis to the domestic partner, or dependent of
such domestic partner, of a city employee who is a party to a registered
domestic partnership relationship pursuant to subsection (d).



      (4)   The City Manager is authorized to take all actions
necessary to implement the provisions of this section.



   (h)   Notification of family members. In any situation providing for
mandatory or permissible notification of family members, including
notification of family members in an emergency, or when permission is granted
to inmates to contact family members, “notification of family” shall
include domestic partners.



   (i)   Additional regulations.



      (1)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to
contravene the general laws of the State of Florida.



      (2)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
impose liability or impose a private cause of action upon a domestic partner
for the health or health expenses of his or her domestic partner.



      (3)   When the term “spouse” or “married” or
“marriage” is used in other city ordinances and documents, it shall be
interpreted to include a registered domestic partner. When the term
“family” or “dependent” is used in other city ordinances, it shall be
interpreted to include domestic partnerships and dependents of registered
domestic partnerships. When the term “divorce” or “legal separation”
is used in other city ordinances and documents, it shall be interpreted to
mean termination of a registered domestic partnership.



(Ord. No. 14-030, § 2, 11-18-14)



 


Notes

Ch. 19 
This cross reference no longer exists in the code of ordinances.

   - Folio Legal Editor

§ 5.153 et seq. 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor

§ 19-1 et seq. 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor

§ 19-38 et seq 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor

§ 19-63 et seq. 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor



ARTICLE II. CITY MANAGER



Sec. 2-25.  Appointment; qualifications.



   Pursuant to the provisions of section 49 of the city Charter, the city
commission shall by resolution appoint a city manager for an indefinite term.
The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative qualifications. He need not be a resident of the city or state
at the time of his appointment but may reside outside the city while in
office only with the approval of the commission.



(Code 1958, § 2-21)



Sec. 2-26.  Compensation.



   The city manager shall receive such compensation for his services and
allowances as may be fixed by the city commission by resolution.



(Code 1958, § 2-23)



Sec. 2-27.  Bond.



   Upon appointment of an individual to the office of city manager and
during his tenure of office, the city shall, at its expense, procure and
maintain a proper fidelity and indemnity bond in the minimum amount of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) covering any person so appointed to the said
office of city manager in connection with the exercise and execution of the
duties of said office.



(Code 1958, § 2-27)



Sec. 2-28.  Appointment; removal.



   The appointment and removal of the City Manager shall be by four-fifths
vote of the City Commission. 



(Ord. No. 95-21, § 2, 6-20-95)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 89-28, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 1989, repealed
previous § 2-28, removal or suspension of the manager, derived from the 1958
Code, § 2-24; Ord. No. 78-33, § 1, adopted Aug. 15, 1978; and Ord. No.
79-1, § 1, adopted Jan. 16, 1979.



Sec. 2-29.  Attendance at council meetings.



   The city manager shall have the right to take part in the discussions
on all matters coming before the commission relative to administrative
functions of the municipality but shall have no vote therein.



(Code 1958, § 2-25; Ord. No. 89-28, § 2, 9-19-89)



Sec. 2-30.  Powers and duties generally.



   The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city
and be responsible to the commission for the administration of all city
affairs placed in his charge under the city Charter, Code of Ordinances or
assigned to him by the city commission. He shall have the power and duty to:



   (a)   Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the city, suspend
or remove all employees and appointive administrative officers of the city,
except the city attorney, or as otherwise provided by law, subject to the
provisions of the municipal civil service merit system. Further, he may
authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his direction and
supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that
officer's department, office or agency.



   (b)   Recommend, in his discretion, to the commission the creation
of the position of assistant city manager or designate with the commission's
consent an employee of the city to act in this capacity.



   (c)   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
officers and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by the
Charter or by law.



   (d)   See that all ordinances, provisions of the Charter and acts of
the commission, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his
direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.



   (e)   Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to
the commission and be responsible for its administration after adoption.



   (f)   Prepare and submit to the commission and make available to the
public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
city as of the end of each fiscal year.



   (g)   Make such other reports as the commission may require
concerning the operations of the city departments, offices and agencies
subject to his direction and supervision.



   (h)   Keep the commission fully advised as to the financial
condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the
commission concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable.



   (i)   Perform such other duties as are specified in the city Charter
or may be required by the city commission.



   (j)   Department Heads may seek approval of the City Manager, to add
or modify positions under the following conditions:



      1.   During each fiscal year department heads may request the
City Manager to add or modify staffing positions within the department,
provided the total salary for the department appropriated by the City
Commission does not increase;



      2.   The following notation shall be made on the budget
summary sheet submitted by each Department in its annual proposed budget:



         “Notwithstanding the positions listed above, staffing may
be modified during the fiscal year if:



         a.    Approved by the City Manager; and



         b.   The total appropriation for salaried positions is
not exceeded.”



      3.   The City Manager shall report any and all modification or
staffing changes to the City Commission by Memorandum prior to implementation
of the modification.



(Code 1958, § 2-26) (Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 7-6-99)



Sec. 2.31.  Temporary absence or disability.



   (a)   When the city manager shall be out of the city for more than
forty-eight (48) hours (not including Saturday, Sunday and holidays), he
shall inform the city commission of his proposed absence and will indicate to
the city commission who will be administratively in charge of the city for
routine matters. This action shall not constitute the appointment of an
acting city manager.



   (b)   When, due to length of absence from the city or illness, and
inability to be in reasonable contact by telephone, the city manager is
unable to carry out administrative duties and responsibilities in a
reasonable time, the city manager, with city commission approval, shall
designate an acting city manager to temporarily carry out the necessary
duties of the city manager.



(Code 1958, § 2-22; Ord. No. 84-2, § 1, 1-17-84)



Secs. 2-32—2-40.   Reserved.



ARTICLE III. ELECTIONS*



   *Cross reference-Political signs, § 21-2.



Sec. 2-41.  Voting districts.



   The boundaries for each of the four (4) voting districts of the City
Commission of the City of Boynton Beach, shall be as follows:



   (1)   District No 1. COMMENCING at the centerline intersection of
Boynton Beach Boulevard and the centerline of Interstate 95 (S.R. 9); thence
run westerly along the centerline of Boynton Beach Boulevard to the
centerline intersection of NW 8th Street and the POINT OF BEGINNING: thence
run southerly along the centerline of NW 8th Street and SW 10th Street to the
centerline intersection of Woolbright Road; thence run easterly along the
centerline of Woolbright Road to the centerline intersection of Interstate 95
(S.R. 9): thence run southerly along the centerline of said Interstate 95
(S.R. 9) to the easterly extension of the centerline of the Lake Worth
Drainage District (LWDD) Lateral 30 Canal: thence run westerly along the
centerline of said LWDD Lateral 30 Canal to the city's western corporate
limits: thence run northerly, easterly and northerly along the city's western
corporate limits to a point on the centerline of the C. Stanley
Weaver/Boynton Beach Canal; thence run easterly along the centerline of the
C. Stanley Weaver/Boynton Beach Canal to the centerline intersection of
Congress Avenue; thence run northerly along Congress Avenue to the centerline
intersection of Gateway Boulevard; thence run easterly along the centerline
of Gateway Boulevard to the centerline intersection of the Lake Worth
Drainage District (LWDD) Equalization (E) 4 Canal: thence run southerly along
the centerline of the Lake Worth Drainage District (LWDD) Equalization (E) 4
Canal to the centerline intersection of Old Boynton Road; thence run
easterly, southeasterly and southerly along the centerline of Old Boynton
Road to the POINT OF BEGINNING.



   (2)   District No. 2. COMMENCING at the centerline intersection of
Boynton Beach Boulevard and the centerline of Interstate 95 (S.R. 9); thence
run westerly along the centerline of Boynton Beach Boulevard to the
centerline intersection of Old Boynton Road and the POINT OF BEGINNING;
thence run northerly, northwesterly, and westerly along the centerline of Old
Boynton Road to the centerline intersection of the Lake Worth Drainage
District (LWDD) Equalization (E) 4 Canal; thence run northerly along the
centerline of the Lake Worth Drainage District (LWDD) Equalization (E) 4
Canal to the centerline intersection of Gateway Boulevard; thence run
easterly along the centerline of Gateway Boulevard to the centerline
intersection of Interstate 95 (S.R. 9): thence run northerly along the
centerline of said Interstate 95 (S.R. 9) to the city's northern corporate
limits: thence run easterly, southerly and easterly along the city's northern
corporate limits to the centerline of the Intracoastal Waterway; thence run
southerly along the centerline of said Intracoastal Waterway to the
centerline of easterly extension of NE 4th Avenue; thence westerly along the
centerline of easterly extension of NE 4th Avenue to the centerline of
Federal Highway (U.S. 1): thence run southerly along, the centerline of
Federal Highway to the centerline of Boynton Beach Boulevard; thence run
westerly along the centerline of said Boynton Beach Boulevard to the POINT OF
BEGINNING.



   (3)   District No 3. BEGINNING at the centerline intersection of
Boynton Beach Boulevard and the centerline of SW 10th Street/NW 8th Street:
thence run easterly along the centerline of said Boynton Beach Boulevard to
the centerline of Federal Highway (U.S. 1); thence run northerly along the
centerline of Federal Highway to the centerline of NE 4th Avenue; thence run
easterly along the centerline of NE 4th Avenue and its easterly extension to
the centerline of the Intracoastal Waterway: thence run southerly along the
centerline of said Intracoastal Waterway and the city's eastern corporate
limits as located to the east side of the Intracoastal Waterway and
periodically adjacent to the corporate limits of the Town of Gulfstream to a
point on the centerline of said Intracoastal Waterway at the city's southern
corporate limits adjacent with a portion of Palm Beach County; thence run
westerly, southerly and northwesterly along the city's southern corporate
limits crossing South Federal Highway south of Gulfstream Boulevard to a
point on the west right-of-way line of Old Dixie Highway and the centerline
of Gulfstream Boulevard being the city's southern corporate limits with the
City of Delray Beach: thence run westerly along the city's southern corporate
limits and the centerline of Gulfstream Boulevard and along the southern
subdivision line of the HILLS AT LAKE EDEN, P.U.D. as recorded in Plat Book
79, Pages 89 and 90, according to the Public Records of Palm Beach County.
Florida, to the centerline of Interstate 95 (S.R.. 9): thence run northerly
along the centerline of Interstate 95 (S.R. 9) to the centerline intersection
of Woolbright Road: thence run easterly along the centerline of Woolbright
Road to the centerline intersection of SW 10th Street/NW 8th Street: thence
run northerly along the centerline of SW 10th Street/NW 8th Street to the
centerline intersection of Boynton Beach Boulevard and the POINT OF BEGINNING.



   (4)   District No 4. BEGINNING at the centerline intersection of the
C. Stanley Weaver/Boynton Beach Canal and the city's western corporate
limits: thence run northerly, westerly, southerly, westerly, northerly,
easterly, northerly, easterly and northerly to the city's northern corporate
limits, said northern corporate limits being also the north right-of-way line
of Hypoluxo Road; thence run easterly along the city's northern corporate
limits to the to the centerline of Interstate 95 (S.R. 9); thence run
southerly along the centerline of said Interstate 95 (S.R. 9) to the
centerline intersection of Gateway Boulevard; thence run westerly along
Gateway Boulevard to the centerline intersection of Congress Avenue: thence
run southerly along Congress Avenue to the centerline intersection of the C.
Stanley Weaver/Boynton Beach Canal; thence run westerly along the centerline
of the C. Stanley Weaver/Boynton Beach Canal to the POINT OF BEGINNING.



(Ord. No. 91-82, § 2, 12-17-91; Ord. No. 02-035, § 2, 8-20-02; Ord. No.
11-033, § 2, 1-3-12)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 91-82, § 2, adopted Dec. 17, 1991, provided the
boundary descriptions of the city's four voting districts.  Such
descriptions have been included by the editor as § 2-41.



Sec. 2-42.  Official ballot, filing fees.



   The city commission shall prepare or cause to be prepared the official
ballot for each regular and special election of the city. Each candidate
shall file a petition signed by at least twenty-five (25) duly qualified
voters of the city and shall submit a filing fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00), which will result in the appearance in alphabetical order of the
name of the particular candidate upon the official general election ballot.
All such filing fees collected shall be deposited to the general fund. None
but the official ballot shall be used.



(Code 1958, § 8-6; Ord. No. 83-51, § 5, 12-20-83)



Sec. 2-43.  Absentee voting permitted.



   Absentee voting shall be permitted in city elections, in accordance
with the procedures established by law for absentee voting in state and
county elections. Provided, however, that “city clerk” shall be
substituted for “supervisor of elections” in said laws and “canvassing
board” as used in said laws shall be held to mean the persons authorized to
canvass city elections.



   State law reference-Absentee voting, F.S. § 101.62 et seq.



Sec. 2-44.  Designation of polling places.



   The polling places within each precinct shall be designated by the
mayor at the time of the calling of each special or general municipal
election, by proclamation.



(Code 1958, § 8-19)



Sec. 2-45.  False statements or affidavits.



   Any person who shall make, transmit or deliver, or cause to be made,
transmitted or delivered, any false statement or affidavit with the intent
that the same be used under any provision of this article, shall be guilty of
a violation of this Code.



(Code 1958, § 8-18)



Sec. 2-46.  Vacancy in candidacy.



   (a)   If the death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot of a
qualified candidate for city commissioner occurs after the close of
registration for candidates for this office, and if the death, withdrawal or
removal leaves fewer than two (2) candidates for that office, and at least
thirty-five (35) days remain before the election, the qualifying period for
that office shall be reopened for a period of five (5) days following the
date the vacancy occurs. All qualified candidates registered during that
period shall be placed on the ballot at the general municipal election along
with the remaining candidate. The city clerk shall promptly post notice at
City Hall, in a conspicuous place, of reopening of the registration period.
The city clerk shall, in conjunction with procedures established by the
supervisor of elections of Palm Beach County, Florida, make a bona fide
attempt to contact all persons requesting absentee ballots so as to advise
such absentee voters of the death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot of a
qualified candidate for city commissioner. The procedures set forth in
subsection (e) hereinafter, shall also apply.



   (b)   If the death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot of a
qualified candidate for city commissioner occurs and there is less than
thirty-five (35) days before the election, the election for that specific
seat shall be delayed from its scheduled date by not less than forty-five
(45) nor more than sixty (60) days, at which time a special municipal
election for that office only shall take place.  Qualifying shall be
reopened for a period of ten (10) days beginning the day after the vacancy
occurs. The city clerk shall promptly advertise at least one (1) notice of
the rescheduled election and reopening of registration in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Boynton Beach. The notice shall be a
quarter page display advertisement appearing at least ten (10) days prior to
the rescheduled election date.



   (c)   Any remaining candidate for that office shall not be required
to requalify for election or pay a second qualifying fee. Any remaining
candidate shall not be declared an unopposed candidate under Chapter 106,
Florida Statutes, unless no additional candidate qualifies for election
during the supplemental qualifying period. Any remaining candidate may
continue to accept contributions pursuant to Chapter 106, Florida Statutes,
or until he is declared unopposed. If he is declared unopposed pursuant to
this section, then within ten (10) days after the close of the supplemental
qualifying period the special election shall be canceled. The unopposed
candidate shall be declared elected at an organizational meeting of the city
commission and the oath of office shall be administered at that time.



   (d)   The filing of campaign expense statements pursuant to Chapter
106, Florida Statutes, by candidates in a special election called under
subsection (b), including the remaining candidate, shall not be later than
such dates as fixed by the city clerk.



   (e)   If a special election is called pursuant to subsection (b),
and other candidates qualify for election during the supplemental qualifying
period, supplemental absentee ballots for the special election shall be
mailed to any absentee voter who was mailed an absentee ballot for the
regular election as well as provided to other voters who properly request
them. If an absentee voter returns the initial ballot he was mailed, his vote
for that office for which the special election was called shall be null and
void, but his votes on all other offices and issues shall be counted.



(Ord. No. 92-08, § 2, 4-7-92; Ord. No. 94-05, § 2, 3-1-94)



Sec. 2-47.  Early voting.



   The provisions of F.S. § 101.657, providing for early voting, shall
not apply to any City of Boynton Beach municipal election. It is the intent
of the City Commission, pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 100.3605, to
exempt all City of Boynton Beach municipal elections from the early voting
provisions of F.S. § 101.657. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained herein, the city may contract with Palm Beach County Supervisor of
Elections to conduct early voting for the city at the office of the
Supervisor of Elections and at any other early voting sites the Supervisor
may establish in locations other than City Hall.



(Ord. No. 05-016, § 2, 3-1-05)



Secs. 2-48—2-55.   Reserved.



ARTICLE IV. PURCHASING AND CONSULTANTS*



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 90-54, § 2, adopted Nov. 20, 1990, repealed
former Art. IV, Consultants, substantive sections thereof being §§ 2-56,
2-57, 2-60 and 2-61, derived from the 1958 Code, §§ 2-70, 2-71, 2-74 and
2-75. Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 90-54 enacted a new Art. IV, §§ 2-56—2-60 to
read as herein set out.



Sec. 2-56.  Purchasing agent, selection, duties; competitive bidding.



   (a)   The city commission shall appoint an officer or employee of
the city, other than a member of the city commission, as purchasing agent for
the city who shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies, 
materials, equipment and other articles used by the municipal government. 
All purchases or sales of city property shall be subject to the approval of
the city commission and shall conform to such regulations as the city
commission may from time to time prescribe. 



   (b)   Personal property, commodities and services. Except as
provided in section 2-56.1 all purchases or sales of personal property,
commodities and services involving amounts in excess of twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00), or construction involving amounts of seventy-five
thousand ($75,000.00), shall be made only after the publishing of an
advertisement of bids thereon in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city at least one (1) time, not less than ten (10) days prior to the date set
for the reception of such bids, together with such other notice as the
commission may direct.  The city commission shall have the power to reject
any and all bids submitted and received, and to waive any informalities in
connection with such bidding.



   (c)   Real property. Real property may be sold in the manner
recommended by the City Manager and determined by the City Commission to be
in the best interest of the city. With regard to the sale of any real estate
owned by the city which has an appraised value exceeding $100,000.00 as
determined by the most recent valuation of the Palm Beach County Property
Appraiser, no such sale shall be conducted or consummated until such time as
subject property has been appraised by a disinterested qualified appraiser to
be designated by the city commission for the purpose of establishing a fair
market value thereon. The sale of real property for less than the fair market
value shall require the approval by a vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the City
Commission.



   (d)   The foregoing provision for sale of real property do not apply
to real property located within the city's community redevelopment area if
the property was acquired by the city for the purposes of community
redevelopment or if the sale of the property will facilitate redevelopment
consistent with the CRA plan; or if the sale of the property will facilitate
restoration of a property which the City Commission deems to be historic,
even in those cases where historic designation by the State of Florida, Palm
Beach County, or pursuant to a federal historic designation program has not
occurred or is pending.



(Ord. No. 90-54, § 3, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 97-45, § 1, 9-2-97; Ord. No.
01-66, § 1, 1-2-02; Ord. No. 03-002, § 1, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 12-009, § 2,
5-15-12; Ord. No. 12-024, § 2, 12-18-12)



Sec. 2-56.1   Exceptions to competitive bidding.



   (a)   The purchase or sale of any real property by the city from or
to another governmental agency shall conform to such regulations as the city
commission may from time to time prescribe, but such purchase or sale shall
be excepted and exempt from the provisions of section 2.56 hereof.



   (b)   On any purchase of personal property, commodities, or services
involving amounts less than twenty-five thousand ($25,000.00), or
construction less than seventy-five ($75,000.00), the city  manager shall
establish procurement policies. The procurement policies shall provide for
obtaining sufficient pricing and product quotations to ensure that the goods,
services, or construction being procured is the highest quality at the most
reasonable cost. Such procedure shall require the preparation and maintenance
of written records which adequately document the quotations obtained,
property account for the funds expended, and facilitate an audit of the
purchase made.  Furthermore, the city manager, or in the city manager's
absence, the acting city manager is authorized to execute a purchase order on
behalf of the city for such purchases under the $25,000.00 bid threshold for
personal property, commodities and services, or $75,000.00 for construction.
The City Manager shall file a written report with the Commission at the
second Commission meeting of each month listing the purchase orders approved
by the City Manager or Acting City Manager.



   (c)   On the purchase of personal property if the city manager shall
maintain that an emergency exists in regard to the purchase of any commodity
so that the delay incident to giving opportunity for competitive bidding
would be detrimental to the interest of the city, then the city manager shall
file a statement certifying the conditions and circumstances. The written
statement shall be kept with the purchase order. This emergency purchase will
be presented to the City Commission at the earliest meeting if it exceeds the
threshold for purchases.



   (d)   Commodities available only from a single source may be
excepted from bid requirements. A letter is required from the vendor and the
single source purchase will be made from the vendor at the discretion of the
purchasing agent.



   (e)   On any purchase of personal property where the funds for the
price of the entire purchase are being supplied by another governmental
agency and no funds of the city are being used towards the purchase price,
the purchasing agent may elect to follow the competitive bidding requirements
of the governmental agency which is supplying the funds for the purchase.



   (f)   The purchasing agent may award a contract by accessing
purchasing items from the Federal General Services Administration Contract,
the State of Florida State Contracts, SNAPS, RESPECT, PRIDE or other
purchasing contracts of any departments or subdivisions of the State of
Florida; or "piggy-back" of the government or national alliance bids without
the competitive bidding process required by this article. If budget
allocation is approved by Commission, as part of the budget adoption for the
fiscal year, all items purchased in relation to paragraph (f) will not
require further Commission action unless a formal contract is involved.



(Ord. No. 90-54, § 3, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 97-45, § 2, 9-2-97; Ord. No.
01-66, § 1, 1-2-02)



Sec. 2-57.  Consultants; incorporation of Florida Statutes Section 287.055.



   There is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part hereof the
"Consultants' Competitive Negotiation Act," being F.S. § 287.055 as amended
from time to time.



(Ord. No. 90-54, § 3, 11-20-90)



Sec. 2-58.  Intent; jurisdiction.



   It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the city
commission that the city and all of its constituent commissions, boards,
authorities and the like, with purchasing or procurement authority, comply to
the fullest extent with the spirit and mandates of the Consultants'
Competitive Negotiation Act, F.S. § 287.055 and the provisions hereof.



   The city administration shall have jurisdiction to perform the
functions set forth for the city and all its constituent commissions, boards,
authorities and the like whether they were established or brought into
existence by ordinance, resolution, or motion of the city commission.



(Ord. No. 90-54, § 3, 11-20-90)



Sec. 2-59.  City to adopt rules of procedure.



   The city administration is hereby directed to adopt a rule or rules of
procedure for the determination of a project under the Consultants'
Competitive Negotiation Act and this article. These procedures may include:



   (a)   Determination of a project which constitutes a grouping of
minor construction, rehabilitation, or renovation activities.



   (b)   Determination of a project which constitutes a grouping of
substantially similar construction, rehabilitation, or renovation activities.



   (c)   The above rules of procedure and any amendments or deletions
therefrom shall be submitted to the city commission for approval, which
approval may be made by motion.



(Ord. No. 90-54, § 3, 11-20-90)



Sec. 2-60.  Commissions, boards, etc., independent of city commission to
follow article.



   Any city commissions, boards, authorities and the like which have
purchasing authority independent of the city commission, the purchases of
such bodies which are subject to the Consultants' Competitive Negotiation Act
shall be processed in accordance herewith; however, the commission, board,
authority, or the like will itself perform the functions set forth herein
that are otherwise applicable to the city commission.



(Ord. No. 90-54, § 3, 11-20-90)



Sec. 2-61   Design-build contracts.



   There is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part here F.S. §
287.055(9), pertaining to design-build contracts, as amended from time to
time.



(Ord. No. 04-054, § 2, 8-3-04)



Secs. 2-62—2-71. Reserved.



ARTICLE V. CODE COMPLIANCE BOARD; SPECIAL MAGISTRATE



   *Cross reference-Minimum qualifications for appointment and membership
on boards, § 2-16.



Sec. 2-72.  Intent.



   Declaration of legislative intent. It is the intent of this article to
promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
and residents of the city by authorizing the creation and use of an
administrative board or Special Magistrate with authority to impose penalties
to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective and inexpensive method of
enforcing any codes and ordinances in force in the city where a pending or
repeated violation continues to exist.  Rules and regulations, consistent
with the provisions of Florida law, necessary to carry out the provisions of
this article may be adopted by resolution of the City Commission.



(Ord. No. 79-28, § 1, 9-18-79; Ord. No. 90-13, § 2, 6-19-90; Ord. No.
13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-73.  Definitions.



As used in this article:



   Board attorney means the city attorney or designated board attorney of
the city.



   Code inspector means those authorized agents or employees of the city
whose duty it is to insure code compliance.



   Enforcement board means a code compliance board.



   Repeat violation means a violation of a provision of a code or
ordinance by a person who has previously been found through a code
enforcement board or any other quasi-judicial process to have violated or has
admitted violating the same provision within five (5) years prior to the
violation, notwithstanding the violations occur at different locations.



   Special Magistrate shall mean the city’s Special Magistrates
appointed by the City Commission to conduct hearings pursuant to Section 2-82
of this article and F.S. Ch. 162.  Except for board voting requirements, any
reference in the city’s Code to “Code Enforcement Board” shall include
Special Magistrate(s).



(Ord. No. 79-28, § 3, 9-18-79; Ord. No. 87-1, § 1, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 90-13,
§ 4, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 97-51, § 1, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 00-10, § 2, 4-4-00;
Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-74.  Creation, appointment, organization of board; establishment of
Magistrate.



   The City Commission may appoint one (1) or more seven-member code
compliance boards, and legal counsel for such boards. The members shall have
the following qualifications and terms of office:



   (a)   Members of a compliance board shall be residents of the city.
Appointments shall be made in accordance with applicable law and ordinances
on the basis of experience or interest in the subject matter [under the]
jurisdiction of the code compliance board.



   (b)   In order that terms of office of all members will not expire
at the same time, the initial appointments to an enforcement board shall be
as follows:



      Two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year.



      Two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years.



      Two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years.



      The seventh regular member of the board appointed when the number
of board members was raised from six (6) shall at the time of his appointment
serve for a period of three (3) years.



      Thereafter, all appointments and terms shall be for a term of
three (3) years. Any member may be reappointed from term to term upon
approval of the City Commission.



      Appointments to fill any vacancy on an enforcement board shall be
for the remainder of the unexpired term of office.  If any member falls to
attend two (2) of three (3) successive meetings without cause and without
prior approval of the chairman, the compliance board shall declare the
members’ office vacant, and the City Commission shall promptly fill such
vacancy. The members shall serve at the pleasure of the City Commission and
may be removed as provided in the city Code of Ordinances for removal of
members of the planning and zoning board.



   (c)   The members of a compliance board shall elect a chairman. The
presence of four (4) or more members shall constitute a quorum of the
enforcement board. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be
reimbursed for such travel expenses, mileage expenses, and per diem expenses
as may be authorized by the City Commission.



   (d)   The City Commission hereby appoints the city attorney or his
designee as legal counsel for the code compliance board.



   (e)   The City Commission may appoint one (1) or more Special
Magistrates with the following conditions: the Special Magistrate shall be
appointed by the City Commission and shall serve with compensation as
established by the City Commission by resolution.  A Special Magistrate
shall not be a city employee.



   (f)   The Special Magistrate must be both an attorney and a member
in good standing with the Florida Bar for a minimum of five (5) years.



   (g)   The Special Magistrate shall have some experience in zoning
and land use law, building control, code enforcement, and/or administrative
law.



   (h)   The Special Magistrate will be bound by the code of ethics of
the Florida Bar as currently proscribed or as amended from time to time.



   (i)   A Special Magistrate shall not be authorized to hire or use
the services of any person except those provided by the city to assist him or
her in the performance of his or her duties.



(Ord. No. 79-28, § 4, 9-18-79; Ord. No. 79-35, § 1, 11-21-79; Ord. No.
80-38, § 2, 9-2-80; Ord. No. 82-19, § 1, 8-3-82; Ord. No. 87-1, § 2,
2-3-87; Ord. No. 87-14, § 1, 6-16-87; Ord. No. 87-19, § 1, 7-21-87; Ord.
No. 90-13, §§ 5-7, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 97-51, § 1, 11-18-97; Ord. No.
13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-75.  Jurisdiction of boards and Magistrates.



   (a)   The code compliance boards shall enforce and have jurisdiction
of the following codes:



      Part II, Code of Ordinances fire codes, Chapter 9, licenses,
Chapter 13 as well as Part III, Land Development Regulations planning and
development generally, Chapter 1.5; zoning Chapter 2; planned unit
developments, Chapter 2.5; community design plan, Chapter 9; building,
housing and construction, Chapter 20; signs, Chapter 21; parking lots,
Chapter 23; and related technical codes in force in the city.



   (b)   The Special Magistrates shall enforce and have jurisdiction
over any and all codes within the city’s Code of Ordinances, as provided by
Florida law.



(Ord.  No. 79-28, §  2, 9-18-79; Ord. No. 87-1, § 3, 2-3-87; Ord. No.
88-39, § 1, 9-7-88; Ord. No. 88-57, § 1, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 96-43, § 1,
10-2-96; Ord. No. 97-51, § 1, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



   Cross references-Prosecution before code compliance board for failure
to place street numbers on buildings, § 15-16(e); acting as nuisance
abatement board, § 10-56.



Sec. 2-76.  Enforcement procedure.



   (a)   It shall be the duty of the code inspector to initiate
enforcement proceedings of the various codes; however, no member of the board
and no Magistrate shall have the power to initiate enforcement proceedings.



   (b)   If a violation of the codes is found, the code inspector shall
notify the violator, unless subsection (c) of this section applies, and give
said violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the
violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the code
inspector shall notify an enforcement board or Special Magistrate and request
a hearing. The code compliance board or Special Magistrate, through its
clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing
shall be hand delivered or mailed as provided in section 2-81 to the
violator. At the option of the code compliance board or Special Magistrate,
notice may additionally be served by publication or posting as provided in
section 2-81. If the violation is corrected and then recurs or if the
violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code
inspector, the case may be presented to the enforcement board or Special
Magistrate even if the violation has been corrected prior to the hearing and
the notice shall so state.



   (c)   If the code inspector has reason to believe a violation or the
condition causing the violation presents a serious threat to the public
health, safety and welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or
irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to
notify the violator and may immediately notify the enforcement board or
Special Magistrate and request a hearing.



   (d)   If a repeat violation is found, the code inspector shall
notify the violator, but it is not required that he give the violator a
reasonable time to correct the violation. The code inspector, after notifying
the violator of a repeat violation, shall notify the code enforcement board
or Special Magistrate and request a hearing. The code compliance board or
Special Magistrate, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing and
shall provide notice pursuant to section 2-81. The case may be presented to
the code compliance board or Special Magistrate even if the repeat violation
has been corrected prior to the board hearing, and the notice shall so state.



   (e)   If the owner of property which is subject to an enforcement
proceeding before an enforcement board, special Magistrate, or court
transfers ownership of such property between the time and initial pleading
was served and the time of the hearing, such owner shall:



      1.   Disclose, in writing, the existence and the nature of the
proceeding to the prospective transferee.



      2.   Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the
pleadings, notices, and other materials relating to the code enforcement
proceeding received by the transferor.



      3.   Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee that
a new owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and
with orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding.



      4.   File a notice with the code enforcement official of the
transfer of the property, with the identity and address of the new owner and
copies of the disclosures made to the new owner, within 5 days after the date
of the transfer.



   A failure to make the disclosures described in paragraphs 1, 2, and 3
before the transfer creates a rebuttable presumption of fraud.  If the
property is transferred before the hearing, the proceeding shall not be
dismissed, but the new owner shall be provided a reasonable period of time to
correct the violation before the hearing is held.  (Ord. No. 79-82, § 5,
9-18-79; Ord. No. 87-1, § 4, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 87-36, § 1, 10-20-87; Ord.
No. 90-13, §§ 8, 9, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 94-57, § 1, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 97-51,
§ 1, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 00-10, § 3, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-77.  Conduct of hearing.



   (a)   Upon request of the code inspector or other designated city
employee, or at such other times as may be necessary.  A hearing may be
convened by one of the following methods:



      1.   The chairman of an enforcement board may call a hearing
of an enforcement board; a hearing may also be called by written notice
signed by at least three (3) members of an enforcement board. Minutes shall
be kept of all hearings by each enforcement board and all hearings shall be
open to the public. The city clerk shall provide clerical and administrative
personnel as may be reasonably required by each enforcement board for the
proper performance of its duties.



      2.   The Special Magistrate(s) may call a hearing.  Minutes
shall be kept of all hearings by each Magistrate and all hearings shall be
open to the public.  The City Clerk shall provide clerical and
administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by each Magistrate for
the proper performance of the Magistrate’s duties.



   (b)   Each case before an enforcement board or Special Magistrate
shall be presented by a member of the building department or Code compliance
administrative staff. If the local governing body prevails in prosecuting a
case before the enforcement board or Special Magistrate, it shall be entitled
to recover all costs incurred prosecuting the case before the board or
Special Magistrate.



   (c)   An enforcement board or Special Magistrate shall proceed to
hear the cases on the agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath
and shall be recorded. The enforcement board or Special Magistrate shall take
testimony from the code inspector and alleged violator. Formal rules of
evidence shall not apply; however, fundamental due process shall be observed
and govern said proceedings.



   (d)   At the hearing the burden of proof shall be upon the
administrative official to show by preponderance of the evidence that a
violation does exist. Assuming proper notice of the hearing has been provided
to the respondent, a hearing may proceed in the absence of the respondent.



   (e)   At the conclusion of the hearing the enforcement board or
Special Magistrate shall issue findings of fact, based on evidence of record,
and conclusions of law and shall issue an order affording the proper relief
consistent with powers granted herein. If the matter is heard by an
enforcement board, the findings shall be by motion approved by a majority of
those present and voting, except that at least four (4) members of the
enforcement board must vote for the action to be official. For all hearings,
the order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specific
date, and that a fine may be imposed and, under the conditions specified in
section 2-79, the cost of repairs may be included along with the fine, if the
order is not complied with by said date; a certified copy of the order may be
recorded in the public records of the county and shall constitute notice to
any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns if the
violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding
upon the violator, if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent
purchasers, successors in interest or assigns. If an order is recorded in the
public records pursuant to this subsection and the order is complied with by
the date specified in the order, the enforcement board or Special Magistrate
shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the
public records. A hearing is not required to issue such an order
acknowledging compliance.



(Ord. No. 79-28, § 6, 9-18-79; Ord. No. 79-35, § 1, 11-21-79; Ord. No.
82-19, § 2, 8-3-82; Ord. No. 87.1, § 5, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 90-13, §§ 10,
11, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 94-57, § 2, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-78.  Powers of boards and Special Magistrates.



   Each enforcement board or Special Magistrate  shall have the power to:



   (a)   Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings.



   (b)   Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings.
Subpoenas may be served by the city’s police department or by the sheriff
of the county.



   (c)   Subpoena evidence to its hearings.



   (d)   Take testimony under oath.



   (e)   Issue orders having the force of law commanding whatever steps
are necessary to bring a violation into compliance.



(Ord. No. 79-28, § 7, 9-18-79; Ord. No. 81-71, § 6, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 90-13,
§ 12, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-79.  Administrative fine; liens.



   (a)   The enforcement board or Special Magistrate, upon notification
by the code inspector, that an order of the enforcement board or Special
Magistrate has not been complied with by the  specified time, or, upon
finding that a repeat violation has been committed, may order the violator to
pay a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1000.00) per day for a first
violation and not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5000.00) per day for a
repeat violation and up to fifteen thousand dollars ($15000) per violation if
the code enforcement board finds the violation to be irreparable or
irreversible in nature for each day the violation continues past the date set
by the enforcement board or Special Magistrate for compliance or, in the case
of a repeat violation for each day the repeat violation continues beginning
with the date the repeat violation is found to have occurred by the code
inspector. In addition, if the violation is a violation described in section
2-76(c), the enforcement board or Special Magistrate may render an order
which includes authority for the City to make all reasonable repairs which
are required to bring the property into compliance and charge the violator
with the reasonable cost of the repairs along with the fine imposed pursuant
to this section. The City Manager or his designee shall have authority to
initiate repairs to bring the property into compliance.  When City action is
taken the property owner shall be issued an invoice for the reasonable cost
of repairs.  Making such repairs does not create a continuing obligation on
the part of the city to make further repairs or to maintain the property and
does not create any liability against the local governing body for any
damages to the property if such repairs were completed in good faith.



   (b)   In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the enforcement
board or Special Magistrate shall consider the following factors:



      (1)   The gravity of the violation;



      (2)   Any actions taken by the violator to correct the
violation; and



      (3)   Any previous violations committed by the violator.



   (c)   A certified copy of an order imposing a fine, or a fine plus
repair costs, may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall
constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any
other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the
circuit court, such order shall be enforceable in the same manner as a court
judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including execution and levy against
the personal property of the violator, but such order shall not be deemed to
be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant
to this part shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into
compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien
filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first.  After three (3)
months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the enforcement
board or Special Magistrate may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on
the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this part may be
enforced on real property which is a homestead under Section 4, Article X of
the State Constitution.



(Ord. No. 79-82, § 8, 9-18-79; Ord. No. 82-19, § 3, 8-3-82; Ord. No. 87-1,
§ 7, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 87-36, § 2, 10-20-87; Ord. No. 90-13, §§ 13, 14,
6-19-90; Ord. No. 94-57, § 3, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 00-10, § 4, 4-4-00; Ord. No.
08-010, § 2, 5-20-08; Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-79.5.  Duration of lien.



   No lien provided under this article shall continue for a period longer
than twenty (20) years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine
has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien
is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose
on a lien, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a
reasonable attorneys fee, that are incurred in the foreclosure. The city
shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a
valid lien. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the
action shall not be good against creditors, or subsequent purchasers for
valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is
recorded.



(Ord. No. 82-19, § 4, 8-3-82; Ord. No. 87-1, § 8, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 90-13,
§ 15, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 94-57, § 4, 1-3-95)



Sec. 2-80.  Appeal.



   An aggrieved party, including the City Commission, may appeal a final
administrative order of an enforcement board or Special Magistrate to the
circuit court of Palm Beach County. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de
novo, but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before
the enforcement board or Special Magistrate. An appeal shall be filed within
thirty (30) days of the execution of the order to be appealed.



(Ord. No. 79-28, § 9, 9-18-79; Ord. No. 82-19, § 5, 8-3-82; Ord. No. 81-7,
§ 9, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 90-13, § 15, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-81.  Service of notices.



   (a)   All notices required by this act shall be provided to the
alleged violator by:



      (1)   Certified mail, return receipt requested, provided if
such notice is sent under this paragraph to the owner of the property in
question at the address listed in the tax collector’s office for tax
notices, and at any other address provided to the city by such owner and is
returned as unclaimed or refused, notice may be provided by posting as
described in subparagraphs (b)(1) and (2), and by first class mail directed
to the addresses furnished to the city with a properly executed proof of
mailing or affidavit confirming the first class mailing;



      (2)   Hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement
officer, code inspector, or other person designated by the city;



      (3)   Leaving the notice at the violator’s usual place of
residence with any person residing therein who is above 15 years of age and
informing such person of the contents of the notice; or



      (4)   In the case of commercial premises, leaving the notice
with the manager or other person in charge.



   (b)   In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection
(a), at the option of the code compliance board or Special Magistrate, notice
may also be served by publication or posting, as follows:



      (1)   a.   Such notice shall be published once during each
week for four (4) consecutive weeks (four (4) publications being sufficient)
in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the code compliance
board or Special Magistrate is located. The newspaper shall meet such
requirements as are prescribed under Chapter 50, Florida Statutes, for legal
and official advertisements.



         b.   Proof of publication shall be made as provided in
Sections 50.041 and 50.051, Florida Statutes.



      (2)   a.   In lieu of publication as described in paragraph
(b)(1), such notice shall be posted at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing, or prior to the expiration of any deadline contained in the notice
in at least two (2) locations, one of which shall be the property upon which
the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be at the City
Hall of Boynton Beach.



         b.   Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the
person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice
posted and the date and places of its posting.



      (3)   Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently
with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand
delivery or by mail as required under subsection (a).



Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as
provided in subsection (a), together with proof of publication or posting as
provided in subsection (b), shall be sufficient to show that the notice
requirements of this chapter have been met, without regard to whether or not
the alleged violator actually received such notice.



(Ord. No. 79-28, § 10, 9-18-79; Ord. No. 87-1, § 10, 2-3-87; Ord. No.
87-36, § 3, 10-20-87; Ord. No. 94-57, § 5, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 97-51, § 1,
11-18-97; Ord. No. 00-10, § 5, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-82.  Alternative code enforcement system.



   The city hereby adopts an alternative code enforcement system which
shall provide the code compliance board or special Magistrates, hereinafter
described and designated by the City Commission, the authority to hold
hearings and assess fines against violators of the codes and ordinances of
the city.



(Ord. No. 90-13, § 3, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 97-51, § 1, 11-18-97; Ord. No.
13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-83.  Enforcement of the codes and ordinances; penalties.



   (a)   As used in this section, code enforcement officer means any
designated employee or agent of the City of Boynton Beach whose duty it is to
enforce codes and ordinances enacted by the city.



   (b)   The city may designate certain of its employees or agents as
code enforcement officers. The training and qualifications of the employed or
agents for such designation shall be determined by the city. Employees or
agents who may be designated as code enforcement officers may include, but
are not limited to code inspectors, law enforcement officers, animal control
officers, or fire safety  inspectors designation  as a code  enforcement 
officer  does not provide the code enforcement officer with the power of
arrest or subject the code enforcement officer to the provisions of Sections
943.085 through 943.255, Florida Statutes, as amended. Nothing in this
section amends, alters or contravenes the provisions of any state
administered retirement system or any state supported retirement system
established by general law.



   (c)   (1)   A code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a
citation to a person when based upon personal investigation, the officer has
reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civic infraction
in violation of a duly enacted code or ordinance and the county court will
hear the charge.



      (2)   Prior to issuing a citation, a code enforcement officer
shall provide notice to the person that the person has committed a violation
of the code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within
which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no
more than thirty (30) days. If, upon personal investigation, a code
enforcement officer finds that the person has not corrected the violation
within the time period, a code enforcement officer may issue a citation to
the person who has committed the violation. A code enforcement officer does
not have to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the
violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation if
a repeat violation is found or if the code enforcement officer has reason to
believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible, or if
the violator is engaged in violations of an itinerant or transient nature, as
defined by local code or ordinance within the jurisdiction.



      (3)   A citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be
in a form prescribed by the city and shall contain:



         a.   The date and time of issuance.



         b.   The name and address of the person to whom the
citation is issued.



         c.   The date and time the civil infraction was
committed.



         d.   The facts constituting reasonable cause.



         e.   The number or section of the code or ordinance
violated.



         f.   The name and authority of the code enforcement
officer.



         g.   The procedure for the person to follow in order to
pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation.



         h.   The applicable civil penalty if the person elects
to contest the citation.



         i.   The applicable civil penalty if the person elects
not to contest the citation.



         j.   A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to
pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to
contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest
the citation and that, in such case, judgement may be entered against the
person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty.



   (d)   After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, a code
enforcement officer shall deposit the original citation and one copy of the
citation with the Palm Beach County Court.



   (e)   The city is authorized to enforce its codes and ordinances
under the provisions of this section and by the enactment of Ordinance No.
90-13, the city shall by separate ordinance set forth procedures for the
implementation  of such provisions,  including a schedule of violations and
penalties to be assessed by code enforcement officers. If the city chooses to
enforce this section, each code or ordinance enacted by the city establishing
procedures for implementation of this section shall provide:



      (1)   That a violation of a code or an ordinance is a civil
infraction.



      (2)   A maximum civil penalty not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00).



      (3)   A civil penalty of less than the maximum civil penalty
if the person who has committed the civil infraction does not contest the
citation.



      (4)   For the issuance of a citation by a code enforcement
officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an
act in violation of a code or ordinance.



      (5)   For the contesting of a citation in county court.



      (6)   Such procedures and provisions as are necessary to
provide for the enforcement of a code or ordinance under the provisions of
this section.



   (f)   Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation
issued by a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree, punishable as provided in Section 775.082 or Section 775.083,
Florida Statutes.



   (g)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
enforcement pursuant to Florida Statutes, Sections, 553.79 and 553.80 or
building codes adopted pursuant to Section 553.73 as they apply to
construction provided that a building permit is either not required or has
been issued by the city. For the purposes of this subsection, “building
codes” means only those codes adopted pursuant to Section 553.73, Florida
Statutes.



   (h)   The provisions of this section are additional and supplemental
means of enforcing the city's codes and ordinances  and may be used  for
the enforcement of any code or ordinance, or for the enforcement of all codes
and ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city
from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other means.



(Ord. No. 90-13, § 15, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 94-57, § 6, 1-3-95; Ord. No.
00-10, § 6, 4-4-00)



Sec. 2-84.  Lien reduction procedure.



   The lien reduction procedure is applicable to a lien, which is in
effect subsequent to the issuance of an affidavit of noncompliance, pursuant
to section 2-79.



(Ord. No. 90-13, § 15, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 04-042, § 1, 7-6-04)



Sec. 2-85.  Criteria for lien reduction.



   The following criteria must be complied with prior to a lien reduction
hearing before the Code Compliance Board or Special Magistrate:



      (1)   The property in question must be in total code
compliance and an affidavit of compliance must be issued for the code
compliance case that is being appealed.



      (2)   The subject property must be free of all outstanding
debts (including taxes) due the city.



      (3)   An application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) must
be included for the application to be processed.



      (4)   This section does not apply to lien waivers or
reductions sought in conjunction with redevelopment of commercial and
residential properties pursuant to the provisions of Section 2-93 of this
Chapter.



(Ord. No. 90-13, § 15, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 97-51, § 1, 11-18-97; Ord. No.
04-042, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13; Ord. No. 16-007, § 3,
4-5-16)



Sec. 2-86.  Application for lien reduction.



   The Code Compliance Administrator or his designee shall provide  the
application for a lien reduction hearing.  The application will be included
with the affidavit of compliance issued by the CodeCompliance Division. A
complete application must accompany each lien reduction request that is to be
heard before the Board or Special Magistrate.



(Ord. No. 90-13, § 15, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 04-042, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No.
13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-87.  Application fee for lien reduction.



   A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall accompany the initial
reduction application with a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
additional lien recorded against the property. If all criteria for lien
reduction are not met under section 2-85, the applicant shall be reimbursed
one-half the amount of the application fee.  If after it has been determined
that the criteria under section 2-85 have not been complied with and the
application returned to the applicant, a new application and fee must be
submitted for a lien reduction hearing.



(Ord. No. 90-13, § 15, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 04-042, § 1, 7-6-04)



Sec. 2-88.  Lien reduction procedure.



   A party requesting a lien reduction must submit a complete lien
reduction application to the Code Compliance Division of the Police
Department upon receiving verification that all conditions are complied with
as stated in section 2-85. The Code Compliance Administrator or designee will
process the application and determine that all required criteria have been
complied with under city ordinance, section 2-85. If the applicant does not
qualify for a hearing under section 2-85, the party will be notified in
writing of the reasons and refunded one-half of the application fees. If the
reduction application is complete, the case will be placed on the next
available Code Compliance Board or Special Magistrate Lien Reduction
Agenda.  The appealing party will be notified in writing of the scheduled
date of the hearing at least five (5) days prior to the hearing date.  If
the matter is heard by a board, a quorum must be present for the Board to
hear a lien reduction and a majority of the entire Board must vote in the
affirmative for a lien to be reduced or waived. The Code Compliance
Administrator shall submit the Board or Special Magistrate’s Lien Reduction
Order to the city clerk, legal department and the city manager.  The Code
Compliance Administrator or his/her designee shall notify the applicant in
writing of the Lien Modification Order within seven (7) days following the
entry of the order and of the date of the next City Commission meeting when
the Commission shall hear the Board or Special Magistrate’s recommendation
if required.



(Ord. No. 90-13, § 15, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 97-51, § 1, 11-18-97; Ord. No.
04-042, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-89.  Conduct of hearing for lien modification.



   The Code Compliance Board or Special Magistrate at a lien modification
hearing shall make one of the following determinations: The lien shall be
waived in full, reduced to a specified amount or shall be upheld in full. The
Board or Special Magistrate shall hear all the facts regarding the specific
code or codes the appealing party was in violation of, the date of the
original hearing, the date the affidavit of noncompliance was issued, the
date the affidavit of compliance was issued, the current lien amount and all
pertinent information relating to the specific case, prior to making a
determination and order. The lien modification hearing shall not be a hearing
de novo of the original case.



(Ord. No. 90-13, § 15, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 97-51, § 1, 11-18-97; Ord. No.
04-042, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-90.  Final orders issued in lien modification hearings.



   Final orders shall be issued in lien modification hearings in
accordance with the following procedure:



      (1)   The Code Compliance Board or Special Magistrate shall
issue its order in lien modification hearings in writing in a form approved
by the City Attorney.  Immediately following rendition of lien modification
order, the City Clerk shall furnish a copy of the order along with minutes of
the hearing to the City Commission.



      (2)   Lien modification order issued by the Code Compliance
Board or Special Magistrate shall be final unless an aggrieved party takes
exception to the final order within seven (7) days of rendition of the order
or a City Commissioner takes exception to the final order within seven (7)
says of rendition of the order.



      (3)   The Commission or an aggrieved party may request a
review of an order by notifying the City Manager or his/her designee of the
intent to do so.  If review of an order is requested, the City Commission
shall review the order within thirty (30) days of the request for review. 
On review, the City Commission may hear the position of the property owner, a
Code Compliance Board representative, or may rely upon the minutes of the
proceeding regarding the propriety of the lien modification.



      (4)   The City Commission shall make one of the following
rulings:



         a.   Affirm the final order in full.



         b.   Modify the final order.



      (5)   The Commission shall direct the administration to take
action consistent with the acceptance, rejection, or modification of the
order.



      (6)   The property owner shall be advised that in the event
the property owner does not comply with the Code Compliance Board or Special
Magistrate order, as approved or modified by the City Commission, within
ninety (90) days of the Commission's action, then the Lien Reduction Order
shall be of no further force or effect, and the original lien shall remain on
the property.  No extensions of the ninety-(90) day period shall be
permitted, and no further action by the Code Compliance Board, the Special
Magistrate, or the City Commission shall be permitted regarding lien
reduction.



(Ord. No. 90-13, § 15, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 97-51, § 1, 11-18-97; Ord. No.
01-07, § 2, 1-16-01; Ord. No. 04-042, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 13-030, § 2,
11-5-13)



Sec. 2-91.  Violations and penalties.



   (a)   The following table of violations and penalties shall be
assessed by code enforcement officers and shall be followed by the county
court system as a special Magistrate pursuant to section 2-82 of this Code,
in its review and adjudication of matters in accordance with this Article. 
The schedule of penalties set forth below is not intended to be all
inclusive.  The penalty for violation of other codes or ordinances of the
city heretofore or hereafter created and not enumerated herein shall be
enforced in the manner provided for therein.



   Editor's note-The Schedule of Civil Penalties begins on the following
page.



 

SCHEDULE OF CIVIL PENALTIES


UNIFORM FINE SCHEDULE
 
Fine


Class I
 
$ 50.00


Class II
 
$ 75.00


Class III
 
$125.00


Class IV
 
$250.00



 



 

Violation
 
Fine Class/First Offense
 
Fine Class/Second Offense




Hedges exceeding maximum height
 

I

 

II



Parking or storing motor vehicle(s) greater than one (1) ton chassis
configuration for longer than 15 minutes in a residential area.
 

I

 

II



Animals and Fowl: Barking dogs creating a nuisance
 

III

 

IV



Animals and Fowl: Livestock, poultry, exotic or wild animals running at large
under 4-19
 

III

 

IV



Animals and Fowl: Maintaining a place for fighting under Sec. 4-8
 

III

 

IV



Animals and Fowl: Poisoning animals under 4-3
 

III

 

IV



Animals and Fowl: Vicious animals in the city under 4-15
 

III

 

IV



Animals and Fowl: Violations of Sec. 4-4 as to the keeping and treatment of
animals
 

III

 

IV



Fire Code, Chapter 9
 

IV

 

IV



Exterior storage or display in commercial and/or industrial zoning districts,
not permitted per city code
 

III

 

IV



Landscaping not maintained as required per code
 

III

 

IV



Major repairs of boats and motor vehicles in a residential area
 

III

 

IV



Mobile Homes: Occupancy or storage of a mobile home or motor home, other than
in a mobile home park
 

III

 

IV



Noise: Violation of the City of Boynton Beach Noise Control Ordinance,
sections 15-8 through 15-8.8
 

III

 

IV



Business Tax Receipt: Conducting a business, profession or occupation without
a business tax receipt
 

III

 

IV



Parking or storing junk vehicles
 

III

 

IV



Performance Standards: Nuisance or hazard due to noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odors, etc.
 

III

 

IV



Residential Zoning: Using a single-family residence as a rooming house or
multi-family dwelling
 

III

 

IV



Signs: Violation of Part III, L.D.R., Ch. 21, Boynton Beach Sign Ord.
 

III

 

IV



Site Plan not maintained as originally approved
 

III

 

IV



Storage: Open air storage of illegal items in a residential area, including
trash and debris, construction materials not being actively used for
construction, abandoned or derelict objects or equipment, including but not
limited to automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, bicycles, furniture,
major and minor appliances, trailers, cans or containers
 

III

 

IV



Trash: Storage of junk, trash debris, or litter
 

III

 

IV



Discharging deleterious wastes to a drainage system
 

IV

 

IV



Excavation and/or fill operation without valid permit or approval
 

IV

 

IV



Hazardous/unsanitary/unsafe conditions of buildings or structures; as well as
electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems
 

IV

 

IV



Maintaining unsanitary conditions
 

IV

 

IV



Open, unsafe, and abandoned buildings
 

IV

 

IV



Operating an illegal designated use
 

IV

 

IV



Swimming pool not completely enclosed by fence or screen
 

IV

 

IV



Temporary Sales without City approval
 

IV

 

IV



Vendors: Unlicensed roadside vending
 

IV

 

IV



Motor vehicle/boat repair, replacement parts; addition of oil or lubricants
 

IV

 

IV





 



   (b)   The provisions contained herein are supplemental.  Nothing
contained in this section shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes
and ordinances by any other means.



   (c)   Unless otherwise specifically stated in this Code, violations
of the City of Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances shall be subject to a Class
II fine, plus any costs assessed by Palm Beach County for processing
citations.



   (d)   The County shall accept this fee schedule for uncontested
violations, which may be paid by mail and may charge the violator a
reasonable fee for costs incurred in processing each citation.



(Ord. No. 96-67, § 1, 1-7-97; Or. No. 97-48, § 2, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 99-02,
§ 1, 1-19-99; Ord. No. 04-041, § 3, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07;
Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-92.  Consolidation of Nuisance Abatement Board; survival of actions.



   All powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Nuisance Abatement
Board shall survive and be deemed merged and consolidated with the powers,
duties, and responsibilities of the Code Compliance Board and Special
Magistrates. All previous actions of the Nuisance Abatement Board shall
survive this consolidation unless specifically revoked by the Code Compliance
Board or Special Magistrate.



(Ord. No. 04-009, § 2, 3-16-04; Ord. No. 13-030, § 2, 11-5-13)



Sec. 2-93.   Contingent Lien/Encumbrance Settlement Program.



   (a)   The city may enter into a Contingent Lien/Encumbrance
Settlement Agreement (hereinafter "Agreement'') with a contract purchaser of
real property when the city determines the Agreement will advance, in the
city's sole discretion, the development or re-development of a chronically
blighted/nuisance property. An Agreement with the city is an opportunity and
not a matter of right.



   (b)   A party who has a contract to purchase real property
encumbered by a city lien may submit a written application to the Code
Compliance Division by fully completing the city's application. Incomplete
applications shall be returned to the applicant prior to acceptance by the
city, and if not returned with all required information completed within
thirty (30) days of the date of the city's notice of incompleteness the
application shall be considered withdrawn.



   (c)   The applicant shall pay a non-refundable application fee of
one thousand dollars ($1,000), payable at the time the application is
submitted.  The amount of the application fee may be revised by the City
Commission by resolution.



   (d)   Upon receipt of an application, the city shall confirm that
subject property is free of all outstanding debts (including taxes) due to
the city. The Agreement shall delineate all outstanding debt owed to the city
and settlement amount of each and a total settlement amount.



   (e)   In addition to the documentation required as part of the
application, the applicant may provide any documentation, including, without
limitation, photographs, receipts. permits, and similar items, which the
applicant wishes to have considered as part of the request.



   (f)   Upon the city's receipt of a complete application and payment
of the application fee, a city code enforcement officer shall inspect the
applicant's property to ascertain outstanding violations existing at the
property. The code enforcement officer shall provide the applicant with a
written explanation of the remaining items that must be completed in order to
bring the property into compliance.



   (g)   Upon the completion of the property inspection, the Code
Compliance Coordinator and Building Official, or their department designee,
and any other member of city staff designated by the City Manager, shall
consider the factors required by this section and determine the amount to
which the accrued fines set forth in the lien(s) should be reduced, if at
all, and an appropriate time for bring the property into compliance. This
time for compliance is subject to negotiation and reflected in the Agreement.
The Agreement shall contain a provision for recordation of new liens against
the property due to failure to comply.



   (h)   When determining a settlement amount, the Code Compliance
Coordinator and Building Official, or their department designee, and any
other member of city staff designated by the City Manager, shall consider the
following:



      (1)   The gravity of the violation.



      (2)   Efforts, if any, taken by the violator/property owner to
come into compliance.



      (3)   Efforts, if any taken by the contract purchaser to come
into compliance on other properties in the city in which the contract
purchaser has or had an interest.



      (4)   Any previous code violations by violator or contract
purchaser.



      (5)   The length the violation remained in place, any
difficulties or unique circumstances affecting the ability to come into
compliance.



      (6)   The level of investment necessary to bring the property
into compliance.



      (7)   Accrued amount of the lien.



      (8)   Current property value compared to the accrued lien.



      (9)   Time and incurred costs by city to bring the property
into compliance.



      (10)   Current ownership of the property, ie. Owner-occupied,
REO or investment property and any other factors the city deems relevant.



   (i)   The city's costs of enforcement, including, without
limitation, any charges resulting from city's abatement of health and safety
violations on the property and administrative costs shall be listed
separately in the Agreement and may not be mitigated or reduced.



   (j)   The Agreement shall indicate the status of the violations on
the property, the total fine accrual, the lien settlement amount, the
administrative fees and costs due the city, and a provision stating that the
city's agreement to settle the liens is contingent on the owner/buyer
bringing the property into compliance by a date certain. If there are any
outstanding debts owed to the city, the agreement shall indicate that the
city's agreement to settle and provide a release of the lien(s) is
conditioned upon the owner/buyer providing the city with proof of payment.



   (k)   The Agreement constitutes on offer by the city to settle the
city liens or claims. The city's offer is deemed withdrawn if not accepted by
the contract purchaser and returned to the city within thirty (30) days.



   (l)   If more than thirty (30) days elapse from the date of the
issuance of the city's offer, the Applicant shall submit an updated
Application and a re-inspection fee in the amount of $150.00 so the city may
confirm whether the condition of the property has changed. Upon
re-inspection, the city shall provide an updated offer of Agreement, valid
for an additional thirty (30) days. City staff may in its sole discretion
waive this requirement if the Property is scheduled to close within five (5)
days of the expiration of the previously issued offer of Agreement. An
extension granted pursuant to this section shall only be granted by the city
one (1) time. If additional extensions are required, the Applicant shall be
required to submit a new application in accordance with Paragraphs (1), (2),
and (3) above.



   (m)   The city is authorized at its sole discretion to grant one
extension to the agreement for a period not to exceed 90 days. The extension
shall be requested in writing with justifiable cause demonstrated prior to
the expiration of the stipulated agreement. The city shall assess a fee of
10% of the lien settlement amount as an extension fee.



   (n)   If the name of the actual buyer/applicant changes after the
issuance of the city's Agreement, the Applicant shall be required to submit a
new application in accordance with Paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) above.



   (o)   An Agreement is not assignable.



(Ord. No. 16-007, § 2, 4-5-16)



Secs. 2-94—2-100. Reserved.



ARTICLE VI. RESERVED*



   *Editor’s note-Part II, Chapter 2, Article VI, “Community Relations
Board” as established by Ord. No. 90-79 was repealed by Ord. No. 13-036, §
2, passed 12-17-13.



Secs. 2-101—2-115. Reserved.



ARTICLE VII. EDUCATION AND YOUTH ADVISORY BOARD*



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 91-18, §§ 2—8, adopted May 7, 1991, enacted
provisions pertaining to a children and youth advisory board. Such ordinance
did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion as Art. VII, §§
2-116—2-122, has been at the editor's discretion.



Sec. 2-116.  Created.



   The City Commission, in accordance with the powers vested in it, hereby
merges the Children and Youth Advisory Boards and the Education Advisory
Board and establishes the Education and Youth Advisory Board.



(Ord. No. 91-18, § 2, 5-7-91; Ord. No. 07-001, § 2, 1-16-07)



Sec. 2-117.  Duties.



   The Education and Youth Advisory Board shall act as a fact-finding and
advisory board on the following issues and on such other issues as are, from
time to time, designated by the City Commission by resolution:



      (1)   Development of programs that promote ongoing
relationships with caring adults.



      (2)   Formulation of long and short range programming to
benefit the children and youth of the community by involving parents, the
business community, civic and neighborhood organizations, including volunteer
recruiting for before and after local school programs.



      (3)   Development of incentives and enhancements encourage the
development of safe places, including improved playgrounds at or near local
schools and structured activities during non-school hours.



      (4)   Identification and dissemination of information on
local, county, state and federal programs that provide beneficial services to
children and their families.



      (5)   Developing strategies for communicating with the School
Board of Palm Beach County and its staff, advising the City Commission as to
the activities of the Board, and other federal, state and local legislative
bodies which affect the needs of students, within the city.



      (6)   Development of child and youth advocacy programs.



      (7)   Contacting community groups and businesses within the
geographical boundaries of Boynton Beach for professional skills, materials,
financial or education support for the schools and with the purpose of
implementing programs at local schools that benefit students from Pre- K
through grades 12 and vocational schools.



      (8)   Developing recommendations to the City Commission for
forwarding to the School Board of Palm Beach County regarding actions which
may be taken in support of schools in Boynton Beach with respect to proposed
legislation at the state level.



      (9)   Coordinating with the local police department to improve
safety for students before, during and after school and developing public
relations that highlight successful programs.



(Ord. No. 91-18, § 3, 5-7-91; Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 11-16-99; Ord. No.
06-050, § 3, 6-20-06)



Sec. 2-118.  Recommendations of board.



   The board shall periodically advise the city commission of its findings
with respect to the foregoing issues and shall make recommendations to the
city commission on any matter referred to it within thirty (30) days or
within such time as prescribed by the city commission by specific resolution.



(Ord. No. 91-18, § 4, 5-7-91)



Sec. 2-119.  Organization.



   (a)   The children and youth advisory board shall comprise seven (7)
permanent members, two (2) alternate members and three (3) student members,
two (2) to be regular voting members and one (1) alternate, all to be
appointed by the city commission. Of the members so appointed, three (3)
shall be for a term of three (3) years, two (2) shall be for a term of two
(2) years, and two (2) shall be for a term of one (1) year. Their successors
shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. Alternate members, as well as
the three (3) student members, shall be appointed for a period of one (1)
year.



   (b)   When a member has missed three (3) regular monthly meetings
for any reason within one (1) annual board term, that member will be notified
that one (1) additional absence will cause his/her board membership to be
terminated and a replacement will be appointed at the time of the next
absence.



   (c)   Any member of the board may be removed for cause in accordance
with state law. The City Commission shall promptly fill any vacancy.



   (d)   At the organizational meeting of the board a chairperson and
vice-chairperson shall be selected by majority vote of the board. The
chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be selected annually at the May
meeting of the board.



(Ord. No. 91-18, § 5, 5-7-91; Ord. No. 93-30, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 09-014,
§ 2, 2-2-09)



Sec. 2-120.  Meetings.



   The board shall meet regularly once a month or more frequently if
necessary, for the transaction of business. Its meetings shall be open to the
public. The board may establish its own meeting rules and procedures for the
conduct of its business. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum.



(Ord. No. 91-18, § 6, 5-7-91)



Sec. 2-121.  Qualification.



   Members of the advisory board on children and youth shall be residents
of the city, with the exception of one alternate non-voting member of the
student membership, who may reside outside the city limits.



(Ord. No. 91-18, § 7, 5-7-91; Ord. 96-42, § 1, 10-2-96)



Sec. 2-122.  Powers.



   Nothing in this article shall be construed as restricting or curtailing
any of the powers of the city commission, or as a delegation to the board of
any of the authority or discretionary powers vested and imposed by law in the
city commission. The city commission declares that public interest,
convenience and welfare required the appointment of the board to act in a
purely advisory capacity to the city commission for the purposes set forth in
this article. Any powers delegated here to the board to adopt rules and
regulations shall not be construed as a delegation of legislative authority,
but purely of administrative authority.



(Ord. No. 91-18, § 8, 5-7-91)



Sec. 2-123.  Consolidation of Children and Youth Advisory Board and
Education Advisory Board; survival of actions.



   All powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Education Advisory
Board shall survive and be deemed  merged and consolidated with the powers,
duties and  responsibilities of the Children and Youth Advisory Board.  All
previous actions of the Education Advisory Board shall survive this
consolidation unless specifically revoked by the Children and Youth Advisory
Board.  The consolidated board shall be known as the Education and Youth
Advisory Board.  All current members of the Children and Youth Advisory
Board are appointed to the Education and Youth Advisory Board as voting
members for the balance of their terms of appointment.



(Ord. No. 06-050, § 2, 6-20-06)



Secs. 2-124—2-125. Reserved.



ARTICLE VIII. EDUCATION ADVISORY BOARD*



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 91-24, §§ 2—8, adopted May 21, 1991,
created the education advisory board. Such provisions, being nonamendatory of
the Code, have been designated by the editor as Art. VIII, §§ 2-126—2-132.



Sec. 2-126.  Creation.



   The city commission, in accordance with the powers vested in it, hereby
creates and establishes an education advisory board.



(Ord. No. 91-24, § 2, 5-21-91)



Sec. 2-127.  Duties.



   The education advisory board shall act as a fact-finding and advisory
board on the following issues and on such other issues as are, from time to
time, designated by the city commission by resolution:



   To assist city and local schools in:



      (1)   Recruiting volunteers to assist students before, during
and after school.



      (2)   Contacting businesses within the geographical borders of
Boynton Beach for professional skills, materials, financial or educational
support for the schools.



      (3)   Coordinating with local police department to improve
safety for students before, during and after school.



      (4)   Coordinating with city's parks and recreation department
to improve playgrounds at or near local schools.



      (5)   Contacting the Greater Boynton Beach Chamber of
Commerce, real estate groups, and other community groups for the purpose of
implementing programs at local schools that benefit students from pre-K
through grades 12 and vocational schools.



      (6)   Communicating with the school board of Palm Beach County
and its staff, and advising the city commission as to the activities of the
school board, and other federal, state and local legislative bodies which
affect the needs of Boynton Beach students.



      (7)   Developing public relations that highlight successful
programs within the schools and to help improve their image in conjunction
with local media.



      (8)   Developing recommendations to the city commission for
forwarding to the school board of Palm Beach County regarding actions which
may be taken in support of schools in Boynton Beach and with respect to
proposed legislation at the state level.



(Ord. No. 91-24, § 3, 5-21-91)



Sec. 2-128.  Recommendations of board.



   The board shall periodically advise the city commission of its findings
with respect to the foregoing issues and shall make recommendations to the
city commission on any matter referred to it within thirty (30) days or
within such time as prescribed by the city commission by specific resolution.



(Ord. No. 91-24, § 4, 5-21-91)



Sec. 2-129.  Organization.



   (a)   Any member failing to attend two (2) of three (3) successive
meetings without cause and/or without prior approval of the chairperson of
the board shall automatically forfeit his or her appointment.



   (b)   Any member of the board may be removed for cause in accordance
with state law. The City Commission shall promptly fill any vacancy.



   (c)   At the organizational meeting of the board a chairperson and
vice-chairperson shall be selected by  majority vote of the  board.  The
chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be selected annually at the May
meeting of the board.



(Ord. No. 91-24, § 5, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 91-72, § 1, 10-1-91; Ord. No.
91-74, § 1, 11-5-91; Ord. No. 94-13, § 1, 6-7-94; Ord. No. 94-16, § 1,
6-21-94; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 06-050, § 4, 6-20-06)



Sec. 2-130.  Meetings.



   The Board shall meet regularly once a month, or more frequently if
necessary, for the transaction of business. Its meetings shall be open to the
public. The Board may establish its own meeting rules and procedures for the
conduct of its business. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum.



(Ord. No. 91-24, § 6, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No.
04-033, § 1, 5-18-04)



Sec. 2-131.  Reserved.



   Editor's note - Ord. No. 06-050, adopted June 20, 2006, repealed §
2-131.  Prior to repeal, § 2-131 set forth qualifications for the Education
Advisory Board.  Ord. No. 06-050 consolidated the Children and Youth
Advisory Board and the Education Advisory Board.



Sec. 2-132.  Powers.



   Nothing in this article shall be construed as restricting or curtailing
any of the powers of the city commission, or as a delegation to the board of
any of the authority or discretionary powers vested and imposed by law in the
city commission. The city commission declares that public interest,
convenience and welfare required the appointment of the board to act in a
purely advisory capacity to the city commission for the purposes set forth in
this article. Any powers delegated here to the board to adopt rules and
regulations shall not be construed as a delegation of legislative authority,
but purely a delegation of administrative authority.



(Ord. No. 91-24, § 8, 5-21-91)



Secs. 2-133—2-140. Reserved.



ARTICLE IX. SENIOR ADVISORY BOARD



Sec. 2-141.  Creation.



   The city commission, in accordance with the powers vested in it, hereby
creates and establishes a senior advisory board. All references to the
elderly advisory board shall hereafter be construed to mean the senior
advisory board.



(Ord. No. 92-13, § 2, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-7-94)



Sec. 2-142.  Duties.



   The senior advisory board shall act as a fact-finding and advisory
board on the following issues and on such other issues as are, from time to
time, designated by the city commission by resolution. [The advisory board
shall] assist the elderly in:



      (1)   Setting up a retired senior volunteer program known as
RSVP to provide services for the homebound;



      (2)   Seeking federal and state grants to provide for services;



      (3)   Monitor and lobby for legislation regarding the elderly;



      (4)   Make arrangements for the medical mobile unit already in
operation in Palm Beach County to bring it to the City of Boynton Beach;



      (5)   Provide a pamphlet of available programs for seniors;



      (6)   Provide a speakers bureau, workshops and educational
meetings on topics of interest for seniors;



      (7)   Recommend free legal programs and banking services for
the homebound;



      (8)   Provide recreation and social programs.



(Ord. No. 92-13, § 3, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-7-94)



Sec. 2-143.  Recommendations of board.



   The board shall periodically advise the city commission of its findings
with respect to the foregoing issues and shall make recommendations to the
city commission on any matter referred to it within thirty (30) days or
within such time as prescribed by the city commission by specific resolution.



(Ord. No. 92-13, § 4, 6-2-92)



Sec. 2-144.  Organization.



   (a)   The senior advisory board shall be comprised of seven (7)
permanent members and two (2) alternate members, all to be appointed by the
city commission. Of the members so appointed, four (4) shall be for a term of
three (3) years, three (3) shall be for a term of two (2) years. Their
successors shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. Alternate members
shall be appointed for a period of one (1) year.



   (b)   Any member failing to attend three (3) meetings shall be
notified that one additional absence shall automatically forfeit his or her
appointment to that board.



   (c)   Any member of the board may be removed for cause in accordance
with state law. The city commission shall promptly fill any vacancy.



   (d)   At the organizational meeting of the board a chairperson and
vice-chairperson shall be selected by majority vote of the board. The
chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be selected annually at the May
meeting of the board.



(Ord. No. 92-13, § 5, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-7-94)



Sec. 2-145.  Meetings.



   The board shall meet quarterly on an “as needed” basis for the
transaction of business. Its meetings shall be open to the public. The board
may establish its own meeting rules and procedures for the conduct of its
business. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum.



(Ord. No. 92-13, § 6, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 01-12, § 2, 3-6-01)



Sec. 2-146.  Qualification.



   The members of the senior advisory board shall be residents of the City
of Boynton Beach, Florida.



(Ord. No. 92-13, § 7, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-7-94)



Sec. 2-147.  Powers.



   Nothing in this article shall be construed as restricting or curtailing
any of the powers of the city commission, or as a delegation to the board of
any of the authority or discretionary powers vested and imposed by law in the
city commission. The city commission declares that public interest,
convenience and welfare required the appointment of the board to act in a
purely advisory capacity to the city commission for the purposes set forth in
this article. Any powers delegated here to the board to adopt rules and
regulations shall not be construed as a delegation of legislative authority,
but purely a delegation of administrative authority.



(Ord. No. 92-13, § 8, 6-2-92)



Sec. 2-148 — 2-150.   Reserved.



ARTICLE X. PERSONNEL POLICY MANUAL



Sec. 2-151.  Personnel Policy Manual adopted by reference.



   The City Commission of the City of Boynton Beach, Florida, hereby
formally adopts the  Personnel Policy Manual, and all subsequent amendments
thereto, which document is designated as Exhibit “A” of Ordinance No.
98-06, which is incorporated herein as if set out in its entirety.



(Ord. No. 98-06, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 98-34, § 1, 9-3-98; Ord. 98-44, § 1,
12-1-98; Ord. No. 01-53, § 2, 10-2-01; Ord. No. 02-031, § 1, 8-6-02; Ord.
No. 03-047, § 1, 9- 2-03; Ord. No. 03-049, § 1, 9-16-03; Ord. No. 05-048,
§ 2, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 09-018, § 2, 4-7-09; Ord. No. 11- 015, § 2, 5-3-11)



Secs. 2-152—2-153. Reserved.



ARTICLE XI. ARTS COMMISSION



Sec. 2-154.  Creation of Commission.



   The City Commission, in accordance with the powers vested in it, hereby
creates and establishes the Boynton Beach Arts Commission, hereinafter
referred to as the "Arts Commission."



(Ord. No. 01-64, § 1, 1-2-02)



Sec. 2-155.  Purpose and duties.



   (a)   The purpose of the Arts Commission is to advise the City
Commission on matters related to the arts, to develop a plan and programs to
promote and support art in public places, and to recommend guidelines and
funding for implementation.



   (b)   It shall be the duty of the Arts Commission to act as an
advisory board to the City Commission in providing advice on matters relating
to the visual arts.



   (c)   The Arts Commission may develop a public art plan and program
for the city.



   (d)   The Arts Commission may recommend funding sources including
private sources and grant funds; encourage public and private partnerships in
the arts; review and make recommendations on proposals for art work for
public buildings and public spaces; encourage the flow of art into the city;
stimulate art related activities and events; study issues related to art and
implement art programs as delegated to it by the City's Commission from time
to time.



   (e)   The Arts Commission shall periodically advise the City
Commission of its findings or proposals with respect to the foregoing issues
and make recommendations to the City Commission on any matter referred to it
within as much time prescribed by the City Commission.



(Ord. No. 01-64, § 1, 1-2-02)



Sec. 2-156.  Organization.



   (a)   The Arts Commission shall consist of seven (7) regular members
and two (2) alternate members and serve at the pleasure of the City
Commission.



   (b)   The Arts Commission shall be comprised of seven (7) permanent
members, and two (2) alternate members, all to be appointed by the City
Commission. Of the members so appointed, three (3) shall be for a term of
three (3) years, two (2) shall be for a term of two (2) years, and two (2)
shall be for a term of one (1) year.  Their successors shall be appointed
for a term of three (3) years.  Alternate members shall be appointed for a
period of one (1) year. All members may be reappointed at the pleasure of the
City Commission at the termination of their appointment, with no limit as to
the number of terms they may serve.



   (c)   Appointees to the Arts Commission shall be residents or
business owners preferably with the following background: artist, art
volunteer/activist; planner; private developer; architect; neighborhood
association member; interested citizen.



   (d)   At the organizational meeting of the Arts Commission, a
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be selected by majority vote of the
Arts Commission. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be selected
annually at the anniversary of the first meeting of the Arts Commission, or
at the May meeting of the Arts Commission.



(Ord. No. 01-64, § 1, 1-2-02; Ord. No. 04-031, § 2, 4-20-04)



Sec. 2-157.  Meetings.



   The Arts Commission shall meet at an appropriate place and shall
arrange a time for holding regular meetings of the Arts Commission, and for
such other meetings as shall be necessary, and it may add to such rules of
organization, regulation and procedure as it may deem necessary and determine
the duties of its members and officers. Other specifications for conducting
meetings, such as the number needed for a quorum, shall be in conformance
with F.S. § 166.041(4).



(Ord. No. 01-64, § 1, 1-2-02)



Sec. 2-158.  Powers.



   Nothing in this article shall be construed as restricting or curtailing
any of the powers of the City Commission, or as a delegation to the Arts
Commission of any of the authority or discretionary powers vested and imposed
by law in the City Commission. The City Commission declares that public
interest, convenience and welfare required the appointment of the Arts
Commission to act in a purely advisory capacity to the City Commission for
the purposes set forth in this article. Any power delegated here to the Arts
Commission to adopt rules and regulations shall not be construed as a
delegation of legislative authority, but purely a delegation of legislative
authority.



(Ord. No. 01-64, § 1, 1-2-02)



ARTICLE XII. ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM



Sec. 2-159.  Short title; intent.



   (a)   This article shall be known and cited as the "Art in Public
Places Program."



   (b)   It is the intent and purpose of this article to further the
commitment of the city to the aesthetic, historical, cultural and economic
enrichment of the community through the creation of works of art so that
citizens and visitors to the city are afforded an opportunity to enjoy and
appreciate works of art. The requirements of this article shall be construed
to promote the aesthetic values of the entire community and to encourage the
preservation and protection of works of art.



(Ord. No. 05-060, § 2, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 07-002, § 2, 4-3-07)



Sec. 2-160.  Definitions.



   For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings:



   Artist or Professional Artist means a practitioner in the visual arts,
generally recognized by critics and peers as a professional of serious intent
and ability. Indications of a person's status as a professional artist
include, but are not limited to, income realized through the sole commission
of artwork, frequent or consistent art exhibitions, placement of artwork in
public institutions or museums, receipt of honors and awards, and training in
the arts.



   Art, Artwork or Works of Art means tangible creations by artists
exhibiting the highest quality of skill and aesthetic principles and includes
all forms of the visual arts conceived in any medium, material, or
combination thereof, including, but not limited to, paintings, sculptures,
engravings, carvings, frescos, stained glass, mosaics, mobiles, tapestries,
murals, photographs, video projections, digital images, bas- relief, high
relief, fountains, kinetics, collages, drawings, monuments erected to
commemorate a person or an event, functional furnishings, such as artist
designed seating and pavers, unique or original architectural elements, and
artist designed landforms or landscape elements. The following shall not be
considered artwork or works of art for purposes of this article:



      (1)   Reproductions or unlimited copies of original artwork.



      (2)   Art objects, which are mass-produced.



      (3)   Works that are decorative, ornamental, or functional
elements of the architecture or landscape design, except when commissioned
from an artist or designed as an integral aspect of a structure or site.



   Building means any structure that encloses space and is used or built
for the shelter or enclosure of persons, businesses, chattel or property.



   Development means any construction, or redevelopment, or structural
alteration of any private or public building within the limits of the city.



   Arts Commission means the advisory board established by the City
Commission pursuant to Ordinance 01-64.



   Public Art Fund means a separate, interest bearing account set up by
the city to receive monies for the Art in Public Places Program.



   Remodeling or conversion means alterations made to a building within
any twelve month period, including, but not limited to, changes to the facade
of a building, changes to the interior of a building, increases or decreases
in the floor area of a building and changes to exterior improvements.



   In-fill Housing means new residential units on parcels less than five
(5) acres that are not part of an approved planned unit development as
defined by the city land development regulations.



(Ord. No. 05-060, § 2, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 07-002, § 2, 4-3-07)



Sec. 2-161.  Arts Commission.



   The Boynton Beach Arts Commission shall function and operate as
outlined in the City of Boynton Beach's Ordinance No. 01-64.



(Ord. No. 05-060, § 2, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 07-002, § 2, 4-3-07)



Sec. 2-162.  Powers and duties of committee.



   (a)   The Arts Commission shall have the following additional powers
and duties:



      (1)   Recommend to the City Commission adoption of Art in
Public Places Program Guidelines and amendments thereto;



      (2)   Recommend to the City Commission adoption of a Public
Art Master Plan identifying locations for public artworks and establishing a
priority order;



      (3)   Recommend to the City Commission authorization of
expenditures for maintaining and implementing the Art in Public Places
Program;



      (4)   Recommend to the City Commission other expenditures of
the Public Art Fund such as hiring staff and services to run the Art in
Public Places Program;



      (5)   Exercise their authority to approve, approve with
conditions or disapprove proposed installation of artwork based on Art in
Public Places Program Guidelines; and



      (6)   Advance, through education and communication, the Art in
Public Places Program Guidelines. The guidelines are attached to Ord. No.
05-060 as Exhibit "A".



(Ord. No. 05-060,  § 2, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 07-002, § 2, 4-3-07)



Sec. 2-163.  Establishment of public art fee.



   (a)   All development, redevelopment, reconstruction or remodeling
projects commenced after the adoption of this article which have a
construction value of $250,000.00 or greater, shall participate in the Art in
Public Places Program by paying a public art fee. For the purpose of this
section, a project will be considered "commenced" when an application for
review is first submitted to the city's Development Department. The public
art fee shall be equal to one percent (1%) of construction value of the
project. The Building Division/Finance Department shall administer the
billing and collection of the thirty percent (30%) or (.03) of the one
percent (1%) of the public art fee at the time of Building Permit issuance
and the seventy percent (70%) or (.07) of the one percent (1%) prior to and
as a condition of issuance of the certificate of occupancy that includes the
public art.  One hundred percent (100%) of the public art fees collected are
to be allocated to the Public Art Fund. All distributions for the Public Art
Fund require the recommendation of the Arts Commission prior to City
Commission approval.



   (b)   The following types of projects are exempt from the payment of
the public art fee:



      (1)   Remodeling, repair or reconstruction of structures
damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity determined by the
City of Boynton Beach Building Official.



      (2)   The percent of the project dedicated to affordable
housing as defined by the City of Boynton Beach.



      (3)   All projects which were submitted prior to or on October
5, 2005, notwithstanding any subsequent request for site plan extension.



      (4)   Single-family and two-family in-fill housing.



      (5)   Normal, routine maintenance including replacement of
existing damaged or failing structural or non-structural elements, HVAC,
plumbing, electric, or fire detection/suppression equipment of a project not
associated with an addition, renovation or new construction.



      (6)   Remodeling, repair, reconstruction, or additions made
after October 5, 2005 to any existing amenity, clubhouse, building, pool,
park, playground and/or common area element located within an existing
private residential development.  This specific exemption applies
retroactively to October 5, 2005.



   (c)   Project owners required to participate in the Art in Public
Places Program may obtain reimbursement up to seventy percent (70%) of
collected art fee if the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The owner of a development agrees to follow the Art
Commission's recommendations to develop the art in the project; and



      (2)   Prior to placement on the development site, has the
artwork approved by the Arts Commission to insure that the artwork will be
accessible and readily visible to the public based on location of artwork and
normal traffic of vehicles/pedestrians in the proposed location; and



      (3)   Select an artist directly to execute a project that
meets specific criteria outlined by the recommendations and guidelines
document provided by the Arts Commission or hire a professional consultant to
select artists to commission site- specific, architecturally integrated
artworks that meet specific art guidelines criteria outlined by the
recommendations and guidelines document provided by the Arts Commission; or
purchase artworks for permanent installation recommended by the Arts
Commission; or elect to purchase an existing artwork or commission an
original artwork for donation as a gift to the City of Boynton Beach's public
art collection.



(Ord. No. 05-060, § 2, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 07-002, § 2, 4-3-07; Ord. No.
15-009, § 2, 3-17-15; Ord. No. 16-002, § 2, 2-2-16)



Sec. 2-164.  Art and artist selection criteria.



   (a)   The Art and Artist selection criteria shall be in compliance
with the Arts Commissions Guidelines and Recommendations.



(Ord. No. 05-060, § 2, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 07-002, § 2, 4-3-07)



Sec. 2-165.  Public Art Fund.



   (a)   There is hereby created a Public Art Fund administered by the
Arts Commission. Funding shall consist of all contributions received from art
fees for development and redevelopment. Contributions shall include one
percent (1%) of construction value on projects exceeding $250,000.00, any
cash grants and donations to the city for public art projects from
governmental or private resources, and all other funds allocated by the city
through the budgetary process for the provision of public art.



   (b)   Expenditures from the Public Art Fund shall include but not be
limited to expenses associated with the selection, commissioning,
acquisition, transportation, maintenance, public education, promotion,
administration, program marketing, documentation, removal and insurance of
the works of art or in relation thereto. The Arts Commission can recommend to
the City Commission expenditures from the funds in furtherance of the Art in
Public Places Program.



   (c)   Disbursements of the public art fee shall be seventy percent
(70%) to the construction of art in a given project and thirty percent (30%)
for the administration of the Art in Public Places Program and a (endowment
or reserve fund) for future work as described in the Arts Commissions
Guidelines and Recommendations.



(Ord. No. 05-060, § 2, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 07-002, § 2, 4-3-07)



Sec. 2-166.  Ownership of artwork.



   Unless otherwise expressly agreed to in writing by the city, ownership
of all art acquired through expending funds in the Public Art Fund shall be
owned by the city according to the Arts Commissions Recommendations and
Guidelines.



(Ord. No. 05-060, § 2, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 07-002, § 2, 4-3-07)



Sec. 2-167.  Art in Public Places Program Guidelines.



   (a)   The Arts Commission shall prepare and from time to time
recommend to the City Commission revisions to the Art in Public Places
Program Guidelines and make the same available to the public, which shall
provide guidance for program organization; organizational governance and
staffing responsibilities; procedures for project planning; artist selection;
art selection criteria; art placement criteria; donations; loans and
memorials; collection management; and administration of the Public Art Fund.



   (b)   In the event language contained in the Art in Public Places
Program Guidelines conflicts with this article, the language in the article
shall control.



(Ord. No. 05-060, § 2, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 07-002, § 2, 4-3-07)



Sec. 2-168.  Art in Public Places Program Location Plan.



   The Arts Commission shall prepare, and from time to time revise, a Art
in Public Places Program Location Plan that identifies locations and criteria
for public artworks and establishes a priority order.



(Ord. No. 05-060, § 2, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 07-002, § 2, 4-3-07)



Secs. 2-169—2-170. Reserved.



ARTICLE XIII. CIVIL EMERGENCIES - EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION



Sec. 2-171.  Purpose.



   To establish levels of compensation for regular, part-time and seasonal
employees who are released from work or who are retained or called back to
perform city work during the threat or occurrence of a hurricane, severe
storm, civil disaster, or other emergency conditions affecting the city.



(Ord. No. 05-036, § 2, 7-19-05)



Sec. 2-172.  Local state of emergency.



   (a)   The provisions of this article for a declaration of a local
state of emergency is for administrative purposes only and supplements the
other provisions of law, as set forth in City Charter, Code or state law, for
the declaration of emergencies. Accordingly, this article shall be construed
to supplement the provisions of the Charter, the Code and state law, and in
the event of a conflict the provision of Charter, Code or state law shall
prevail.



   (b)   A local emergency shall be deemed to have commenced when the
City Manager (or an acting City Manager when the City Manager is not
available to act) files with the City Clerk a declaration that the city is in
a state of local emergency. The Declaration of Emergency shall reference this
article. Immediately following such declaration, the City Manager (or Acting
City Manager) will inform each city department and office in as timely a
manner as possible by written or electronic communication that a state of
civil emergency is in effect. The state of local civil emergency shall
continue in effect until rescinded in writing by the City Manager (or Acting
City Manager), filed with the City Clerk.



(Ord. No. 05-036, § 2, 7-19-05)



Sec. 2-173.  Authority and duration of Emergency Pay Policy coverage.



   The provisions of this Emergency Pay Policy shall become effective
immediately following the declaration of a state of civil emergency by the
City Manager and are considered from that point to take precedence over all
other Personnel Rules and Regulations, policies, ordinances and collective
bargaining agreements of the City of Boynton Beach in the matters of pay,
compensation and leave as hereinafter set forth. The provisions of this
Emergency Pay Policy shall apply for the entire time period during which the
declared state of civil emergency exists, as determined by the City Manager.



(Ord. No. 05-036, § 2, 7-19-05)



Sec. 2-174.  Designation of employees for purposes of establishing pay and
compensation.



   (a)   In a manner to be determined by the City Manager or his/her
acting designee, all city employees (regardless of full-time, part-time,
seasonal, exempt or non-exempt status) will be classified into one of the
following three categories:



   A = Essential/Mandatory Personnel



The assistance of these employees is considered essential to the city's
ability to function and provide public services in the event of a civil
emergency.



   B = Essential Personnel



Depending on circumstances and needs, the assistance of these employees may
be required in the event of a civil emergency.



   C = Non-Essential Personnel



The assistance of these employees is normally not required during a civil
emergency event.



   (b)   Employees who are classified as category "A"
(Essential/Mandatory Personnel) are expected to report for work at the
beginning of their assigned shift, work their entire shift, and be prepared
to work any overtime hours as may be required under emergency conditions.



   (c)   Category "A" employees may also be required to report for work
on unscheduled days or hours and should be prepared to perform tasks outside
their normal scope of duties. Category "A" employees may be required to
remain at a designated facility during some portion of the emergency event.



   (d)   Employees who are classified as category "B" (Essential
Personnel) should be prepared to report for work and should be prepared to
work any overtime hours if required to do so.



   (e)   Category "B" employees may also be required to report for work
on unscheduled days or hours, and should be prepared to perform tasks outside
their normal scope of duties. Category "B" employees may be required to
remain at a designated facility during some portion of the emergency event.



   (f)   Employees who are classified as category "C" (Non-Essential
Personnel) may be released from their normal work duties and schedules as
circumstances dictate, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The employee is to remain in periodic contact with their
supervisor or other designated representatives in accordance with
departmental procedures;



      (2)   Be available to respond to call back assignments as
directed; and



      (3)   Be prepared to work any overtime hours that may be
required in advance of or following an emergency event.



   (g)   The city retains the right to change at any time an employee's
designation (as either "A", "B" or "C"), based upon the type of civil
emergency that exists and upon the level or stage of response that is deemed
appropriate by city management to address the civil emergency.



(Ord. No. 05-036, § 2, 7-19-05)



Sec. 2-175.  Duty to work.



   An employee who is directed to report for work during a declared civil
emergency and fails to do so is subject to being disciplined, up to and
including termination. In addition to any disciplinary action, the employee
shall forfeit any compensation payable under these policies, except
compensation for hours actually worked.



(Ord. No. 05-036, § 2, 7-19-05)



Sec. 2-176.  Employee compensation.



   (a)   Any employee classified as either "A" (Essential/Mandatory) or
"B" (Essential), who is not exempt from the overtime provisions of the Fair
Labor Standards Act, will be compensated as follows during a period of local
emergency:



      (1)   The employee will be paid their regular compensation of
all hours they are scheduled for work, but released from work.



Example: If an employee is scheduled to work from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., but
is released from work at 3:00 p.m., the employee will be paid as though the
employee worked until 5:00 p.m. However, only those hours actually worked
will be counted for overtime purposes.



      (2)   The employee will be compensated at a premium rate of
double their regular base rate of pay for all hours actually worked,
including hours which would otherwise qualify for overtime pay (time and
one-half).



Example: If an employee who earns $10.00 an hour is scheduled and required to
work at 8:00 a.m. but a local emergency was declared at 7:00 a.m., the
employee shall be paid $20.00 an hour for all hours actually worked until the
local emergency ends.



      (3)   Any employee who is exempt from the overtime provisions
of the Fair Labor Standards Act, except the City Manager, will be compensated
as follows: the employee will be paid their regular weekly pay plus one (1)
hour of straight time for each hour of work over 40 hours of work provided
each hour of additional pay corresponds to an hour worked during the period
of emergency. (It is presumed, solely for the sake of the calculation of
emergency pay, that an exempt status employee works an average of 40 hours
per work week.)



Example: If a local state of emergency takes effect 8:00 a.m. on a Tuesday
and ends 8:00 a.m. on Wednesday and the exempt employee is required to spend
Tuesday night in the Emergency Operations Center (5:00 p.m. Tuesday to 8:00
a.m. Wednesday), the employee is entitled to 15 hours of additional pay at
straight time, provided they work the balance of their ordinary work week
(Monday through Friday).



(Ord. No. 05-036, § 2, 7-19-05)



Sec. 2-177.  Standby and call back pay.



   No employee is entitled to nor shall receive standby pay or call back
pay during a period of local emergency.



(Ord. No. 05-036, § 2, 7-19-05)



Sec. 2-178.  Record keeping.



   All employees are responsible for keeping accurate time logs/records
for hours worked during a declared state of emergency. The submission of a
request for compensation for time worked when the employee did not actually
work during a period of local emergency is grounds for termination of
employment.



(Ord. No. 05-036, § 2, 7-19-05)



Sec. 2-179.  Handling of leave requests during a declared emergency.



   Leave requests approved prior to a declared emergency will be honored
if, in the opinion of the employee's department director, the employee's
absence will not adversely affect the city's ability to effectively respond
to the emergency. However, all employees are subject to having previously
approved leave cancelled, and new requests for leave denied, based upon an
overriding organizational need to have the employee report for duty to
fulfill their job assignments during an emergency. Any off-duty employee who
anticipates being unavailable to respond to a call back assignment associated
with an emergency has a responsibility to discuss their plans with their
department director and request to be relieved from call back
responsibilities for the anticipated duration of the emergency. The
department director will evaluate the employee's reasons for the request to
be relieved of possible call back responsibilities and notify the employee of
his/her decision as soon as possible. All employees who request sick leave
immediately prior to, during, or in recovery from a declared emergency may be
required by the department director to submit appropriate medical
documentation to verify their sick leave request.



Special Note: An employee who is on a previously approved leave that was not
revoked prior to the specified civil emergency time period is not eligible
for administrative leave with pay or any other form of special compensation
that may be made available under the provisions of this policy.



(Ord. No. 05-036, § 2, 7-19-05)



Sec. 2-180.  Holiday pay.



   If the declared emergency time period should encompass a holiday, an
employee is eligible to receive any applicable holiday pay they are due in
addition to any special compensation that is to be paid under the conditions
outlined in Section 2-175 above.



(Ord. No. 05-036, § 2, 7-19-05)



Sec. 2-181.  Suspension of other compensation rules.



   During periods of declared local emergencies, the provisions of this
article supersede all other provisions for scheduling and compensation set
forth in any other local rule, regulation, ordinance or collective bargaining
agreement.



(Ord. No. 05-036, § 2, 7-19-05)



Secs. 2-182—2-184. Reserved.



ARTICLE XIV. RESERVED*



   *Editor’s note-Part 2, Chapter 2, Article XIV, “Veterans Advisory
Commission” as established by Ord. No. 05-047 was repealed by Ord. No.
16-009, § 2, passed 5-3-16.



Secs. 2-185—2-200. Reserved.



ARTICLE XV. SMALL AND MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISES



Sec. 2-201.  General.



   This article establishes the city's Small and Minority Business
Enterprise Program.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-202.  Policy statement.



   (a)   The policy of the city is that all businesses be afforded an
opportunity for full participation in the city's system for the procurement
of goods, services or construction projects.



   (b)   It is the policy of the city to provide equal opportunities
for city contracting for small businesses owned by socially and economically
disadvantaged persons doing business in the city's contracting marketplace.



   (c)   It is the policy of the city to prohibit discrimination
against any business in pursuit of these opportunities, to conduct its
contracting activities so as to prevent discrimination in the solicitation or
award of public contracts or the acquisition of goods and services.



   (d)   It is declared to be the policy of the city to take all
necessary, reasonable and legal action to prevent discrimination, be it
direct or indirect, in its procurement process; to ensure that all
businesses, including small businesses, are afforded the maximum opportunity
to participate in the city's procurement process; and to establish a
recordkeeping system to monitor small business participation in procurement.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-203.  Definitions.



   The following words as used in this chapter have the indicated meanings:



   Affiliation means a relationship between two (2) or more businesses
which one business controls or has the power to control the other, or a third
party or parties controls or has the power to control both, or an identity of
interests exists between such businesses. In determining affiliation, the
city shall consider all appropriate factors, including common ownership,
common management, contractual relationships and shared facilities.
Affiliates must be considered together in determining whether a business is a
small business enterprise.



   Annual participation goals mean the targeted levels established by the
city for the annual aggregate participation in city contracts of
small/minority business enterprises S/MBE.



   Bid means the offer to furnish goods or services, including formal and
informal bids, and responses to requests for proposals qualifications.



   Bidder means a person that has submitted a bid to the city.



   Brokering means filling orders by purchasing or receiving supplies from
a third party supplier rather than out of existing inventory, and providing
no commercially useful function other than acting as a conduit between a
supplier and a customer.



   City Manager means the City Manager of the City of Boynton Beach or his
or her designee.



   City's contracting marketplace means the geographic and procurement
areas in which the city contracts on an annual basis.



   Commercially useful function means a function which results in the
provision of needed materials, supplies, equipment or services to the city. A
small business must demonstrate expertise in the commodity area that they are
supplying and those commodity area must be identified and listed in the
certification approval letter. Acting merely as a conduit to transfer funds
to another business does not constitute a commercially useful function.



   Contract means any written agreement or purchase order through which
the city procures goods or services.



   Contractor means a person that has a contract with the city to provide
goods or services.



   Controlled, for the purposes of determining whether a business is a
minority or woman-owned business, means the minority, the woman or
combination of minorities and women, as the context requires, who:



      (1)   Possesses legal authority and power to manage business
assets, goodwill and daily operations of the business; and



      (2)   Actively and continuously exercises such authority and
power in determining the policies and directing the operations of the
business. The term controlled for the purposes of determining whether a
business is a small business shall mean that no large business:



         a.   Possesses legal authority and power to manage
business assets, goodwill and daily operations of the business; and



         b.   Actively and continuously exercises such authority
and power in determining the policies and directing the operations of the
business.



   Debarment means the exclusion for cause of a vendor or contractor from
bidding and/or doing business with the city.



   Director means the City Manager or those individuals or departments
designed to administer all or part of the small/minority business enterprise
program.



   Economically disadvantaged means an individual whose personal net worth
is less than $750,000.



   Emergency procurement, as authorized by the City Manager, means a
procurement made in response to a requirement when a delay caused by
complying with all governing rules, regulations and/or procedures would be
detrimental to the interests, health, safety or welfare of the city.



   Expertise means demonstrated skills, knowledge or ability to perform in
the field of endeavor in which certification is sought by the business as
defined by normal industry practices, including licensure where required.



   Good faith efforts means actions that the city finds are sufficient to
meet the standards hereinafter set forth in Section 2-210 which provides for
contract pre-award compliance procedures.



   Goods means apparatus, materials, supplies and equipment.



   Joint venture means an association of two (2) or more persons, or any
combination of types of business enterprises and persons numbering two (2) or
more, proposing to perform a single for-profit business enterprise, in which
each joint venture participant contributes property, capital, efforts, skill
and knowledge, and in which the S/MBE is responsible for a distinct, clearly
defined portion of the work of the contract with the city and whose share in
the capital contribution, control, management, risks, and profits of the
joint venture are commensurate with its ownership interest. Joint ventures
must have an agreement in writing specifying the terms and conditions of the
relationships between the joint venture participant and their relationship
and responsibility regarding to the contract with the city.



   Large business means a business that does not meet the definition of
small business as defined in this article.



   MB means a minority-owned business.



   Minority person means an individual who is a citizen or lawful
permanent resident of the United States who is:



      (1)   An African-American, a person having origins in any of
the black racial groups of Africa;



      (2)   A Hispanic-American, a person of Spanish or Portuguese
culture who has origins in Central or South America, or the Caribbean,
regardless of race;



      (3)   An Asian-American, a person having origins in any of the
original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, or
the Pacific Islands;



      (4)   A Native-American, a person who has origins in any of
the Indian tribes of North America prior to 1835; or



      (5)   A female.



   Owned, for the purposes of determining whether a business is a minority
or woman-owned business, means that the minorities or women, as the context
requires, shall possess an ownership interest of at least fifty-one percent
(51%).  The term owned, for the purposes of determining whether a business
is a small business, shall mean that no large business shall possess an
ownership interest in excess of forty-nine percent (49%).



   Participation plan means the list of SMBE that the bidder commits will
be utilized, their scopes of work, and dollar value or the percentage of the
project or the scopes of work of the contract they will perform.



   Personal net worth means the net value of the assets of an individual
after total liabilities are deducted. An individual's personal net worth does
not include the individual's ownership interest in the applicant and the
individual's equity in his or her primary place of residence.  An
individual's personal net worth includes his or her share of assets held
jointly with the individual's spouse. Property held by the entireties is
deemed to be owned equally by the spouses.



   Practicable means reasonably capable of being accomplished.



   Prime contractor means any person or business entity who has a contract
with the city.



   Procurement code means the city's procurement code set forth in this
chapter, as it may be amended from time to time.



   Procurement goals means goals expressed as percentages of the total
dollar volume for participation of small businesses on individual bids,
proposals, resulting work authorizations, purchase orders (POs) or city
contracts.



   Professional services means any narrow discipline wherein a known
practitioner has, through education and experience, developed expert advisory
and programming skills as a vocation, any service performed primarily by
vocational personnel which requires the certification of a professional
before the services are acceptable to the user of the service, or any other
advisory study or programming activity where the procurement official
determines that the level of skills and/or creativity of the potential or
known practitioner warrant a solicitation process other than the competitive
bid process.



   Program means the equal business opportunity (EBO) program.



   Project specific goals means the goals established for a particular
project or contract based upon the availability of SMBEs in the scopes of
work of the project, delineated into percentages of SMBEs owned by blacks and
women.



   Proposal means an executed formal document submitted to the city
stating the goods, services and/or construction offered to satisfy the need
as requested in the requisition, request for proposal, request for
information or request for qualifications.



   Quotation means any oral or written offer as a result of an informal
request by a vendor to the city to furnish specific goods, services and/or
construction at a stated price.



   Request for quotation means a request, either oral or written, to
solicit prices for specific goods, services and/or construction.



   SED means socially disadvantaged and economically disadvantaged.



   Services means the furnishing primarily of labor, time and/or effort by
a contractor, wherein the provision of goods or other specific end products
other than reports, studies, plans, advisories, contractual documents or
other documents, relating to the required performance is incidental or
secondary. This term services shall not include construction or employment
agreements.



   Small business means a person or business that:



      (1)   Is domiciled in Palm Beach County which is an
independently owned and operated business concern organized to engage in
commercial transactions and whose adjusted gross margin and number of
employees, including those working in all offices or locations, does not
exceed the following:



         a.   In construction, the annual adjusted gross margin
less than $3,000,000 (averaged over the previous three years, or if in
business, less than three (3) years, averaged during duration of business),
and does not employ more than thirty (30) full-time employees.



         b.   In commodities, the annual adjusted gross margin
less than $1,500,000 (averaged over the previous three (3) years, or if in
business, less than three (3) years, averaged during duration of business),
and does not employ more than thirty (30) full-time employees.



         c.   In professional services, the annual adjusted gross
margin less than $2,000,000 (averaged over the previous three (3) years, or
if in business, less than three (3) years, averaged during duration of
business), and does not employ more than thirty (30) full-time employees.



      (2)   Meets the certification criteria set forth in this
article.



      (3)   The limits described in subsections (1)a., b. and c.
above shall apply to all small businesses certified by the city (or other
entity as heretofore listed) as of October 1, 2003.



   Small business enterprise (SBE) means a small business concern meeting
the size standards established by the city or a federal, state, county, or
local school board agency under similar programs.



   Small business listing means a supplier list of certified small
businesses approved by the City Manager and made available to contractors or
vendors for use in identifying subcontractors and material suppliers.



   Small minority business enterprise (S/MBE) means a business, including
a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
joint venture or any other business or professional entity:



      (1)   Which is at least fifty-one percent (51%) owned by one
(1) or more socially and economically disadvantaged individuals, or in the
case of a publicly owned business, at least fifty-one (51%) of all classes of
the stock of which is owned by one or more socially and economically
disadvantaged individuals;



      (2)   Whose management, policies, major decisions and daily
business operations are independently managed and controlled by one (1) or
more socially and economically disadvantaged individuals;



      (3)   Which is small business enterprise;



      (4)   Which has a physical location from which to engage in
for-profit activities in the scope(s) of expertise in the city's marketplace;
and



      (5)   Which is certified as a SMBE by the City of Boynton
Beach, the State of Florida, Palm Beach County, the School Board of Palm
Beach County, or any other municipality, notwithstanding the terminology used
to designate the enterprise.



   Socially disadvantaged means an individual who has been subjected to
racial or ethnic prejudice or cultural bias within American society because
of his or her identity as a member of a group and without regard to
individual qualities. Social disadvantage must stem from circumstances beyond
the individual's control. A socially disadvantaged individual must be a
citizen (or lawfully admitted permanent resident) of the United States who is
either:



      (1)   Black/African-American, which includes persons having
origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa;



      (2)   Female; or



      (3)   Any individual found by the city on a case-by-case basis
to have been subjected to racial or ethnic prejudice or cultural bias within
American society because of his or her identity as a member of a group,
without regard to individual qualities. Social disadvantage must stem from
circumstances beyond the individual's control. Evidence of social
disadvantage must include:



         a.   At least one (1) objective, distinguishing feature
that has contributed to social disadvantage, such as disability, long-term
residence in an environment isolated from the mainstream of American society
or other similar barriers not common to individuals who are not socially
disadvantaged;



         b.   Personal experiences of substantial and chronic
social disadvantage in American society, not in other countries; and



         c.   Negative impact on entry into or advancement in the
city's contracting marketplace and participating on city contracts because of
the disadvantage, as demonstrated by the individual's education, employment
and business history.



   Subcontractor means any person providing goods, services and/or
construction to a prime contractor for profit, if such goods, services and/or
construction are procured or used in fulfillment of the prime contractor's
obligations arising from a contract with the city, excluding providers of
goods directly acquired by the city.



   User department means the department of the city that the City Manager
designates as responsible for initiating the procurement process.



   Vendor means an actual or potential supplier of goods, services and/or
construction.



   WB means a woman-owned business.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-204.  Program administration.



   (a)   The City Manager shall administer the city's Small/Minority
Business Enterprise program.



   (b)   The City Manager is authorized to:



      (1)   Adopt rules for the implementation and monitoring of the
program and to incorporate those rules into the city's procurement code.



      (2)   Develop a system to inform S/MBEs of city contracting
opportunities.



      (3)   Providing information and staff assistance to SMBEs
relating to city procurement practices and procedures, and bid
specifications, requirements, and prerequisites.



      (4)   Maintain a list of businesses that are certified as
SMBEs and maintain that list in a SMBE availability data bank.



      (5)   Establish project specific goals.



      (6)   Evaluate bidders' and contractors' achievement of
project specific goals or good faith efforts to meet project specific goals.



      (7)   Direct his or her administrative staff to monitor
contracts to facilitate prompt payments to SMBEs and compliance with project
specific goals and commitments.



      (8)   Receive, review, and act upon complaints and suggestions
concerning the program.



      (9)   Collect and maintain data through software systems in
order to report on compliance with the article and monitor and report on
utilization of minority and woman-owned businesses as compared to their
availability.



      (10)   Monitor and report on the program and the city's
progress towards the annual participation goals.



      (11)   Prepare an annual budget detail that allocates
resources, including budget and staff to carry out the mandates of this
article.



      (12)   Delegate all or part of the responsibilities listed
herein.



   (c)   The city staff or city departments which receive appropriate
delegation for project management, contract management, and/or construction
and/or design contract responsibility shall have the following duties and
responsibilities with regard to the program:



      (1)   Assisting with setting project specific goals.



      (2)   Assisting in the identification of available SMBEs, and
providing other assistance in meeting the annual participation and project
specific goals.



      (3)   Performing other activities to support the program.



      (4)   Gathering and maintaining subcontracting data for those
contracts which they manage.



      (5)   Submitting subcontracting data to the City Manager.



      (6)   Managing contracts in a consistent manner to facilitate
contract compliance in utilization of SMBEs.



      (7)   Submitting to the City Manager, on or before the
beginning of each fiscal year, the administrator's or department's annual
SMBE contracting goal based upon a project identification survey listing all
upcoming projects, estimating the probable monetary value, the projected bid
advertisement date and the necessary qualifications.



      (8)   Department directors shall, whenever practicable:



         a.   Separate discrete and unconnected work elements
from projects for separate contracts, where separation will not cause
substantial adverse fiscal, administrative, or legal impact;



         b.   Divide procurements into component parts or work
elements on a report so that the City Manager can determine which small
businesses are available to participate as subcontractors; and



         c.   Establish delivery schedules that do not discourage
small or large business participation, especially, in master agreements.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-205.  Equal opportunities.



   The city shall develop and use race- and gender-neutral measures to
facilitate the participation of SMBEs in city contracting activities. These
measures shall include, but are not limited to:



   (a)   Arranging solicitation times for the presentations of bids,
quantities, specifications, and delivery schedules so as to facilitate the
participation of interested persons.



   (b)   Providing timely information on contracting procedures, bid
preparation, and specific contracting opportunities.



   (c)   Holding pre-bid conferences, where appropriate, to explain the
projects and to encourage potential bidders to solicit available S/MBEs as
subcontractors or as joint venture participant.



   (d)   Adopting prompt payment procedures, including requiring by
contract that contractors pay their direct subcontractors within a stated
period of receipt of payment from the city, subject to appropriate exceptions.



   (e)   Reviewing bonding and insurance requirements to eliminate
unnecessary barriers to contracting with the city.



   (f)   Maintaining a bidders list, consisting of all persons bidding
on city prime contracts and bidding or quoting on city-funded subcontracts.



   (g)   Providing technical assistance, which may include:



      (1)   A surety bonding assistance and support program to
provide access to surety bonding and contract financing.



      (2)   A mentor-protege program.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-206.  Program eligibility.



   (a)   Only a business that is managed and controlled by socially or
economically disadvantaged (SED) owners may be certified as a S/MBE, provided:



      (1)   A business must not be subject to any formal or informal
restrictions that limit the discretion of the SED owner(s). There can be no
restrictions through corporate charter provisions, by-law provisions,
contracts or any other formal or informal devices that prevent the SED
owner(s), without the cooperation or vote of any non-SED person, from making
any business decision of the business.



      (2)   The SED owner(s) must possess the power to direct or
cause the direction of the management and policies of the business and to
make day-to-day as well as long-term decisions on management, policy and
operations.



      (3)   The SED owner(s) may delegate various areas of the
management, policymaking or daily operations of the business to persons who
are not SED. Such delegations of authority must be revocable, and the SED
owners must retain the power to hire and fire any such person. The SED owners
must exercise control over the business's operations, work, management and
policies.



      (4)   The SED owner(s) must have an overall understanding of,
and managerial and technical competence, experience and expertise, directly
related to the business's operations and work. The SED owner(s) must have the
ability to intelligently and critically evaluate information presented by
other participants in the business's activities and to make independent
decisions concerning the business's daily operations, work, management, and
policymaking.



      (5)   If any law requires the owners to have a particular
license or other credential to operate, own and/or control a certain type of
business, then the SED owner(s) must possess the required license or
credential. If the law does not so require, than the owner(s) lacking such
license or credential is a factor in determining whether the SED owner(s)
actually controls the business.



      (6)   An SED owner cannot engage in outside employment or
other business interests that conflict with the management of the business or
prevent the owner from devoting sufficient time and attention to the affairs
of the business to manage and control its activities.



   (b)   Only an independent business may be certified as a S/MBE. An
independent business is one whose viability does not depend on its
relationship with another business. Recognition of an applicant as a separate
entity for tax or corporate purposes is not necessarily sufficient to
demonstrate that a business is independent. In determining whether an
applicant is an independent business, the City Manager will:



      (1)   Scrutinize relationships with non-S/MBEs in such areas
as personnel, facilities, equipment, financial and/or bonding support, and
other resources.



      (2)   Consider whether present or recent employer/employee
relationships between the SED owner(s) of the applicant and non-SMBEs or
persons associated with non-SMBEs compromise the applicant's independence.



      (3)   Examine the applicant's relationships with non-SMBE
prime contractors to determine whether a pattern of exclusive or primary
dealings with a prime contractor compromises the applicant's independence.



      (4)   Consider the consistency of relationships between the
applicant and non-SMBEs with normal industry practice.



   (c)   In order to be certified as an SMBE, a business must be a
small business enterprise and must have a physical location, in the city's
contracting marketplace, from which it engages in for-profit activities in
the scope(s) of its expertise.



   (d)   An applicant shall be certified only for specific types of
work in which the SED owner(s) has the ability and expertise to manage and
control the business's operations and work.



   (e)   The city shall certify the eligibility of joint ventures in
which the joint venture participant are SMBEs and non-SMBEs.



   (f)   In lieu of conducting its own investigation to determine
whether an applicant is eligible for certification, the city may consider a
formal certification by another entity to determine whether the applicant
meets the requirements of the program, provided that the City Manager
determines that the certification standards of such entity are comparable to
those of the city.



   (g)   Where federal or state law or regulations or any agreement
between the city and a federal or state agency requires different eligibility
standards, the applicable federal or state standards shall apply, including,
if applicable, the regulations promulgated by the United States Departments
of Transportation and Housing for contracts involving federal funds. Where
the city is to receive, apply, administer, or use funds from the federal
government or the state government or any entity, agency, or grantee of
either of them, if the city is required to apply a disadvantaged business
program or program whose purposes are to help ensure opportunities for small
businesses owned by socially and economically disadvantaged persons, that
other program, instead of this chapter, shall apply in the award and
administration of the contract.



   (h)   The certification status of all SMBEs shall be reviewed
biannually by the City Manager.  Failure of an SMBE to seek recertification
by filing the necessary documentation with the City Manager within ninety
(90) days from the date of receipt of written notice shall result in
decertification.



   (i)   It is the responsibility of the SMBE to notify the City
Manager of any change in its circumstances affecting its continued
eligibility for the program. Failure to do so within a reasonable time of the
change may result in the business's decertification.



   (j)   The City Manager shall decertify a business that does not
continuously meet the eligibility criteria.



   (k)   A business whose average annual gross receipts exceed the size
standards for SMBEs for three (3) consecutive years shall graduate from the
program.



   (l)   The City Manager may decertify an SMBE that repeatedly fails
to respond to requests for quotations from bidders who timely solicit
participation on a contract, attend relevant pre-bid conferences, or honor
bids in good faith.



   (m)   A business that has been denied certification or
recertification or been decertified may protest the denial or decertification
as follows:



      (1)   Within seven (7) days of receipt of denial of
certification or recertification, or notice of intent to decertify, the
business may protest such action in writing to the City Manager.



      (2)   A hearing shall be held by the City Manager at which the
business may present additional facts and evidence in support of its
eligibility. The City Manager shall control all aspects of the hearing,
including scheduling, conduct, witnesses, and evidence, and may request the
attendance of witnesses and production of documents.  The applicant's
failure to comply promptly with these requests may be grounds for denial of
relief sought by the applicant.



      (3)   The City Manager shall send notice of the written
decision to the business within thirty (30) days of the hearing. The City
Manager's decision shall be final.



   (n)   A business found to be ineligible cannot apply for
certification for one (1) year after the effective date of the final decision.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-207.  Goals.



   (a)   Annual goal. Small business participation goals will be set on
a procurement by procurement basis as set forth in this article. At the
request of the City Commission, but no less than on an annual basis, the City
Manager shall provide a formal report on small business utilization and
availability data to the City Commission. Upon evaluating such data, the City
Commission may establish or revise an annual participation goal for the next
fiscal year.



   (b)   Annual budget detail. Each department shall, by no later than
October 1, provide the City Manager with its annual budget detail. The City
Manager shall compile a prospective procurement list based on the annual
budget detail received from the individual departments and make these
listings available to the City Commission for their use and consideration in
establishing procurement goals and to SMDEs for the purpose of providing them
with advance notice of upcoming opportunities.



   (c)   Goals for procurements over $25,000. Specific goals for each
bid or proposal shall be adopted on a procurement by procurement basis.



      (1)   Criteria for bid or proposal goal establishment. In
setting bid or proposal goals, the following factors shall be considered:



         a.   The type of work required;



         b.   The contracting and subcontracting opportunities
for small businesses, including support and ancillary services, and the
number of certified small businesses available in comparison with other
registered vendors;



         c.   Past and current experience of the city in meeting
its goal and the results and reasons therefore; and



         d.   Special circumstances relating to the procurement
including, but not limited to, scheduling constraints.



   (d)   The department responsible for the procurement shall prepare a
report that identifies its various components. The report will be submitted
to the City Manager outlining the potential contracting and subcontracting
opportunities and the estimated percentage that each bears to the total bid,
proposal, work authorization, or procurement. The report shall show the scope
of the work for each component that has potential for being subcontracted and
the qualifications required of the subcontractor to do the work if they are
not evident in the scope of work. The report shall also identify if the
procurement has any other specific requirements such as may be imposed by a
federal or state grant. The report is forwarded to the City Manager.



   (e)   The City Manager then compares the report against the listing
of certified small business vendor database to determine the availability of
small businesses qualified to do the work in each potential subcontract
component, reviews the listing of other vendors and calculates the goal for
each bid, proposal and work authorization. Upon calculating the goal, the
City Manager shall provide the completed report, the list of qualified small
business vendors and the list of other vendors to the procurement official,
the department responsible for the procurement, and all members of the goal
setting team. The individual goal approved by the City Manager shall become
final.



   (f)   No individual procurement goal for small business
participation may exceed fifty percent (50%). If there are no available
certified small businesses for the procurement, no goal will be established.



   (g)   The established goal shall be applied to the full monetary
value of the procurement; no portion of the procurement is exempt from
consideration in determining whether the goal was met or not.



   (h)   In case of a certified small business submitting a bid as a
prime contractor, the small business is credited with meeting the percentage
of the procurement goal that the small business will perform with its own
forces plus the percentage of subcontractors awarded to other certified small
businesses.



   (i)   A single purpose joint venture or partnership consisting of a
small business where the small business owns and controls at least fifty-one
percent (51%) of the entity and a non-small business, functioning as a prime
contractor, will be credited with small business participation on the basis
of percentage of ownership, participation in the work, risk and profit by the
small business.



   (j)   Bidders or proposers will receive credit for small business
participation goal attainment only for subcontractors who are certified and
licensed, if required, in the specific area of expertise for which credit is
sought at the time of bid or proposal opening.



   (k)   Quotes for small procurements valued at $2,500 to $25,000.
Whenever practicable, the procurement official shall obtain quotes from small
businesses when they are listed on the computerized supplier lists by NIGP
codes.



   (l)   Procurement card and other purchases valued at less than
$2,500. The procurement official shall encourage the use of small businesses.



   (m)   For procurements using requests for proposals, the procurement
official or, if applicable, evaluation team established to evaluate the
proposals, shall consider compliance with the small business goals as a
material criterion for selection, i.e., such goals shall be given significant
weight.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-208.  Counting participation of SMBEs.



   (a)   SMBEs that are owned by SED persons who are not blacks or
women may be counted by the bidder towards either SMBE goal.



   (b)   The entire amount of that portion of a construction contract
that is performed by the SMBE's own forces shall be counted, as well as the
cost of goods obtained or leased by the SMBE for the work of the contract
(except goods the SMBE subcontractor or joint venture partner purchases or
leases from the prime contractor or its affiliate).



   (c)   The entire amount of fees or commissions charged by an SMBE
for providing a bona fide service, such as professional, technical,
consultant or managerial services, or for providing bonds or insurance
specifically required for the performance of a contract, shall be counted,
provided the fee is reasonable and not excessive as compared with fees
customarily charged for similar services.



   (d)   When an SMBE performs as a participant in a joint venture,
only the portion of the total dollar value of the contract equal to the
distinct, clearly defined portion of the work of the joint venture's contract
that the SMBE performs with its own forces and for which it is separately at
risk shall be counted.



   (e)   Only expenditures to an SMBE that is performing a commercially
useful function shall be counted. To determine whether a business is
performing a commercially useful function, the city will evaluate the amount
of work subcontracted, industry practices, whether the amount the business is
to be paid under the contract is commensurate with the work it is actually
performing and other relevant factors. To perform a commercially useful
function, the SMBE must be responsible, with respect to goods used on the
contract, for negotiating price, determining quality and quantity, ordering
the goods, installing (where applicable) and paying for the goods itself. An
SMBE does not perform a commercially useful function if its role is limited
to that of an extra participant in the contract through which funds are
passed in order to obtain the appearance of SMBE participation. If an SMBE
subcontracts a greater portion of the work of a contract than would be
expected on the basis of normal industry practice, it is presumed not to
perform a commercially useful function. When an SMBE is presumed not to be
performing a commercially useful function, the SMBE may present evidence to
rebut this presumption at a time and manner as determined by the City Manager.



   (f)   One hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the goods obtained
from an SMBE manufacturer or regular dealer shall be counted. Manufacturer
means a business that operates or maintains a factory or establishment that
produces, on the premises, the goods required under the contract. Regular
dealer means a business that owns, operates, or maintains a store, warehouse,
or other establishment in which the goods of the general character described
by the specifications or required under the contract are bought, kept in
stock, and regularly sold or leased to the public in the usual course of
business. To be a regular dealer, the business must be an established
business that engages, as its principal business and under its own name, in
the purchase and sale or lease of the goods. Packagers, manufacture
representatives, or other persons who arrange or expedite transactions are
not regular dealers.



   (g)   One hundred percent (100%) of the fees for the delivery of
goods required on a job site shall be counted only if the payment and amount
of such fees are customary in the applicable industry. The cost of the goods
shall not be counted towards the fees.



   (h)   If an SMBE is decertified during its performance of a
contract, the dollar value of work performed after it has ceased to be
certified shall not be counted.



   (i)   In determining achievement of project specific goals, the
participation of an SMBE shall not be counted until that amount has been paid
to the SMBE.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-209.  Contract pre-award compliance procedures.



   (a)   The City Manager may prequalify all bidders or proposers based
upon their efforts to meet program objectives prior to the solicitation of
bids for construction contracts with an estimated contract amount over
$200,000 and proposals for professional services contracts with an estimated
contract amount over $30,000.



      (1)   The City Manager shall evaluate the bidder's or
proposer's past, current and future activities and achievements in utilizing
M/WBEs on city projects and private sector projects, and its recruitment,
retention and promotion of minority and women employees and other relevant
information.



      (2)   The City Manager may refuse to prequalify a bidder or
proposer.



      (3)   The City Manager's denial of prequalification may be
appealed to the City Council in writing within seven (7) days of receipt. The
City Council's decision shall be final.



      (4)   That a bidder or proposer is denied prequalification on
a contract does not prohibit it from seeking to be prequalified on future
contracts.



      (5)   A prequalified bidder or proposer must make good faith
efforts to meet project specific goals.



   (b)   In all solicitations for which project specific goals have
been established, the bidder shall submit a participation plan when required
by the City Manager detailing all subcontractors from which the bidder
solicited bids or quotations and its achievement of the project specific
goals or its good faith efforts to do so. The plan shall be submitted in
accordance with the schedule and instructions required by the City Manager.
If the bidder fails to achieve the project specific goals, documentation of
its good faith efforts to do so is due at the time specified in the
solicitation. The list of SMBES provided by the city to a bidder establishes
the universe from which a bidder must solicit SMBEs.



   (c)   Any agreement between a bidder and an SMBE in which the bidder
requires that the SMBE not provide subcontracting quotations to other bidders
is prohibited.



   (d)   SMBEs shall respond to relevant requests for quotations.



   (e)   In determining whether a bidder has made good faith efforts,
the performance of other bidders in meeting the project specific goals may be
considered.



   (f)   A signed letter of intent from all listed SMBEs describing the
work, including goods and services to be performed or provided by the SMBE
and the agreed upon dollar value for bids or percentage of professional
services pursuant to a request for proposals or description of the services
to be rendered pursuant to a request for qualifications shall be due in
accordance with the City Manager's instructions.



   (g)   The City Manager shall review the participation plan prior to
award, including the scope of work and the letters of intent from SMBEs. The
City Manager may request clarification in writing of items listed in the
participation plan, provided such clarification shall not include the
opportunity to augment listed SMBE participation or good faith efforts.



   (h)   If the City Manager determines that the participation plan
demonstrates that the project specific goals have been achieved or good faith
efforts were made, or that award is in the best interest of the city, then
the City Manager shall recommend award to the City council.



   (i)   If the City Manager finds that a bidder did not make good
faith efforts, the City Manager shall send notice of the finding to the
bidder.



      (1)   The bidder shall have seven (7) days from receipt of the
notice to notify the City Manager of its request for a hearing.



      (2)   The City Manager shall hold a hearing within fourteen
(14) days, and shall control all aspects of the hearing, including
scheduling, conduct, witnesses, and evidence, and may request the attendance
of witnesses and production of documents. The bidder's failure to comply
promptly with these directions and orders may be grounds for denial of the
relief sought.



      (3)   The City Manager shall send notice to the bidder of the
written decision on the appeal within fourteen (14) days of the hearing. The
City Manager's decision shall be final.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-210.  Good faith efforts.



   (a)   Contractors submitting bids or proposals to provide goods,
services and construction to the city shall attempt to comply with small
business participation goals. In the event the goals are not achieved, the
contractor must include with its bid evidence of good faith efforts to
achieve the goals. A bidder or proposer may still be selected subject to the
provisions of this article, and the city shall consider the following
criteria in determining good faith efforts:



      (1)   Attendance at the pre-bid conference, if held;



      (2)   Whether and when the contractor provided written notice
to all certified small businesses that perform the type of work to be
subcontracted appearing on the listings by commodity codes established by
NIGP as published by the City Manager and advising the small businesses:



         a.   Of the specific work the contractor intends to
subcontract;



         b.   That their interest in the contract is being
solicited; and



         c.   How to obtain information for the review and
inspection of contract plans and specifications;



      (3)   Whether the contractor selected feasible portions of
work to be performed by small businesses, including, where appropriate,
dividing work elements in any manner that maximize the opportunity for small
business participation. The ability of the contractor to perform the work
with its own work force will not in itself excuse a contractor from making
positive efforts to meet goals for small business participation on the
contract;



      (4)   Whether the contractor considered all quotations
received from small businesses, and for those quotations not accepted, the
contractor shall provide a written explanation of why the small business will
not be used during the course of the contract. Receipt of a lower quotation
from a non-small business will not in itself excuse a contractor's failure to
meet project goals;



      (5)   Whether the contractor provided interested small
businesses assistance in reviewing the contract plans and specifications;



      (6)   Whether the contractor assisted interested small
business businesses in obtaining information regarding required bonding,
lines of credit or insurance if such assistance was necessary;



      (7)   Whether the contractor advertised the subcontracting
opportunities in publications of general circulation, trade associations, and
small business focused media;



      (8)   Whether the contractor followed up initial solicitations
of interest by contacting small businesses to determine with certainty
whether the small business was interested;



      (9)   Whether the contractor negotiated in good faith with
interested small businesses, based on a reasonable investigation of their
capabilities;



      (10)   Whether the contractor effectively used the services of
available small business associations (community organizations, contractors
business groups); local, state and federal small business assistance offices;
and other organizations that provide assistance in the recruitment and
placement of small business businesses;



      (11)   Whether the contractor has utilized small business
subcontractors on other (city and private sector) contracts within six (6)
months preceding the date of the specific contract under consideration;



      (12)   Whether the contractor's efforts were merely pro forma,
given all relevant circumstances, and could not reasonably be expected to
provide sufficient small business participation to meet the goals.



   (b)   This list is not intended to be all inclusive, and the city
will consider the quality, quantity, intensity and timeliness of the
contractor's efforts. The City Manager shall develop procedures and
clarifications which provide objective guidelines pertaining to the criteria
for determining of good faith efforts.



   (c)   It is the responsibility of the contractor to exercise good
faith efforts. Any act or omission by the city shall not relieve the bidder
or proposer of this responsibility.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-211.  Contracts.



   The following shall be included in the body of the contract with the
city for the provision of goods, services, and construction:



   (a)   A provision indicating that this article is incorporated by
reference.



   (b)   A requirement that the contractor shall comply with the
commitment to use small businesses made in their proposal or bid. Small
businesses that no longer remain associated with the contract of the
contractor shall be replaced with other certified small businesses unless
approval to the contrary is granted by the City Manager.



   (c)   A requirement to maintain relevant records and information
necessary to document compliance with this article and to permit the city to
inspect and audit such records.



(Code 1979, § 2-462)  (Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-212.  Contract performance compliance procedures.



   (a)   The Finance Department will establish procedures for
monitoring and evaluating program performance and compliance. Failure to
comply with the small business requirements of an awarded contract may result
in suspension or debarment of the businesses or individuals involved in
accordance with all applicable articles. Contracts shall provide that the
participation plan is binding on the contractor. Project specific goals
become elements of performance by the contractor in favor of the city.



   (b)   The contractor shall provide a listing of all subcontractors
to be used in the performance of the contract, and subcontractor payment
information to the city with each request for payment submitted to the city.
The director and the user department shall monitor subcontractor
participation during the course of the contract and shall have reasonable
access to all contract-related documentation held by the contractor relevant
to the contract.



   (c)   After the city and the contractor have executed the contract,
the contractor shall not make changes to the participation plan or substitute
SMBEs named in the participation plan without the prior written approval of
the City Manager. Unauthorized changes or substitutions shall be a violation
of this chapter, and may constitute grounds for rejection of the bid or
proposal, termination of the contract for breach, the withholding of payment
and/or subject the contractor to contract penalties or other sanctions. When
a change is requested:



      (1)   All requests for changes or substitutions of the
subcontractors named in the participation plan shall be made to the City
Manager on a form provided or approved by the city, and shall clearly and
fully set forth the basis for the request. A contractor shall not substitute
a subcontractor or perform the work designated for a subcontractor with its
own forces or with any other subcontractor unless and until the City Manager
approves such substitution in writing. A contractor shall not allow a
substituted subcontractor to begin work until both the director and the
city's project manager have approved the substitution.



      (2)   The facts supporting the request must not have been
known nor reasonably should have been known by either party prior to the
submission of the participation plan. The contractor must negotiate with the
subcontractor to resolve the problem. If requested by either party, the city
shall facilitate such a meeting. Where there has been a mistake or
disagreement about the scope of work, the SMBE can be substituted only where
an agreement cannot be reached on commercially reasonable terms for the
correct scope of work.



      (3)   The City Manager shall allow changes or substitutions of
the subcontractor only on the following bases:



         a.   Unavailability after receipt of reasonable notice
to proceed;



         b.   Failure of performance;



         c.   Financial incapacity;



         d.   Refusal by the subcontractor to honor the bid or
proposal price or qualifications description;



         e.   Mistake of fact or law about the elements of the
scope of work of a solicitation where agreement on commercially reasonable
terms cannot be reached;



         f.   Failure of the subcontractor to meet insurance,
licensing or bonding requirements; or



         g.   The subcontractor's withdrawal of its bid or
proposal or qualifications description.



      (4)   The City Manager shall give written notice to the
contractor and the affected subcontractor of the decision whether to permit
or deny the proposed change or substitution.



      (5)   Where the contractor has established the basis for the
substitution to the satisfaction of the City Manager, or if the city requires
the substitution of a subcontractor listed in the participation plan, the
contractor shall make good faith efforts to fulfill the participation plan.
The contractor may seek the assistance of the city in obtaining a new SMBE
subcontractor. If the project specific goal(s) cannot be reached and good
faith efforts have been made, the contractor may substitute with a non-SMBE.



   (d)   If a contractor plans to hire a subcontractor on any scope of
work that was not previously disclosed in the participation plan, the
contractor shall obtain the approval of the City Manager to modify the
participation plan and must make new good faith efforts to ensure that SMBEs
have a fair opportunity to bid on the new scope of work.



   (e)   Changes to the scopes of work shall be documented by the user
department at the time they arise, to establish the reasons for the change
and the effect on achievement of the SMBE goals.



   (f)   If the City Manager determines that the contractor has failed
to comply with the provisions of the contract, the City Manager shall notify
the contractor in writing of the deficiencies. The contractor shall have
fourteen (14) days, or such time as specified in the contract, to cure the
deficiencies or establish that there are no deficiencies. If the deficiencies
are not cured, the city shall have the right to take all lawful actions.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-213.  Contract language required.



   Every contract let by the city for the performance of work shall
contain a provision requiring the prime contractor to certify in writing that
all small business subcontractors, sub-consultants, and suppliers have been
utilized in accordance with the participation levels provided by the prime
contractor at the time of contract and have been paid for work and materials
from previous progress payments received, less any retainage, prior to
receipt of any further progress payments. During the contract and upon
completion of the contract, the city shall require documentation from the
prime contractor to certify utilization and payment to small business
subcontractors, sub-consultants or suppliers. This provision in no way
creates any contractual relationship between any subcontractor,
sub-consultant, or supplier and the city or any liability on the city for the
contractor's failure to make timely payment to the subcontractor,
sub-consultant or supplier.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-214.  Penalties.



   (a)   The following violations of this chapter are unlawful and may
be prosecuted as a misdemeanor.



      (1)   Providing false or misleading information to the city in
connection with an application for or challenge to certification,
recertification or decertification as an SMBE.



      (2)   Providing false or misleading information to the city in
connection with submission of a bid, responses to requests for qualifications
or proposals, good faith efforts documentation, post-award compliance or
other program operations.



      (3)   Substituting SMBE subcontractors without prior approval.



      (4)   Committing any other violations of this chapter.



   (b)   A contractor is subject to withholding of payments under the
contract, termination of the contract for breach, contract penalties,
decertification as an SMBE, or deemed non-responsive or not responsible in
future city solicitations and contract awards, if it is found to have:



      (1)   Provided materially false or misleading information in
connection with this chapter, an application for certification or
recertification.



      (2)   Provided false or misleading information in connection
with the submission of a bid or proposal or documentation of good faith
efforts, post-award compliance, or other program operations.



      (3)   Failed in bad faith to fulfill project specific goals,
thereby materially breaching the contract.



      (4)   Repeatedly failed to comply in good faith with
substantive provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-215.  SMBE Program Advisory Board.



   (a)   The city may appoint a board to advise the City Commission on
the program and to review proposed changes to this article and make
recommendations to the City Commission for modification of the program.



   (b)   The advisory board membership shall be appointed by City
Commissioners. The City Manager shall serve ex officio.



   (c)   Members shall serve two-year, staggered terms.



   (d)   Membership shall be composed of the following:



      (1)   Two (2) SMBE construction business owners or
representatives of disadvantaged, minority or women construction trade
associations.



      (2)   One (1) non-SMBE construction business owner or
representative of general or subcontracting construction trade associations.



      (3)   Two (2) SMBE professional services business owners or
representatives of disadvantaged, minority or women professional services
associations.



      (4)   One (1) non-SMBE professional services business owner or
representative of professional services associations.



      (5)   One (1) SMBE non-professional services or commodities
business owner or disadvantaged, minority or women trade association.



   (e)   Each member shall serve without compensation and may be
removed by the City Commission without cause. All members must be residents
of Palm Beach County and preference shall be given to residents of the city.



   (f)   A chair and vice-chair shall be elected by a majority vote of
the Small Business Board and shall serve for a term of one (1) year. The
duties of the chair shall be to preside at Small Business Board meetings. The
vice-chair shall perform the duties of the chair in the chair's absence.



   (g)   Meetings of the Small Business Board shall be held at the call
of the chair or according to a meeting schedule adopted by the Board. Four
(4) members of the Small Business Board shall constitute a quorum and a
majority of the quorum shall be sufficient to take action. The Small Business
Board shall adopt such rules for its operation, meetings and proceedings as
it deems desirable.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-216.  Annual program review.



   (a)   The City Manager shall make an annual report to the City
Commission, detailing the city's performance under the program department by
department for the preceding fiscal year.



   (b)   The City Commission will review this report, including the
annual participation goals and the city's progress towards meeting the annual
participation goals and eliminating discrimination in its marketplace, and
revise the program as necessary to meet legal and program requirements.



   (c)   If the City Commission finds that the objectives of the
program have been achieved, the City Commission, by super-majority vote may
discontinue the program.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-217.  Notice.



   All notices required or allowed by this chapter shall be in writing and
shall be given either by personal delivery, fax, or United States mail,
addressed to the last-known address of the addressee. The notice shall be
deemed given at the time of actual delivery, if it is personally delivered or
sent by fax. If sent by United States mail, it shall be deemed given upon the
third calendar day following the day on which it is deposited with the United
States Postal Service.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-218.  Severability.



   If any section, subsection, clause, or provision of this chapter is
held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the
chapter shall not be affected by such invalidity.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-219.  Waiver.



   (a)   Whenever an emergency procurement is authorized by the City
Manager pursuant to the procurement code, the requirements of this article
shall be deemed waived.



   (b)   Whenever the procurement official makes a single source
determination pursuant to the procurement code, the requirements of this
article shall be deemed waived.



   (c)   The City Manager may waive compliance with this article if
such compliance is no longer possible or practicable during the period of
performance of the contract.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



Sec. 2-220.  Limitation of remedy.



   In the event of a challenge to the granting of any contract to a SMBE
by any other party, the sole remedy to the challenging party shall be the
costs the challenging party incurred in preparing its bid or proposal.



(Ord. No. 06-080, § 2, 10-17-06)



ARTICLE XVI. REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY OF BOYNTON BEACH’S PROPERTY ASSESSED
CLEAN ENERGY PROGRAMS (“PACE”)



   Editor’s note—Former Part II, Chapter 2, Article XVI, “Voting by
Board Members” as established by Ord. No. 06-085 was repealed by Ord. No.
13-017, § 2, passed 6-18-13. The City Commission is regulated by the Palm
Beach County Code of Ethics as amended from time to time by Palm Beach County.



Sec. 2-221.   Requirements for City of Boynton Beach’s Property Assessed
Clean Energy Programs (“PACE”).



   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words
and phrases shall have the following meanings:



      Financing Agreement shall mean the financing agreement or the
summary memorandum of such agreement required to be recorded in the public
records pursuant to the PACE Statute.



      PACE assessment shall mean the non-ad valorem assessment placed
on a property owner's tax bill as a result of financing obtained under the
PACE Statute.



      PACE local government shall mean a local government (as defined
in the PACE Statute) that has taken all required actions to fund PACE
improvements, and any person or entity acting on that local government's
behalf.



      PACE Statute shall mean F.S. § 163.08, which establishes
Florida's PACE program.



   (b)   In addition to any disclosure requirements in the PACE
Statute, PACE local governments that extend financing pursuant to the PACE
Statute and levy a non-ad valorem assessment to fund the PACE improvements
shall present to the property owner a separate, written notice disclosing the
following ("Notice"):



      (1)   The full legal description of the property subject to
the PACE assessment;



      (2)   The total amount of the debt, including amount financed,
fees, fixed interest rate. capitalized interest and the effective rate of the
interest charged (APR);



      (3)   The repayment process, amounts and a schedule that fully
amortizes the amount financed Including the maximum annual PACE assessment;



      (4)   That the PACE assessment will appear on the property
owner's tax bill;



      (5)   That there is no discount for paying the PACE assessment
early;



      (6)   The nature of the lien recorded and that the PACE
assessment will be collected in the same manner as real estate taxes, that
failure to pay the PACE assessment may cause a tax certificate to be issued
against the property, and that failure to pay may result in the loss of
property subject to the PACE assessment, including homestead property, in the
same manner as failure to pay property taxes; and



      (7)   The specific improvements to be installed and that the
property improvements and PACE assessment may or may not affect the overall
value of the property.



      (8)   A term that does not exceed the useful life of the
majority of the improvements.



      (9)   The 3-day right to cancel the financing.



      (10)   FHFA policy toward PACE.



   (c)   The Notice must be delivered to the property owner by the PACE
local government, and must be signed and dated by the property owner prior to
or contemporaneously with the property owner's signing of any legally
enforceable documents obligating the property owner to participate in the
PACE program or to repay financing obtained pursuant to a financing agreement
or the PACE Statute.



   (d)   The PACE local government shall record, or cause to be
recorded, the signed Notice in the public records as an attachment to the
Financing Agreement, which must also be recorded pursuant to the PACE Statute.



   (e)   Eligible properties. PACE Programs may finance improvements on
residential properties (4 units or less) that meet the following criteria:



      (1)   All mortgage-related debt on the property may not exceed
90% of the property's fair market value (FMV);



      (2)   The financing may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the
just value of the property consistent with the PACE Statute;



      (3)   The total mortgage-related debt on the underlying
property plus program financing may not exceed the FMV of the Property.



PACE programs may finance improvements on commercial, industrial,
agricultural, multi-family residential properties of 5 or more units, and
other non-residential properties.



   (f)   Eligible improvements. When energy efficiency and renewable
energy improvements are financed by PACE assessment they must be permanently
affixed to the property. All improvements and products must meet standards
established by the U.S. Department of Energy, the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or Florida state agencies. All improvements must comply
with the PACE Statute for energy efficiency, renewable energy and wind
resistance.



   (g)   Complaints and dispute resolution. The Program must receive,
manage, track, timely resolve, and report on all inquiries and complaints
from property owners. In addition, the Program must investigate and mediate
disputes between property owners and contractors.



   (h)   Data security. The Program is responsible for taking security
measures that protect the security and confidentiality of consumer records
and information in proportion to the sensitivity of the information.



   (i)   Consumer privacy. The Program must develop and maintain a
privacy policy that complies with state and federal law (e.g.. the Gramm
Leach Bliley Act) and, in particular, prohibits sharing with third parties
personal identifying information of property owners without the property
owner's express authorization except where expressly permitted by state and
federal law.



   (j)   Marketing and communications. The Program prohibits marketing
practices that are or could appear to be unfair, deceptive, abusive, and/or
misleading, that violate laws or regulations, that provide tax advice, that
are inappropriate, incomplete or are inconsistent with the Program's purpose.



   (k)   Protected classes. The Program must develop and implement a
program that validates elder homeowner ("i.e.. homeowners over 64 years old)
understanding of the eligible improvement project for which they are seeking
Program financing, including the terms of such financing.



   (l)   Contractor management. The Program must ensure that
contractors are licensed by the appropriate state and local agencies: and
that they are insured and bonded. Additionally, contractors must agree to
follow program marketing guidelines, and act in good faith to timely resolve
property owner complaints.



   (m)   Maximum financing amounts. The Program will establish maximum
financing amounts for every project type. The Program will establish pricing
rules to ensure that consumers are protected from excessive charges.



   (n)   Reporting. The Program will report on a quarterly basis to its
local government partners on the number of applications submitted, projects
completed, energy saved, and jobs created as a result of the Program.



   (o)   Closing and funding. The Program requires that the property
owner and the contractor sign a certificate of completion prior to providing
funding to the contractor for the project. The Program also requires that any
necessary permits are pulled and verified prior to funding. The Program will
conduct a randomized onsite inspection protocol to verify that the
appropriate financed products have been installed.



(Ord. No. 16-017, § 2, 9-8-16)



ARTICLE XVII. RESERVED



   Editor’s note—Ord. No. 11- 029 is hereby rescinded by Ord. No.
12-017, passed 11-7-12.  All provisions regarding lobbyists, lobbyists
registration and enforcement of lobbyist activity previously contained in
this Article XVII are repealed.  The provisions regarding lobbyist
registration shall hereinafter be governed by the Palm Beach County Lobbyist
Registration Ordinance as amended from time to time by Palm Beach County.



ARTICLE XVIII. RESERVED



   Editor’s note—Ord. No. 15-010, § 2, adopted 3-17-15, repealed Part
II, Chapter 2, Article XVIII, “Financial Advisory Committee” which
derived from Ord. No. 10-009, as amended by Ord. No. 11-012 and Ord. No.
12-005, having fulfilled the objectives. Additional review tasks can be
handled by the city administration and City Commission in the future.



ARTICLE XIX:  REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY OF BOYNTON BEACH’S DOCKED BIKE SHARE
SYSTEMS .



Sec. 2-222   Requirements for City of Boynton Beach’s Docked Bike Share
Systems.



   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words
and phrases shall have the following meanings:



      (1)   Agreement shall mean a nonexclusive agreement between a
bike share operator and the city as approved by the City Commission.



      (2)   Bike Share Station (or Station) shall include, but not
be limited to, the following items located within a designated area: docking
structure, kiosk, map display, system bicycles or other equipment attached to
and necessary for the facility’s operation.



      (3)   Bike Share System (or System) shall mean an automated
system in which bicycles are made available for shared use via membership
subscriptions or short-term rentals to individuals who do not own them. As
used herein, Bike Share System shall specifically refer to a docked system
wherein bikes are checked out and returned to permanent docking stations.



      (4)   City shall mean the City of Boynton Beach.



      (5)   Customer shall mean any person using a bike share system.



      (6)   Kiosk shall mean the physical structure and housing for
the automated payment terminal at which users can access the bike share
system with a membership card, pay for a rental with a credit or debit card,
and receive information about the bike share system.



      (7)   Operator shall mean any entity that owns and/or operates
a bike share system.



   (b)   Agreement required. Operators must have a nonexclusive
agreement approved by the City Commission to lawfully operate a bike share
system within the city. Agreements must comply with the requirements set
forth in this section.



   (c)   Administrative review for dockless use of bike share system.
This section specifies requirements for docked bike share systems only. If an
operator or the city desires to use the system or any of its bicycles on a
Dockless Basis (i.e., bikes could be dropped off and picked up at any
location, outside of the permanent bike share stations), such a proposal
would be subject to administrative review.



   (d)   Operations. Operators shall be solely responsible for all
costs and expenses to implement and maintain the bike share system.



      (1)   Bike share systems shall provide bike sharing services
and rentals at automated, self-service kiosks.



      (2)   Bikes shall be GPS-enabled to allow operators to track
their locations.



      (3)   All pricing charged to the customer shall clearly
explain structure for ride and time period, as well as fees for additional or
overage periods. The maximum charge should be clearly stated.



      (4)   Operators shall have a twenty-four (24) hour customer
service phone number for customers to report safety concerns, complaints, or
ask questions.



      (5)   Any inoperable bicycle, or any bicycle that is not safe
to operate, shall be removed from the system within twenty-four (24) hours of
notice, and shall be repaired before being put back into service.



      (6)   Bike share systems shall include visible language within
the operator’s mobile and web application that notifies the customer that:



         a.   People on bicycles are encouraged to wear helmets.



         b.   People on bicycles must follow all traffic laws.



      (7)   Stations shall provide clearly posted reference to
Bicycle Safety Laws (i.e., F.S. § 316.2065).



      (8)   Operators shall provide the city with a current contact
name and phone number for staff that are capable of relocating and repairing
bicycles.



      (9)   Operators shall provide data, records, and reports at
the city’s request, according to terms specified in the agreement.



   (e)   Bicycles. All bicycles operated by a bike share system
agreement with the city shall:



      (1)   Meet the standards outlined in the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) under Title 16, Chapter II, Subchapter C, Part 1512 -
Requirements for Bicycles, as amended. Additionally, all bike share operators
shall meet the safety standards outlined in ISO 43.150 - Cycles, subsection
4210, as amended.



      (2)   Meet the requirements in F.S. § 316.2065(7) regarding
lamps and reflectors, and other state, federal, and local requirements.



      (3)   Have an emblem of the operator, contact information,
including website and phone number, and a prominently displayed unique
identifier.



      (4)   Be high quality and sturdily built to withstand the
effects of weather and constant use for a minimum of five years.



      (5)   Accommodate a wide range of users.



      (6)   Be well maintained and in good riding condition.



   (f)   Insurance. The operator shall provide and maintain such public
liability and property damage insurance for the entirety of any existing
lease agreement(s) with the city to protect the city from all claims and
damage to property or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from
any aspect of the agreement or its operation. Such coverage should be
maintained, at a minimum, in the amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence with an
annual aggregate coverage of $2,000,000. The operator shall maintain a
commercial automobile liability insurance limit of $1,000,000. The operator
shall secure worker’s compensation coverage for any and all employees and
officers. The operator must secure coverage via insurers, rated at least
“A-, VI” or better by the current A.M. Best Key Rating Guide, that are
licensed to do business in the State of Florida, and that have been approved
by the city. Operator must provide the city with certificate(s) of insurance
evidencing the required coverages, including language granting the city
additional insured status, excluding the worker’s compensation policy.



   (g)   Indemnification. As a condition of the agreement, the operator
must agree to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its
representative, employees, and elected and appointed officials, from and
against all liability, claims, damages, suits, losses, and expenses of any
kind, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs for appeal, associated
with or arising out of or from the agreement, the use of right-of-way or
city-owned property for the bike share system’s operations, or arising from
any negligent act, omission or error of the bike share system’s owner,
managing agent, its agents or employees, or from the failure of the managing
agent or owner, its agents or employees, to comply with each and every
requirement of this division or with any other federal, state, or local
traffic law or any combination of same.



   (h)   Docking structures and kiosks. All kiosks and docking
structures shall be designed and constructed to meet the Florida Building
Code and to comply with all applicable laws and regulations, including city
sign regulations and community appearance regulations. All kiosks must adhere
to the aesthetic requirements of other structures located near the specific
kiosk location. The. operator shall maintain the kiosks, bicycles, and
docking structures free of graffiti and in good, clean working order and
repair, including the daily removal of trash and debris from the station area.



   (i)   Station locations. Bike share stations shall only be placed in
sites that are mutually agreed upon by the city and operator, and which are
approved by the city.



      (1)   The bike share system’s owner, managing agent, or
both, shall be responsible to ensure that the following requirements are met
during operation of the bike share system:



         a.   For locations within city right-of-way, the
operator shall submit a city right-of-way application to the Engineering
Division.



         b.   For locations on city property, the operator shall
submit a minor site plan modification and building permit application to the
city's Planning and Zoning Division and Building Department, respectively.



            1.   The application shall include a site plan for
each bike sharing station location.



            2.   Plans shall be to scale and show the
footprint and design of the station, existing roadway, striping, signage,
lighting, parking meters, and sidewalk for a distance of at least twenty-five
(25) feet beyond the limits of all sides of the bike sharing station location.



         c.   No installation, permanent or temporary, shall be
performed without a valid permit.



         d.   The city may request, upon thirty (30) days written
notice to operator, that one (1) or more bike sharing station(s) be removed,
relocated, and/or restored.



         e.   Operator shall make all reasonable efforts to
comply with city’s request for the removal, relocation and/or restoration
of bike sharing station(s) within the time provided above.



         f.   Upon removal of a station, the right-of-way shall
be restored by the operator, at no expense to the city, to a condition equal
to or better than the condition at the time of installation.



      (2)   For locations on private or public property that is
controlled or managed by an entity other than the city, the operator shall be
responsible for obtaining all required permits and approval from property
owners.



      (3)   Operators shall provide the city with pictures of each
location prior to commencing construction of a bike share system or kiosk,
such that the city may confirm restoration to the original condition of the
location after a bike share system or kiosk is removed.



   (j)   Performance bond. Bike share operators shall provide the city
with a performance bond in an amount determined by the city to be sufficient
to cover the obligations of the operator under the agreement. The form of the
bond shall be approved by the city and shall be executed by one or more
surety companies legally authorized to do business in the State of Florida.
The bond shall guarantee the performance of all the obligations of the bike
share operator under the agreement. If an operator increases the size of
their fleet, the performance bond shall be adjusted appropriately before
deploying additional bicycles.



   (k)   Fleet size. Operators shall state the desired maximum fleet
size in the agreement. The city and operator may agree to add additional
bikes and/or stations if it is determined and mutually agreed that there are
not enough bicycles or locations to meet demand. The city shall have the
authority to limit an operator’s fleet size with reasonable discretion to
protect the safety of the traveling public and integrity of the bike share
system itself and entire transportation system within the public way.



   (l)   Restoration. After a bike share system is removed, the owner,
managing agent or both shall restore the right-of-way or city-owned property
to its original condition.



(Ord. No. 18-015, § 2, 7-3-18)



Secs. 2-223—2-240. Reserved.



Chapter 2.5
ALARM SYSTEMS*



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 88-36, §§ 1—16, adopted July 19, 1988, did
not specify manner of codification; hence, such provisions have been
designated as Ch. 2.5, §§ 2.5-1—2.5-16, by the editor.



Sec. 2.5-1.  Short Title.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Burglar and Fire Alarm
Ordinance.”



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 07-033, § 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-2.  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, whenever any of the following words or
terms are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:



   Alarm system: Any electrical device, signaling device, or combination
of electrical devices used to signal or detect a burglary, fire, robbery, or
medical emergency.



   Alarm system contractor:  A person whose business includes the
execution of contracts requiring the ability, experience, science, knowledge,
and skill to layout, fabricate alarm systems for compensation, including but
not limited to all types of alarm systems for all purposes.



   Alarm user: Any person using an alarm or occupying and controlling
premises or building, or a portion of a premises or building, served by an
alarm.



   Audible alarm: An alarm that sounds a warning bell, buzzer, or other
sounding device that can be heard for fifty (50) feet or more beyond the
protected premises.



   Class "A" alarm:  An alarm activated by:



   (a)   Unauthorized intrusion;



   (b)   Criminal activity;



   (c)   Fire;



   (d)   The need for emergency medical response; or



   (e)   An act of nature not contributed to by faulty design,
maintenance, installation or use.



   Commercial: Any business, multiple dwelling unit, storage facility,
that has a fire alarm system to monitor flow, tamper, manual initiation
devices and audible notification.



   False alarms:  Any alarm that is not determined to be a "Class A
alarm", including but not limited to alarms activated through:



   (a)   Inadvertence;



   (b)   Neglect;



   (c)   Accident;



   (d)   Alarm testing;



   (e)   Faulty installation;



   (f)   Lack of maintenance;



   (g)   Improper maintenance;



   (h)   Excessive vibrations; or



   (i)   Power failure.



In the absence of a determination by the Police Department or the Fire
Department that an alarm is a Class "A" alarm, a rebuttal presumption is
established that an alarm is a false alarm.  A property owner can rebut the
presumption by submission of proof that the alarm was a Class "A" alarm and
not a false alarm.



   Fire alarm system agent:  Any person who is employed by a licensed
fire alarm contractor or certified unlimited electrical contractor that is
performing duties which are an element of an activity that constitutes fire
alarm system contracting requiring certification under this part: and whose
specific duties include any of the following: altering, installing,
maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, servicing, selling, or monitoring
a fire alarm system for compensation.  All associated work and personnel
shall comply with F.S. Chapter 489, specifically F.S. §§ 489.505, 489.518,
and 489.5185.



   Government: Any direct agency of any federal, state, county, or city
government including schools and the U.S. Postal Service.



   Person: Shall mean any natural person, individual or any firm,
partnership, association, limited partnership, sole proprietorship,
corporation, apartment complex, condominium association, or any business
entity whatsoever.



   Premises: Shall mean the building or structure and adjoining property
which is protected by and upon which is installed an emergency alarm or alarm
system.



   Residential:  Any single-family dwelling that has a burglar alarm
system that may or may not have smoke detectors attached to the system.



   UL certified installation: A "Certificated Alarm System" is one that
the certificate issuing alarm company declares that the system is in
compliance with standards.  It is equivalent to a manufacturer whose name
appears in a UL Product Directory choosing to place a UL Mark on a specific
production product. A certificated alarm system is subject to random audit by
UL alarm system auditors to countercheck compliance, just as a product with a
UL Mark is subject to random audit.



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 2, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 90-43, § 1, 9-18-90; Ord. No.
98-46, § 1, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 07-011, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 07-033, § 2,
11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-3.  Alarm operating permit required.



   No person shall have an alarm installed to be operational, or use an
existing alarm serving a premises, or a building, or portion thereof,
occupied or controlled by such person, unless an alarm operating permit in
the form of a decal has been issued hereunder, and is in force, authorizing
the use of such alarm. Such alarm operating permit shall constitute a
regulatory license. For any alarm existing prior to the effective date of
this chapter an alarm operating permit application shall be made within sixty
(60) days of the effective date hereof. A person with an installed alarm
system without a permit from the city shall be issued a notice of violation
and that person shall have ten (10) days from the date of the notice of
violation to make application for a permit. If application for a permit is
not made within ten (10) days of the notice of violation the person shall be
in violation of this section.



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 3, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 90-43, § 2, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 92-5,
§ 1, 3-3-92; Ord. No. 94-29, § 1, 9-9-94)



Sec. 2.5-4.  Application for permit.



   Application for an alarm operating permit for the operation of an alarm
system shall be made by a person having control over the property on which
the alarm system is to be operated. Such application shall be made in writing
to the Chief of Police on a form designated by the city for that purpose. On
such application, the applicant shall set forth:



   (a)   The name, address and telephone number of each person in
control of the property.



   (b)   The street address of the property on which the alarm system
is to be or has been installed and operated.



   (c)   Any business name used for the premises on which the
alarm-system is to be installed and operated.



   (d)   Whether the alarm system or systems are or are not local
alarms and whether the alarm system or systems are designed to give notice of
a burglary, fire, and hold-up or of other type of emergency.



   (e)   The name of the person or alarm system business that will
install the alarm system.



   (f)   The names and telephone numbers of two (2) persons, which are
able to and have agreed as follows:



      (1)   To receive notification of alarm activation at any time;



      (2)   To arrive at the alarm site within one (1) hour after
receiving a request from a member of the communications center, Police
Department or Fire Department to do so; and



      (3)   To grant access to the alarm site and to deactivate the
alarm system if such becomes necessary; or the name and telephone number of
an alarm system business that is able and has agreed to provide as follows:



         a.   The names of two (2) persons listed with that
company who are able to arrive within one (1) hour after receiving a request
from a member of the communications division, Police Department or Fire
Department to do so, and to grant access to the alarm site and to deactivate
the alarm system if necessary.



         b.   When necessary, the permit holder shall give the
alarm system business the name and telephone number of another person who is
able and is willing to perform the above described duties so that at least
two (2) persons are listed with the alarm system business at all times.



         c.   The person having control over the property has
authorized the alarm system business to provide the names listed with that
business pursuant to subsections d and e above to the Police and/or Fire
Department or the communications center whenever that department(s) or the
communications center has requested that information in order to obtain
assistance after an alarm has been activated.



(Ord. No. 88-36 § 4, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 91-6, § 1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 07-033,
§ 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-5.  Term of permit; fee; nontransferable.



   (a)   Fee. A fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be charged the
alarm user by the city for each alarm-operating permit issued, to defray the
cost of regulation. Successive renewal fees shall not be required of a
residential or commercial permit holder except as provided in subsection (b).



   (b)   Term and renewal. An alarm operating permit shall have an
indefinite term from date of issuance; provided however, the term shall
expire and the permit shall be deemed invalid with any change in ownership of
residential or commercial property to which the permit is assigned.
Compliance with subsections (1) and (2) shall revalidate the alarm permit.



      (1)   An alarm permit holder is required to notify the city
within seven (7) days of any change of alarm permit registration information.



      (2)   Any change in ownership of residential or commercial
property to which an alarm permit is assigned shall require a new
registration application and a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00).



   (c)   Permit nontransferable. Any alarm operating permit issued
pursuant to this article shall not be transferable or assignable and shall
cover only one (1) building or premises or portion thereof.



(Ord. No. 88-36; § 5, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 90-43, § 3, 9-18-90; Ord. No.
90-59, § 1, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 07-033, § 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-6.  Issuance of alarm operating permit.



   An alarm permit will be issued by the Chief of Police upon receipt of
said completed application, and the Chief of Police or his designee may
inspect the alarm equipment and planned installation and may require the
submission of additional and specific information.



   An alarm operating permit shall be denied if:



   (a)   The requested information is not supplied on the application
or such additional information as required is not furnished.



   (b)   Material information on the application is incorrect.



   (c)   Any person or entity listed on the application under items
(a)(4), (5) and (6) of section 2.5-4 of this chapter does not possess any
required occupational or regulatory license to conduct the activities
required by said items (a)(4), (5) and (6), unless the person or entity is
the alarm user.



   (d)   If the equipment is found to be inferior and not capable of
proper performance.



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 6, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 90-43, § 4, 9-18-90; Ord. No.
07-033, § 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-7.  Decal required.



   Each alarm operating permit holder shall be issued an alarm decal by
the Chief of Police. Said decal shall be displayed at the main entry or a
conspicuous place visible at the front of the premises of all business,
commercial establishments, and residential premises, covered by said permit.



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 7, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 90-43, § 5, 9-18-90; Ord. No.
07-033, § 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-8.  Duties of property owner.



   For the purpose of this chapter, both the owner and lessee of an office
or commercial premises shall be considered to be the owners of the premises
and shall be held jointly and severally responsible for the registration of
the alarm system and liable to the city for all service fees charged for
false alarms. The owner of an apartment complex or multifamily residence is
responsible for the registration of all alarm systems and shall be liable to
the city for service fees charged for false alarms.



   The person in control of the property on which an alarm system is
installed shall:



   (a)   Ensure that any person listed with the city is able:



      (1)   To receive notification at any time;



      (2)   To come to the alarm site within one (1) hour after
receiving a request from a member of the Police Department, Fire Department
or Communications Department to do so; and



      (3)   To grant access to the alarm site and to deactivate the
alarm system if such becomes necessary.



      (4)   To inspect the alarm system after each activation to
ensure proper operation.



   (b)   Train all persons who may activate the alarm system in the
proper operation of the alarm system.



   (c)   Failure to respond as provided shall result in a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00). The Police Department or Fire Department shall indicate on
their false alarm report the failure to respond. The fine shall be processed
by the Code Compliance Division through the Code Compliance Board.



   (d)   Notify the city within thirty (30) days of any changes of
information contained on the original application.



   (e)   Properly maintain the alarm system to ensure malfunctions due
to faulty maintenance will not occur.



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 8, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 90-43, § 6, 9-18-90; Ord. No.
07-033, § 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-9.  Duty of person notified to provide access to premises, render
assistance.



   Any person who is notified by any member of the communications
division, Police Department or Fire Department of the activation of an alarm
system and who is able to give access to the alarm site shall come to the
alarm site within one (1) hour of the time such person is notified of such
activation and shall provide the Police and/or Fire Department any necessary
access or assistance. Failure to respond as provided shall be grounds for and
result in the city taking reasonable action to deactivate the alarm.  Fire
alarms required by fire codes and/or state statutes shall be exempt from
deactivating the alarm.



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 9, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 90-43, § 7, 9-18-90; Ord. No.
98-46, § 2, 12-1-98)



Sec. 2.5-10.  Operation and installation of system.



   No person shall install, cause to be installed or permit to be
installed any alarm system unless the requirements of this section are met.



   (a)   Any alarm system which may be activated as a result of
different types of emergency situations shall give a unique signal to
designate activation as a result of a hold-up, a burglary, a fire, or any
other different type of emergency situation so that the proper notification
and proper response can be made.



   (b)   Any local alarm system shall have a twenty-minute shutoff and
must not make a sound similar to that of a siren, an emergency vehicle or a
civil defense warning system. For purposes of this subsection any alarm
system which emits any variable tone (as opposed to a steady pitch or a
ringing sound as is made by a bell) shall be considered to be emitting a
sound, that is similar to that of a siren, an emergency vehicle or a civil
defense warning system.



   (c)   Any hold-up alarm shall be designed so that it may be
activated only by intentional and deliberate human action; and any owner
found in violation of subsection (a), (b) or (c) shall be fined fifty dollars
($50.00).



   (d)   The police department shall indicate any violation of
subsection (a), (b) or (c) on the alarm report and Code Compliance Division
shall be responsible to take the appropriate action by issuing a notice of
violation of this section. The owner of the alarm system will have ten (10)
days from the date of the notice of violation to correct the violation. If
the violation is not corrected within ten (10) days, the Code Compliance
Division shall process the violations through the Code Compliance Board.



   (e)   The city may set reasonable standards and procedures to be
followed by any alarm system business or telephone answering service when
giving notice to the communications division of activation of an alarm
system. Such standards and procedures shall be set out in writing and made
available to any alarm system business or telephone answering service
requesting it.



   (f)   The Fire Rescue Department shall indicate any violation of
subsection (a) or (b) on their alarm report.  The Code Compliance Division
shall be responsible to take the appropriate action by issuing a notice of
violation of this section.  The owner a commercial alarm system will have
ten (10) days from the date of the notice of violation to correct the
violation.  If the violation is not corrected within ten days, the Code
Compliance Division shall process the violations through the Code Compliance
Board.



   (g)   All new and retrofitted fire alarm systems shall be UL
Certificated. When a Certificate is issued for an alarm system, it is the
installer's declaration that the system will be installed, maintained,
tested, and monitored in accordance with applicable codes and standards. The
Certificated installation is then subject to random physical audit by UL's
alarm system specialists.  In addition as part of the annual audit processes
the UL's representatives shall closely scrutinize the required documentation
that goes along with a certificated alarm system. If noncompliance is found,
the alarm company must rectify the problem or face cancellation of the
certificate. If cancellation of the certificate occurs other compensatory
measures shall be implemented as determined by the Fire Marshal or designee.



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 10, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 90-43, § 8, 9-18-90; Ord. No.
98-46, § 3, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 07-011, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 07-033, § 2,
11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-11.  False alarms prohibited; exceptions.



   No person shall activate an alarm system for any purpose other than an
emergency or threat of emergency of the kind for which the alarm system was
designed to give notice.



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 11, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 90-43, § 9, 9-18-90; Ord. No.
07-011, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 07-033, § 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-12.  Excessive false alarms declared a public nuisance; exceptions.



   (a)   The activation of more than three (3) false alarms of a
residential alarm system within any fiscal year of October 1 through
September 30 is excessive and constitutes a serious nuisance, and is hereby
declared to be unlawful and a violation of this section. No person shall
allow, permit, cause or fail to prevent the activation, for any reason, by
any alarm used by such person, or any alarm serving a premises or a building
occupied and controlled by such person, of more than three (3) false alarms
within any fiscal year of October 1 through September 30.



   (b)   All new residential property with a permitted alarm systems
shall be exempt from  the application of this section for the first three
(3) months from the date of initial installation.



   (c)   Occupancies with multiple alarm zones, apartment complexes, or
commercial occupancies with multiple alarm systems, that are maintained by
the same company, may be declared nuisance alarms by the Fire Marshal and
shall be assessed a false alarm fee.



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 12, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 89-6, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 90-43,
§ 10, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 91-64, § 2, 9-19-91; Ord. No. 98-46, § 4, 12-1-98;
Ord. No. 07-011, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 07-033, § 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-13.  False alarm response service fee; collection.



   (a)   For response to excessive false alarms by the police
department, the alarm user shall be charged a service fee by the City as
follows:



   1st false alarm in a fiscal year of October 1 through September
30   No charge



   2nd false alarm in a fiscal year of October 1 through September
30   No charge



   3rd false alarm in a fiscal year of October 1 through September
30   No charge



   4th false alarm in a fiscal year of October 1 through September
30   $75 for residential; $200 for commercial



   5th false alarm in a fiscal year of October 1 through September
30   $100 for residential; $500 for commercial



   6th false alarm in a fiscal year of October 1 through September
30   $150 for residential; $750 for commercial



   7th and successive false alarm in a fiscal year of October 1 through
September 30   $200 for residential; $1,000 for commercial.



   Example: A residence with nine (9) false alarms within a fiscal year of
October 1 through September 30 would be calculated as follows:



      1st   $0



      2nd   $0



      3rd   $0



      4th   $75



      5th   $100



      6th   $150



      7th   $200



      8th   $200



      9th   $200



         $925 Total



   (b)   The Chief of Police or his/her designee, shall determine
whether a false burglar alarm has occurred and the frequency of such false
alarms. The city shall notify alarm users of amounts owed to the city and
shall make demand therefor, pursuant to the provisions of this section.  The
Fire Marshal shall determine whether a false fire or medical alarm has
occurred and the frequency of such alarms.



   (c)   Proof of alarm repair on the date of the false alarm can
result in the fine being reduced or waived, if approved by the Fire Marshal
or the Chief of Police or their designees.



   (d)   The city attorney may proceed by a suit in a court of
competent jurisdiction to collect said charge after demand therefor has been
made by the city and the payment thereof refused by the alarm user.




(Ord. No. 88-36, § 13, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 90-43, § 11, 9-18-90; Ord. No.
98-46, § 5, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 07-011, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 07-033, § 2,
11-13-07)




Sec. 2.5-14.  Interference with city telephone trunk lines prohibited.



   (a)   No person shall use or cause to be used any telephone or
electronic device or attachment that automatically selects a public primary
telephone trunk line of the communications center, Police Department, Fire
Department or any other department or bureau of the city, and then reproduces
any prerecorded message to report any burglary, unauthorized entry or other
emergency.



   (b)   No person shall provide a private alarm service system
programmed to a central alarm reception office unless it shall have the
central office staffed at all times, twenty-four (24) hours a day, including
holidays.



   (c)   Any staff member of a private alarm service system reporting
an alarm activation to which Police Department and/or Fire Department
response is requested shall identify himself and state the name and telephone
number of the alarm business by which such response is requested.



   (d)   The request for response shall include the name, telephone
number, and zone, if applicable, of the alarm activation.



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 14, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 98-46, § 6, 12-1-98; Ord. No.
07-011, § 2, 6-19-07)



Sec. 2.5-15.  Audible alarms.



   All alarms that may be heard in any public place shall be equipped and
maintained to automatically cut off no longer than twenty (20) minutes after
being activated.



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 15, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 91-64, § 3, 9-19-91; Ord. No.
07-033, § 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-16.  Enforcement through the Code Compliance Board.



   The Police Chief, Fire Chief or their designees may initiate action
before the Code Compliance Board of the city to obtain compliance with this
chapter and payment of service charges assessed by the city. The board shall
have the authority to place a lien against the property served by a burglar
and/or fire alarm in the amount of all daily accrued fines, administrative
costs and service charges.



(Ord. No. 88-36, § 16, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 90-43, § 12, 9-18-90; Ord. No.
92-5, § 2, 3-3-92; Ord. No. 94-29, § 2, 9-9-94; Ord. No. 07-033, § 2,
11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-17.  Service charge, fines; failure to pay.



   The owner of an alarm system in violation of a specified section of
this chapter shall have ten (10) days from the date of the violation notice
to pay the service charge and/or fine.



   (a)   If the owner fails to pay the service charge or fine within
ten (10) days the matter will be processed through the Code Compliance Board.



   (b)   If the owner or person in charge of the alarm system fails to
pay the past due amount within ten (10) days, the city attorney may proceed
by a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect said unpaid service
charges and/or fines from an alarm system owner, and the city attorney shall
have the authority to place a lien against the property served by a burglar
and/or fire alarm in the amount of all assessed service charges and/or fines.



   (c)   The owner of the alarm system and/or the premises the alarm
system serves shall be responsible for all costs incurred in collecting the
service fee including attorney's fees.



(Ord. No. 90-43, § 13, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 92-5, § 3, 3-3-92; Ord. No. 97-03,
§ 1, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 07-033, § 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-18.  Departmental review of contested fees.



   (a)   Alarm users wishing to contest a false alarm response service
fee shall provide to the police or fire rescue department, within thirty (30)
days of imposition of the fee, a written explanation including work orders
specifying dates of service calls, detailing reasons that the false alarm
response service fee should be reduced or waived.



   (b)   The chiefs of the Police Department and the Fire Rescue
Departments shall each designate a member of their respective departments to
process, review and make a written recommendation to the department chief on
each case contesting a false alarm response service fee.



   (c)   The chief of each department shall review the recommendation
and may reduce, remove, or leave unchanged the false alarm response service 
charge imposed pursuant to section 2.5-13.  The decision of the chief of the
respective department shall be the final decision of the city.



(Ord. No. 98-17, § 1, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 07-033, § 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-19.  Failure to notify.



   No alarm business shall attempt to service, repair, alter, replace,
move and/or test an alarm system without a prior one-hour notice of intent to
the City of Boynton Beach Fire and Life Safety Division and/or the Police
Department.  All reasonable precautions to avoid the transmission of false
alarms shall be made.  Failure to notify one hour prior to the transmission
of a false alarm shall result in a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), payable by
the alarm business.



   (a)   All alarm businesses and alarm monitoring companies conducting
fire or medical alarm business in the city will register with the Fire and
Life Safety Division of the Boynton Beach Fire Rescue Department.



   (b)   All alarm businesses will notify the Fire and Life Safety
Division of any alteration, deletion, removal of service, or other operating
problems of fire and medical alarm systems in the city or communities served
by interlocal agreements.



(Ord. No. 98-46, § 7, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 07-011, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No.
07-033, § 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-20.  Alarm business responsibility.



   An alarm company conducting fire alarm business within the city shall
adhere to all requirements of all applicable NFPA and UL Standards.  Failure
to comply with this section of the code, as determined by the Fire Marshal,
shall result in prosecution before the Code Compliance Board.



(Ord. No. 98-46, § 8, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 07-033, § 2, 11-13-07)



Sec. 2.5-21.  Damage to property.



   The City of Boynton Beach shall not be financially responsible for any
property damage caused by the Police and/or Fire Rescue responding to an
alarm.  The alarm user shall be solely responsible for any damages that
occur while attempting to verify the cause for the alarm activation.



(Ord. No. 98-46, § 9, 12-1-98)



Sec. 2.5-22.  Operations permit.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any business engaged in the
monitoring of fire alarms, or inspecting and/or testing of fire alarms or
suppression systems to operate within the city without first obtaining an
operational permit issued by the Fire Marshal.



   (b)   A person operating in violation of this chapter and/or F.S.
Ch. 489, shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) a
day and/or sixty (60) days in jail for each day business is operated in
violation of this section.



   (c)   Application for the permit shall be made to the Fire Marshal
on a form provided and will be issued upon a determination that proper state
and local licensing requirements are met per F.S. Ch. 633, Ch. 489, and City
Ordinance Sec. 13.  There is no additional fee for this permit.



   (d)   The permit shall remain in force as long as state and local
licensing provisions are maintained or unless the Fire Marshal determines
that the business is not satisfactorily maintaining the systems in accordance
with the Florida Fire Prevention Code and adopted NFPA codes.



(Ord. 07-011, § 2, 6-19-07)



Chapter 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*



   *Cross references-License tax for nightclubs, § 13-22(211) ; authority
to close beverage establishments in civil emergency, § 15-45(b); consuming
alcoholic beverages at beaches, parks, § 16-38.



   State law reference-State beverage law, F.S. Chs. 561—565.



Sec. 3-1.  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter:



   Alcoholic beverage establishment means any business or commercial
establishment, whether open to the public at large or entrance is limited by
cover charge or membership requirements, including those licensed by the
State for sale and or service of alcoholic beverages, which include, but are
not limited to, any stand-alone bar, bottle club, hotel, motel, restaurant,
night club, country club, cabaret, and meeting facility located in the City
of Boynton Beach in which alcoholic beverages, beer or wine are, or are
available to be, sold, dispensed, served, consumed, provided, possessed or
offered for sale or consumption on the premises.



   Alcoholic beverages means all beverages containing more than one (1)
per cent of alcohol by weight.



   State law reference-Similar provisions, F.S. § 561.01(4).



   Beer means all brewed beverages containing malt.



   State law reference-Similar provisions, F.S. § 563.01.



   Beverage law means Florida Statutes, Chapters 561, 562, 563, 564, 565,
567, 568.



   Commercial establishment parking lot means any private or public area
appurtenant to commercial establishments used by the public for parking for,
and pedestrian access to, commercial establishments, including drives,
parking areas, and sidewalks and walkways appurtenant thereto.



   Container means any can, bottle, carton, or other vessel of alcoholic
beverage.



   Liquor includes “distilled spirits” and shall include all
spirituous beverages created by distillation, and by mixture of distilled
beverages by what is commonly termed “blending.”



   State law reference-Similar provisions, F.S. § 565.01.



   Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is not powered by muscular power.



   Nudity is the exposing to public view of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, cleavage of the human buttocks, or that portion of the
human female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal
line one would have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of
the areola (the colored ring around the nipple).



   Partial nudity is the exposing to public view of the human male or
female cleavage of the human buttocks or that portion of the human female
breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would
have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of the areola
(the colored ring around the nipple) with less than a full opaque covering;
or the depiction of covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



   Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership, association,
or entity.



   Public or semi-public area open for vehicular travel means all public
and private roads, streets, highways, lanes, alleys, parking lots, and
parking areas on which the public is expressly or implicitly invited to
travel by motor vehicle or which is otherwise open for vehicular travel. It
shall not include areas (1) such as golf courses, go-cart tracks, moto-cross
tracks, and similar areas; and (2) private driveways or property serving a
single dwelling unit.



   Wine means all beverages made from fresh fruits, berries or grapes,
either by natural fermentation or by fermentation with brandy added, in the
manner required by the laws and regulations of the United States, and
includes all sparkling wines, champagnes, combination of the aforesaid
beverages, vermouths, and like products. Sugar, flavors, and coloring
materials may be added to wine to make it conform to the consumer's taste,
except that the ultimate flavor or the color of the product may not be
altered to imitate a beverage other than wine or to change the character of
the wine.



   State law reference-Similar provisions, F.S. § 564.01.



   Vendor means all persons who sell beverages herein referred to at
retail.



(Code 1958, § 3-1; Ord. No. 86-9, § 1, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 10-030, § 2,
12-7-10)



Secs. 3-2, 3-3. Reserved.



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 85-45, Attach. (b), adopted Aug. 20, 1985,
repealed §§ 3-2, 3-3. Prior to repeal, § 3-2 prohibited sale of alcoholic
beverages to minors, drunkards and incompetents and was derived from the 1958
Code, § 3-2; § 3-3 prohibited the solicitation or allowing solicitation of
drinks, as derived from the 1958 Code, § 17-42.



Sec. 3-4.  Hours of sale.



   (a)   For purposes of this section, alcoholic beverage(s) means
distilled spirits and all beverages containing one-half of one percent (0.5%)
or more alcohol by volume.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful to sell, deliver or consume, or permit
the sale, delivery, service or consumption of, alcoholic beverages on the
premises where such licensed business is conducted, between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m., on any day of the week, except New Year’s Day.



(Code 1958, § 3-3; Ord. No. 80-22, § 1, 6-3-80; Ord. No, 82-2, § 1,
1-19-82; Ord. No. 84-17, § 1, 3-20-84; Ord. No. 08-023, § 2, 9-18-08)



   State law reference-Authority to regulate hours, F.S. § 562.45(2).



Sec. 3-5.  Possession or consumption prohibited.



   (a)   The following unlawful acts are prohibited:



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume
any alcoholic beverage in or within five hundred (500) feet of a commercial
establishment parking lot in the City of Boynton Beach, except in those areas
in which consumption is permitted pursuant to the beverage law; special or
general act of the state legislature; the Florida Administrative Code; or
city ordinance, resolution or administrative approval. Nothing herein shall
prohibit consumption on private property within five hundred (500) feet of a
commercial establishment parking lot; provided that the owner or person in
control of said private property has explicitly consented to such consumption.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any
alcoholic beverage in or within five hundred (500) feet of a commercial
establishment parking lot in the City of Boynton Beach except in those areas
in which such possession is permitted pursuant to beverage law; special or
general act of the state legislature; the Florida Administrative Code; or
city ordinance, resolution or administrative approval unless such alcoholic
beverage is in the original container with the seal unbroken.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any
container of alcoholic beverage, except an original container with the seal
unbroken, or to consume any alcoholic beverage in or on a motor vehicle being
operated on a public or semi-public area open for vehicular travel.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or
possess any alcoholic beverage upon the public streets or alleys of the City,
or outside of any building in a nonresidential zone of the City, unless there
are seating arrangements for patrons at permanent tables provided by an
establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. The City Manager may
grant a permit for a Special Event in a defined location for a period not to
exceed twelve (12) hours per day, allowing the serving and consumption of
alcoholic beverages on public or private, nonresidentially zoned property. To
receive such a permit, an applicant must submit the request at the time of
Special Event application. Any permit granted hereunder may be conditioned
upon the applicant complying with such terms and requirements as are
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.



   (b)   This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Any person engaged in picking up empty beverage
containers for the purpose of collecting the deposit or value of the bottle
or can itself, nor to any person taking part in a litter control campaign.



      (2)   The possession of any open container by any licensed
distributor or licensed vendor of alcoholic beverages provided that such
alcoholic beverage is being transported solely for commercial purposes.



      (3)   The transportation of any open container of alcoholic
beverage in or on any motor vehicle provided that such container is in a
compartment of the vehicle not readily accessible to the driver or
passengers, such as a locked (not merely latched) glove compartment, trunk,
or other nonpassenger or nondriver area of the motor vehicle.



      (4)   The transportation of any open container or consumption
of alcoholic beverage in or on any motor vehicle duly licensed and operated
for hire to transport passengers, such as Charter buses, regularly scheduled
buses, taxi cabs, and the separate passenger compartments of limousines;
provided the operator thereof is not in immediate possession of, or engaged
in the consumption of, any alcoholic beverage or open container of alcoholic
beverage.



      (5)   The operation, for a consideration, of any motor vehicle
by an individual duly licensed and supplied by a chauffeur service, limousine
service, taxicab company, or bus company; provided the operator thereof is
not in immediate possession of, or engaged in the consumption of, any
alcoholic beverage or open container of alcoholic beverage, and is operating
the vehicle while under, and in the scope of, the employment of a chauffeur
service, limousine service, taxicab company, or bus company. The operator
must have in his possession evidence of employment by a bona fide chauffeur
service, limousine service, taxicab company, or bus company.



(Code 1958, § 3-6; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 15-015, § 6,
6-16-15)



   Editor's note-It should be noted that former §§ 3-6 and 3.7 were
deleted by Ord. No. 92-53, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 4, 1992. Prior to
deletion, such sections pertained to proximity of beer and wine sales to
other establishments and location of liquor establishments, as derived from
the 1958 Code, §§ 3-19 and 3-21.



Sec. 3-6.  Prohibition of nudity, partial nudity, sexual conduct.



   (1)   No person shall engage in nudity or partial nudity in any
alcoholic beverage establishment.



   (2)   No employee of, or person having an independent contractual
relationship with, the owner or operator of an alcoholic beverage
establishment shall engage in nudity or partial nudity in any alcoholic
beverage establishment.



   (3)   No person maintaining, owning or operating an alcoholic
beverage establishment shall suffer or permit any employee or person having
an independent contractor status as to the owner or operator of the alcoholic
beverage establishment to engage in nudity or partial nudity within any
alcoholic beverage establishment.



   (4)   No person shall engage in and no person maintaining, owning or
operating an alcoholic beverage establishment shall suffer or permit any
sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation,
flagellation, any sexual act which is prohibited by law, touching, caressing
or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, or any portion thereof, anus or
genitals or the simulation thereof, within any alcoholic beverage
establishment.



(Ord. No. 10-030, § 3, 12-7-10)



 


Notes

§ 13-22(211) 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor



Chapter 4
ANIMALS AND FOWL*



Art. I.   In General, §§ 4-1—4-39



   *Cross references-License tax for animal hospitals, § 13-22(11) ; for
animal or dog grooming service, § 13-22(12) ; license tax on kennels, §
13-22(175) ; animals at beaches and parks, § 16-39.



Sec. 4-1.  Definitions.



The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:



   (a)   Animal shall include every living dumb creature, domestic and
wild.



   (b)   Animal control center shall mean any facility operated by the
City, county or humane society for the temporary care, confinement and
detention of animals and for other disposition of animals.



   (c)   Animal control officer shall mean an animal control officer of
the City, who is an employee or agent of the City, designated to administer
and enforce the licensing, inspection, and enforcement requirements contained
within Chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances.



   (d)   Animal enclosure means any structure used to restrict an
animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, run,
cage, compartment, or hutch.



   (e)   At large shall mean off the premises of the owner and not
under the control, custody, charge or possession of the owner, or other
responsible person capable of restraining the animal, either by leash, cord,
chain or other humane means of physical restraint.



   (f)   Business shall mean holding oneself out, either expressly or
implicitly, to the public or a portion of the public on a continual, regular
and permanent basis for livelihood or profit.



   (g)   Dangerous or vicious animal shall mean any animal of fierce or
dangerous propensities which is likely to cause injury to persons or damage
to property, or any animal which exhibits traits which are ungovernable, or
any animal which has bitten one or more persons without provocation on two
separate occasions within a period of six months.



   (h)   Disposition means adoption, quarantine, voluntary or
involuntary custodianship or placement or euthanasia humanely administered to
an animal. The term also includes the placement or sale of an animal to the
general public, or removal of an animal from any pet shop to any other
location.



   (i)   Exotic animal means any live monkey, alligator, crocodile,
cayman, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, emu, ostrich,
member of the feline species other than domestic cat (felis domesticus),
member of the canine species other than domestic dog (canis familiaris), or
any other animal that would require a standard of care and control greater
than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops
of domestic farm animals.



   (j)   Guard dog shall mean any type of dog used primarily for the
purpose of defending, patrolling or protecting property or life and which is
commercially or privately owned to perform these services when the owner(s)
of the business or premises is/are not present.



   (k)   Hobby breeder shall mean any person who owns or breeds
pure-bred dogs or pedigreed cats primarily for personal recreational use. 
Personal recreational use may include participation in recognized
conformation shows, hunting, field or obedience trials, racing, coursing,
scenting, specialized hunting, or water trials, and may include improving the
physical soundness, temperament and conformation of a given breed to standard
or for the purpose of guarding or protecting the owner's property.



   (l)   Impoundment means the taking into custody of an animal by any
police officer, animal control officer, or other authorized representative
thereof.



   (m)   Kennel shall mean any place of business at which dogs or cats
are kept for sale, breeding, boarding, treatment, training or grooming
purposes. The word “kennel” shall not include any humane society, animal
protection agency, veterinary clinic or hobby breeder.



   (n)   Owner shall mean any person owning, having temporary or
permanent custody of, sheltering, exercising control over, harboring or
keeping any animal.



   (o)   Pet shop shall include any place or premises where the primary
purpose is the keeping of pet animals for resale.



   (p)   Public nuisance animal means any animal that unreasonably
annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or
substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their
owners, to enjoyment of life or property.  The term public nuisance animal
shall include but not be limited to:



      (1)   Any animal that is repeatedly found running at large;



      (2)   Any dog or cat in any section of a park or public
recreation area unless the dog or cat is controlled by leash or similar
physical restraint;



      (3)   Any animal that damages, soils, defiles or defecates on
any property other than that of its owner;



      (4)   Any animal that makes disturbing noises, including but
not limited to continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other
utterances causing a disturbance to neighbors or others in close proximity to
the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;



      (5)   Any animal that causes fouling of the air by noxious or
offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to
neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is
kept or harbored;



      (6)   Any animal in heat that is not confined so as to prevent
attraction or contact with other animals;



      (7)   Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner,
that without provocation, molests, attacks, or otherwise interferes with the
freedom of movement of persons in a public right-of- way;



      (8)   Any animal that chases motor vehicles in a public
right-of-way;



      (9)   Any animal that attacks domestic animals;



      (10)   Any animal that causes unsanitary conditions in
enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored;



      (11)   Any animal that is offensive or dangerous to the public
health, safety or welfare by virtue of the number of animals maintained at a
single residence or the inadequacy of the facilities.



   (q)   Sanitary means a condition of good order and cleanliness to
minimize the possibility of disease transmission.



   (r)   Sanitary conditions means a space free from hazards which may
endanger an animal’s health, such as animal waste or overcrowding.



   (s)   Stable shall be held to include those premises at which horses
are kept commercially for boarding, riding, breeding, or resale purposes.



   (t)   Tether means the act of constraining an animal’s movement by
attaching one end of a leash (or other similar device) to the animal and
attaching the other end of the leash to some object which is attached to the
ground.



   (u)   Torture, torment, cruelty shall include every act, omission or
neglect whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused,
permitted or allowed to continue when there is reasonable remedy or relief.
Cruelty shall also include the failure to provide an animal with proper food,
drink, shelter, or protection from weather.



   (v)   Under restraint means that an animal is secured by a leash,
lead under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the
animal and obedient to that person's commands, or securely enclosed within
the real property limits of the owner's premises.



   (w)   Water means water that is potable.



   (x)   Wild animal means any live monkey, non- human primate,
raccoon, skunk, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other warm
blooded animal that can normally be found in the wild state. This term shall
not include domestic dogs (but does include hybrids with wolves, coyotes or
jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm
animals, rodents, any hybrid animal that is part wild, and captive-bred
species of common cage birds.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 09-015, § 2, 2-2-09)



Sec. 4-2.  Cruelty generally.



   (a)   Whoever willfully and maliciously kills, strikes, maims or
disfigures any dog, cat or other animal or willfully and maliciously
administers poison to any such animal or exposes any poisonous substance with
the intent that it shall be taken and swallowed by any animal shall be deemed
in violation of this chapter.  Any person using reasonable force in
defending his animals, livestock or a human being from attack by another
animal shall be excluded from the provisions of this section.



   (b)   A person who unnecessarily overloads, over drives, torments,
deprives of necessary sustenance or shelter, or unnecessarily or cruelly
beats, mutilates, or kills any animal, or causes the same to be done, or
carries in or upon any vehicle, or otherwise, any animal in a cruel or
inhumane manner, is in violation of this chapter.



   (c)   A person who tortures any animal with intent to inflict
intense pain, serious physical injury, or death upon an animal is in
violation of this Chapter.



   (d)   The animal control officer shall impound any animal found to
have been cruelly treated, as defined in this section.



   (e)   Any person(s) who shall violate any provision of this section
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $250.00 for the first
offense, and $500.00 for any offense thereafter.



   (f)   This section providing for civil penalties for violation of
the Code of Ordinances does not preclude the City of Boynton Beach from
enforcing Sections 828.12(1) and 828.12(2), Florida Statutes through the
State Attorney's Office.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



   State law reference-Statutory provisions, F.S. § 828.12.



Sec. 4-3.  Poisoning.



   It shall be unlawful to poison any animal or distribute poison in any
manner with the intent or purpose of poisoning any animal, excluding rodents.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



   State law reference-Exposing poison, F.S. § 828.08.



Sec. 4-4.  Manner of keeping and treating animals generally; abandonment.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep animals without
providing:



      (1)   Clean and sanitary conditions;



      (2)   Food on a daily basis;



      (3)   Air ventilation and circulation;



      (4)   Water that is available at all times and free of foreign
matter, algae, excreta, or other biological hazards; and



      (5)   Medical attention and/or necessary veterinary care when
an animal is sick, diseased, or injured.  Written proof of veterinary care
must be provided upon request by the city.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person keeping an animal to fail
to provide shelter for that animal.



      (1)   In general, shelter for dogs, cats and small domestic
animals must:



         a.   Provide adequate protection from cold and heat. 
When the outdoor temperature falls below 40 degrees Fahrenheit (4.5 degrees
Celsius), all cats, small domestic animals, and dogs that cannot tolerate
such temperatures without stress or discomfort shall be moved indoors or
provided adequate heating to maintain temperature about 40 degrees
Fahrenheit.  When the outdoor temperature rises above 90 degrees Fahrenheit
(32.5 degrees Celsius), ventilation such as exhaust fans or air conditioning
must be provided;



         b.   Provide protection from the direct rays of the sun;
the direct effect of wind and rain; and all other elements at all times.



      (2)   Animal enclosures which house dogs must meet the
following minimum requirements:



         a.   A single animal enclosure must be 100 square feet
or less.  An individual property or parcel of land which contains multiple
enclosures may have a maximum aggregate or 150 square feet of dog enclosures.



         b.   Animal enclosures shall be constructed with chain
link fencing.  The flooring of an animal enclosure may be the ground/grass
or a solid, non-porous surface such as a concrete slab or pavers which have
no less than one-quarter (¼) inch between them.  All flooring for an animal
enclosure shall be at ground level.  A tarp or fabric screening may be used
on the sides or top of the animal enclosure.  No other type of material,
such as plywood, may be used for or attached to an animal enclosure.



         c.    An animal enclosure must have a six (6)-foot
setback from the property line and be located in the rear yard.  Prior to
constructing an enclosure, citizens must complete a planning and zoning
permit application and receive a development permit from the city.  The city
will establish a flat-rate fee for animal enclosure development permits,
which may increase from time to time.



         d.   Animal enclosures must be constructed and
maintained so that they:



            1.   Have no sharp points or edges that could
injure the dog;



            2.   Contain the dog such that it cannot escape
from the enclosure;



            3.   Keep other animals from entering the
enclosure;



            4.   Provide the dog with unobstructed access to
food and water.



               i.   Food and water shall be placed in the
enclosure such that they may not be commingled with waste or excreta. 
Owners must inspect food and water daily and if waste, excreta, or other
excessive foreign matter, is present, owners shall immediately replace the
contaminated food or water.



            5.   Provide sufficient space to allow the dog to
turn about, stand or sit freely; to lie down in any position it would be able
to if it were not in an enclosure; and to walk without crouching or
stumbling. 



               i.   Dogs shall be provided with a minimum
of six (6) square feet of space to sit or lie down such that they are not
sitting in waste or other excreta.



            6.   The interior height of an animal enclosure
must be at least twelve (12) inches higher than the head of the tallest dog
in the enclosure when it is in a normal standing position.



         e.   Animal enclosures and food and water receptacles
for dogs must be sanitized at least once every two (2) weeks and more often
if necessary to prevent an accumulation of dirt, debris, food waste, excreta,
and other disease hazards using steam under pressure or washing with soap and
hot water so as to remove all organic material and mineral buildup, followed
by a clean water rinse.



         f.   Outdoor housing areas using material that cannot be
sanitized using the methods provided in paragraph (e) of this section, such
as grass, shall be sanitized by removing all contaminated material in order
to prevent odors, diseases, pests, insects, and vermin infestation.



   (c)   Tethering.  Any person who owns or any person who is in
charge of any animal kept as a pet who confines that animal outdoors on
private property must provide the animal with:



      (1)   Food and potable water; and



      (2)   Provide protection from the direct rays of the sun; the
direct effect of wind and rain; and all other elements at all times; and



      (3)   Periodic supervision, which shall mean that each animal
shall be attended to at least once during every twelve (12) consecutive hours;



      (4)   Adequate space for exercise, which shall mean no less
than 150 square feet per animal; and



      (5)   A fenced yard or animal enclosure that is sufficient to
prevent the animal from escaping; or



      (6)   A tether under the following circumstances:



         a.   Any person who owns or any person who is in charge
or in control of any animal that is under the age of six (6) months shall not
tie, chain or otherwise tether the animal outdoors.



         b.   Any person who owns or any person who is in charge
or in control of any animal that is over the age of six (6) months shall not
tie, chain, or otherwise tether the animal kept as a pet outdoors between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except that an animal kept as a pet of any
age may be temporarily tethered, tied or chained outdoors for a total time
period not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes.  At other times, it is permitted
to tie, chain or otherwise tether an animal kept as a pet that is over the
age of six (6) months outdoors if the pet is collared by a properly fitting,
non-choke type collar or a body harness that is fastened to either:



            1.   A tether that is at least three (3) times the
body length of the animal measured from the animal’s nose to back of the
hindquarters, and that is free from entanglement; or



            2.   An overhead run, which is a  leash or chain
attached to an overhead wire at least ten (10) feet long, that allows the
animal to move unheeded.



   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit an
owner or keeper from controlling an animal kept as a pet by the handheld use
of a rope, leash or chain.



   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or set loose,
with the intention of avoiding the responsibility for the custody and care
of, any domestic animal within the limits of the city.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 09-015, § 3, 2-2-09)



Sec. 4-5.  Teasing and molesting animals.



   It shall be a violation of this article for any person to tease or
molest any animal of another.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-6.  Bird sanctuary declared; unlawful to molest, shoot and catch
birds.



   (a)   The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the
city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot,
molest or attempt to trap, hunt, shoot or molest any bird or wild fowl in any
manner or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests; provided, however, that if
starlings or similar birds are found to be congregated in any particular
locality within the city to the extent that complaint is made to the city
manager that such birds constitute a nuisance or menace to health or
property, then a meeting shall be called by the city manager of
representatives of the Audobon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club, Humane
Society, or as many clubs as are found to exist in said city, after having
given at least three (3) days actual notice of the time and place of said
meeting. Thereupon, if as a result of said meeting, no acceptable alternate
is found to abate such nuisance, then such birds may be destroyed in such
numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the city manager under
the supervision of the chief of police or such other officer as may be
designated by the chief of police.



   (c)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall be assessed a Class IV civil penalty of two hundred fifty
($250.00) dollars.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-7.  Unlawful to keep stray animal.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to harbor, feed, and/or
keep any stray animal unless he or she notifies the Animal Control Division
of the city within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the animal came into
his or her possession.  Upon receiving such notice, an animal control
officer may take such animal and place it in the animal shelter. Upon demand
by an animal control officer of the city, the stray animal shall be
surrendered to the animal control officer.  Failure to surrender the stray
animal shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-8.  Maintaining place for fighting.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any place where fowl,
dogs or other animals are suffered to fight upon exhibition or for sport upon
any wager.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



   State law reference-Fighting or baiting animals, F.S. § 828.122.



Sec. 4-9.  Indecent exhibitions.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to let any male animal to any
female animal unless the same is done in some place wholly enclosed and out
of public view.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-10.  Duty to remove dead animals from public streets and squares;
cost.



   The owner of dead animals upon the public streets and squares shall,
immediately upon notification, remove the same so as not to constitute a
nuisance.  If the owner fails to do so the city shall remove and dispose of
such carcass, and charge the owner of the carcass, if known, the sum of
twenty ($20.00) dollars for such removal and disposition.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



   State law reference-Disposal of bodies of dead animals, F.S. § 823.041.



Sec. 4-11.  Removal of dead animals from private property.



   When any dead animal is found on private property, the owner of the
dead animal or the owner of the premises upon which such animal is located
shall, when notified, remove the same immediately at his own cost.  Upon
failure to do so within a reason-able time, the city shall remove same, the
sum of twenty ($20.00) dollars to be collected from the offending party.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-12.  Injuring animals, action required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person injuring any animal by running over
or into the same, or coming into contact with the same, with a motor vehicle,
motorcycle, bicycle, or other means of transportation, to fail to immediately
notify the owner of such potential animal, the animal control officer, or the
police department of the city.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-13.  Animals creating nuisance.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any
property located within the corporate limits of the City when the keeping of
such animal constitutes a public nuisance or menace to public health and
safety.



   (b)   Any dog, cat, household pet or other animal which habitually
barks, whines, howls or causes other objectionable noise; or which is at
large or chases or runs after persons or vehicles; or which destroys or
damages any property of another person; or which causes serious annoyance to
a neighboring residence or interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment
of that person's property; or which emits offensive odors; or which creates
filthy or unsanitary conditions; or which is otherwise offensive to the
public so as to annoy, disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety of the citizens and residents of the city, is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and is an act in violation of this chapter.



   (c)   Any person who is the owner of such a dog, cat, household pet
or other animal as described in subsection (a) of this section; or who keeps
or maintains such an animal on his or her premises, is guilty of maintaining
a public nuisance, and is in violation of this chapter.



   (d)   In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter for the
violation of the provisions hereof, the city may institute any lawful civil
action or proceeding to prevent, restrain or abate any acts or failures to
act hereunder, which constitute a public nuisance.



   (e)   The animal control officer shall investigate an alleged
violation of this section upon receipt of two (2) sworn affidavits of
complaint provided by Animal Control signed by two (2) unrelated Palm Beach
County residents living in separate dwellings in close proximity to the site
of the alleged violation. Said affidavit shall specify the address or
location of the alleged violation, the nature, time and date(s) of the act,
the name and address of the owner or custodian, if known, and a description
of the animal, if known.



   (f)   An animal control officer upon the receipt of two (2) sworn
affidavits of complaint as provided in subsection (e), may issue a citation
to the owner or custodian of any animal alleged to be in violation of this
section.



   (g)   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance
for any person to feed any wild or exotic animal, including but not limited
to ducks and pigeons.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



   Cross references-Offensive conditions on property generally, § 10-2 et
seq.; noisy animals generally, § 15-8(e).



Sec. 4-14.  Animal waste.



   The owner or custodian of every animal shall be responsible for the
immediate removal and disposal of any excreta deposited by his or her animal
on public walks, public property, recreation areas or private property of
others.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-15.  Vicious animals.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep any vicious, fierce, or
dangerous animal within the city unless it is confined within a secure
building or enclosure or unless it is securely muzzled and under the
restraint of a competent person who by means of a leash, chain or rope has
such animal under control at all times.  An animal may be declared to be
vicious by the direction of the city animal control officer on the showing
that the animal has bitten a person without provocation on two (2) separate
occasions within a period of six (6) months or if such animal shows fierce or
dangerous propensities which if unrestrained are likely to cause injury to
persons other than the owner.  This declaration of viciousness shall be
delivered in writing to the owner.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-16.  Procedure when dog bites a person.



   Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of said dog shall notify the
animal control division, who shall immediately notify the county health
department.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-17.  Animals injuring, killing other animals.



   Any person who owns or has in his or her possession and under his
control any animal which the person knows to have injured or killed or to be
in the habit of injuring or killing other animals belonging to other persons
and who knowingly permits and allows such animal to run at large is deemed to
be in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-18.  Keeping livestock, poultry, exotic and wild animals in city.



   It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain or pasture horses, cattle,
mules, goats, sheep, swine, fowl, poultry, or other livestock within the
city.  It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor or maintain any exotic or wild
animal within the city.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-19.  Livestock, poultry, exotic and wild animals running at large
prohibited; impounding authorized.



   It shall be unlawful for any livestock, including fowl and poultry,
exotic animal or wild animal, to run at large on public or private property
within the city, and it shall be the duty of the police and animal control,
upon information and view, to cause any such animal, fowl or poultry running
at large to be impounded in accordance with the provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-20.  Impounding authorized; redemption.



   (a)   Impounding authorized.  Any dog, cat or other animal found in
the city that has not been registered and licensed as provided in section
4-27, or otherwise in violation of this Chapter, shall be impounded by the
city.



   (b)   Any animal found to be in violation of this chapter, the laws
of the state or county, and is picked up for such violation by any law
enforcement officer or animal control officer, and whose owner cannot readily
be found, shall be impounded.



   (c)   Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or
neglected, that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or
destroyed, or that is considered unattended or abandoned, shall be impounded.



   (d)   Any dog, cat, household pet, or other animal found running at
large within the city limits in violation of this chapter, or any dog, cat,
household pet, or other animal suspected or believed to be infected with
rabies or any apparent infectious or contagious disease shall be apprehended
and placed in the city animal control center.



   (e)   Any animal apprehended under this chapter which is suspected
to have or exhibit symptoms of having any infectious or contagious disease
shall be segregated from other impounded animals in the animal control
center.  Subsequent to the impounding of such animals in the animal control
center, the City shall notify the county animal control officer to pick up
such animals pursuant to Chapter 832, Florida Statutes.



   (f)   All animals impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be held
at the city's animal control center for at least seventy-two (72) hours to
give lawful owners sufficient time to locate and redeem their animals prior
to transferring such animals to the county animal control center.  Should
such animal have an infectious or contagious disease or other medical
disorder requiring medical attention, the animal shall be transferred to the
county animal control center as soon as practicable.



   (g)   Before an animal may be adopted from the city animal control
center, it must be in the possession of the animal control center for seven
(7) consecutive days.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-21.  Notice of impounding of licensed dogs and cats.



   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to cause notice to
be given to the registered owner of any licensed dog or cat impounded under
the pro-visions of this article.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-22.  Impounding fees, charges.



   The fees for the impounding of any animal by Animal Control under this
article shall be as follows:



   (a)   Twenty ($20.00) dollars for first impounding within any twelve
(12) month period;



   (b)   Thirty ($30.00) dollars for second impounding within any
twelve (12) month period;



   (c)   Fifty ($50.00) dollars for third impounding within any twelve
(12) month period.



   In addition to the fees enumerated above, a fee of five ($5.00) dollars
per day shall be charged for keep of the animal, and a fee of three ($3.00)
dollars for each flea spraying.  These fees shall be in addition to the
other requirements of the animal control regulations pertaining to
inoculation and license fees.  The owners, keepers or harborers of impounded
animals shall pay all fees accrued to the City at the time the animal is
released to them by the animal control officer.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-23.  Disposition of animals impounded for the third time.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, any animal which is
impounded for the third time may be transferred by animal control directly to
the county animal control authorities.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-24.  Release or interference with impounded animals.



   Any person who, after the impounding of any animal under any of the
ordinances of the city, shall release or attempt to release or in any manner
interfere with such animal, or with the safekeeping thereof until after such
animal be released in accordance with the ordinances, shall be guilty of a
violation of this code.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-25.  Adoption of regulations; animal control centers; personnel.



   The city shall promulgate such rules and regulations, hire such
personnel and designate such areas for animal control centers as necessary to
carry out and implement the purposes set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-26.  Records.



   The city animal control officer shall keep and maintain records of the
impoundment and disposition of all animals processed by animal control, and
shall record the names and addresses of persons to whom the animals are
released, and the date of release.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-27.  Enforcement.



   (a)   The City animal control officer shall be charged with the
responsibility of carrying out the provisions of this article, except that
any activity which requires the power of arrest shall be performed by law
enforcement officers only.



   (b)   The city's animal control officers have the authority to issue
citations pursuant to Section 4-38 of this chapter, and all law enforcement
officers may issue written citations to owners of animals in violation of
this chapter within the City limits.  In lieu of writing citations, any law
enforcement officer shall have the power to arrest.



   (c)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to
knowingly hinder, resist or oppose any officer or employee of Animal Control
in the performance of his or her duties under this chapter, or knowingly
interfere with any animal trap set by such officers or employees, or molest
or release any animal caught therein.



   (d)   If any owner refuses to permit an animal control officer or a
law enforcement officer to enter the premises to enforce this chapter, such
officer shall contact the police department and proceed on the owner's
premises in the company of a police officer, with such legal warrant or other
documents of authority as is necessary to lawfully enter the owner's premises
for the purpose of enforcing this chapter.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-28.  Agents for protection of animals.



   The county or any society or association for the prevention of cruelty
to children or animals organized under the laws of the State of Florida, may
appoint agents for the purpose of investigating violations of any provision
of Chapter 828, Florida Statutes or of any other law of the state, for the
purpose of protecting children and animals or preventing acts of cruelty to
them.  All appointments of such agents by such societies or corporations
existing or working in the city must have approval from the city com-mission,
and a record of such appointment shall be kept by the city clerk.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-29.  Kennel, stable, grooming parlors and pet shops.



   Every person who owns or operates a kennel, pet shop, stable, or
grooming parlor must comply with the regulations of the City, and in the
absence thereof, with the regulations provided by the county pertaining to
kennels, pet shops, stables, and grooming parlors shall prevail.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-30.  Application of Palm Beach County Code of Ordinances and Chapter
828, Florida Statutes.



   (a)   In the absence of any regulations of the city to the contrary,
the Palm Beach County Animal Care and Control Rules, as codified in the Palm
Beach County Code of Ordinances, shall prevail.



   (b)   The City hereby adopts the provisions of Chapter 828, Florida
Statutes, as amended from time to time.



   (c)   In the event this chapter conflicts with the Palm Beach County
Code of Ordinances or Florida State Statutes, the more strict provisions
shall control.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-31.  Running at large prohibited.



   No person owning, harboring or having in his or her possession any dog
or cat shall permit or allow such dog or cat to run at large within the City,
or allow such dog or cat to be upon any street, boulevard, road or alley of
city, unless accompanied by an attendant who shall have such dog or cat
firmly held by collar and leash, which leash shall not exceed eight feet in
length.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-32.  Leash law and presumptions.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner, keeper or
harborer of any dog, cat or household pet or other animal to permit or allow
such animal to be off such person's private property, unless such animal is
under the restraint or control of a competent person who is physically
capable of restraining and controlling the animal, by means of a chain,
leash, cage, or other humane means of restraint.  All dogs, cats, and other
household pets must be securely confined to the real property of the person
who is the owner, keeper or harborer of the animal.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-33.  Damaging property; presence in city owned park or recreation
areas prohibited.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person having
custody or control of any animal to permit, either willfully or by failure to
exercise due care and control, any animal to enter upon or damage the
property of the city or the property of another, whether said animal is
leashed or unleashed.  For purposes of this section, the leaving or dropping
of fecal matter by any animal upon the property of another, or upon the
property of the city, shall be deemed to cause damage thereupon.  If such
animal damages property as provided herein, the owner or other person having
custody or control of such animal shall be required to immediately remove and
dispose of such fecal matter or other droppings, and upon his failure to do
so, shall be fined in accordance with Section 2-91 of this Code.



   (b)   For purposes of this section, the property of the city shall
include but not be limited to any and all public streets, sidewalks, parks,
and buildings, including the lawns and driveways adjacent thereto. The term,
“property of another” shall include, but not be limited to driveways,
lawns, swales, and buildings of residential and commercial property owners.



   (c)   In the event that any animal shall cause damage upon the
property of the city or the property of another, proof of the occurrence and
proof of the identity of the owner or other person having custody or control
of the animal shall be sufficient to find the person owning of having control
or custody of the animal guilty of violating the terms and conditions of this
section.



   (d)   (1)   Notwithstanding the animal restrictions provided in
this section, dog owners are hereby authorized to bring and have possession
or control of leashed dogs within the following specified city parks, subject
to the limitations, restrictions, and regulations provided for herein:



         a.   Jaycee Park (excluding restrooms and playground
area);



         b.   Boynton Lakes Park (excluding playground area);



         c.   Dewey Park; and



         d.   Intracoastal Park (excluding restrooms. playground
and seawall/boat launching areas).



      For purposes of this section, a playground area shall mean an
improved area that is designed, equipped, and set aside for children's play.



      (2)   The authorization provided for herein for dog owners to
bring and have possession or control of leashed dogs in the specified city
parks is conditioned on and subject to strict compliance with the
limitations, restrictions, and regulations provided for herein and all
applicable provisions of the Animal Control Ordinances of the city and Palm
Beach County (cumulatively “Animal Control Ordinance”), including but not
limited to the following:



         a.   The authorized activities are limited to the posted
hours of operation for each respective park.



         b.   Dog owners are responsible for the conduct and
supervision of their dogs.



         c.   Dog owners must have their dog(s) under control at
all times and on a leash not longer than eight (8) feet in length.  Any dog
not on an appropriate leash is deemed “at large” and constitutes a
violation of Section 4-31 of this Code of Ordinances.



         d.   Dogs must be at least four (4) months old and have
all vaccinations and licenses required by Sections 4-30 , 4-36 and 4-37 of
this Code of Ordinances.  Failure to meet such vaccination and licensing
requirements constitutes a violation of the Animal Control Ordinance.



         e.   Dog owners must clean up and properly dispose of
their dog's waste.  Failure to do so constitutes a violation of the Animal
Control Ordinance.



         f.   Dog owners shall remove their dog from the park at
the first sign of aggression toward any person or other dog.



      (3)   For purposes of this section, the term dog owner shall
mean and include any person who brings or has possession or control of a dog
in any specified city park or area or as that term is otherwise defined in
Section 4-1 of this Code of Ordinances.  If such person is under the age of
eighteen (18) years or otherwise legally incapacitated, that person's parent
or guardian shall ensure compliance with all applicable limitations,
restrictions, and regulations by such person.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 2014-007, § 2, 6-3-14)



Sec. 4-34.  Bitches in heat.



   It shall be the responsibility of every animal owner to securely
confine a female animal in heat in a secure enclosure inaccessible to other
animals from the outside.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-35.  Restraint of guard dogs.



   (a)   Every owner of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog
confined in a building, compartment, or other enclosure.  Any such enclosure
shall be completely surrounded by a fence at least six (6) feet in height and
shall be topped with an anti-climbing device constructed of angle metal
braces with at least three (3) strands of equally separated barbed wire
attached between them.



   (b)   All anti-climbing devices shall extend inward at an angle of
not less than forty-five (45) degrees nor more than ninety (90) degrees when
measured from the perpendicular.



   (c)   The areas of confinement shall all have gates and entrances
thereto securely closed and locked, and all fences properly maintained and
escape proof.



   (d)   The provisions of this Section shall not apply to dogs owned
or controlled by government law enforcement agencies.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-36.  County registration, license required.



   (a)   Every person who is the owner, keeper or harborer of any dog
or cat, which is greater than four (4) months old shall secure from the
county, a licensed veterinarian, or by other lawful means, a tag or license
for each dog or cat, and shall comply with all county regulations.



   (b)   All dogs and cats shall be required to wear a tag, except as
may be otherwise specified in this article.  Any person to whom a tag and
license has been issued shall cause the tag to be securely fastened by a
substantial device about the dog or cat's neck so as to be clearly visible at
all times.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-37.  Rabies vaccinations.



   (a)   Every person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog or cat over the
age of four (4) months within the city shall have such dog or cat vaccinated
annually against the rabies virus with a vaccine approved by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture and produced or manufactured by authorities
licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and shall comply with all
provisions of the county code.



   (b)   The animal control officer shall have the authority to cause
the owners of other species to have particular species vaccinated against the
rabies virus at such times and in such areas within the city on the
recommendation of the county veterinarian to prevent and/or bring under
control any outbreak of disease which might constitute a threat to residents
of the city.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-38.  Violations; notice to appear; enforcement.



   (a)   Unless otherwise set forth in this Chapter, any violation of
any provision of this chapter is a civil infraction punishable with a maximum
civil penalty not to exceed $500.00.  The judge shall include all costs, if
any, incurred in the capture and impounding of such animal during the period
of its retention by Animal Control.



   (b)   A civil penalty of less than the maximum civil penalty is
appropriate if the person committing the civil infraction does not contest
the citation.



   (c)   Any person who has committed an act in violation of this
chapter shall receive a citation from the animal control officer or the law
enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that the person has
committed a civil infraction in violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (d)   Any person issued a citation shall have the opportunity to
contest the citation in the County Court of Palm Beach County.



   (e)   If the person fails to pay the civil penalty, fails to appear
in court to contest the citation, or fails to appear in court, or willfully
refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by an officer, the court may
issue an order to show cause upon request of the governing body of the
city.  This order shall require such person to appear before the court to
explain why action on the citation has not been taken.  If any person who is
issued such order fails to appear in response to the court's directive, that
person may be held in contempt of court.



   (f)   Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation
issued by an animal control officer or a law enforcement officer is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in Section 775.082
and Section 775.083, Florida Statutes.



   (g)   A surcharge of $5.00 is imposed for each civil penalty imposed
for each violation of the provisions of this chapter.  The proceeds of such
surcharge shall be used to pay for training of animal control officers.



(Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, 10-7-97)



Sec. 4-39.   Retail sale of dogs and/or cats.



   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:



      Animal rescue organization means a duly incorporated nonprofit
organization devoted to the welfare, protection, rescue, care, humane
treatment, and adoption of stray, abandoned, or surrendered animals, and
which does not breed animals. The term adoption does not include the sale of
an animal for profit.



      Animal shelter meas a state, county, municipal, or related public
shelter or duly incorporated nonprofit organization devoted to the rescue,
care, and adoption of stray, abandoned, or surrendered animals, and which
does not breed animals. The term adoption does not include the sale of an
animal for profit.



      Pet store or pet supply store means any retail establishment open
to the public that sells or transfers, or offers for sale or transfer, dogs
and/or cats regardless of the age of the dog or cat. Additionally, such
establishments may also be identified by the sale of animals other than those
from the Canidae or Felidae families that are traditionally considered to be
domestic pets and/or  the sale of grooming services and/or domestic pet
supplies and accessories (including but not limited to food, bedding, toys,
grooming products, collars, leashes and the like).



   (b)   Retail sales of dogs and/or cats prohibited. No pet store or
pet supply store shall display, sell, trade, deliver, barter, lease, rent,
auction, give away, transfer, offer for sale or transfer, or otherwise
dispose of dogs or cats within the city.



   (c)   Exemptions. This section does not apply to an animal shelter,
an animal rescue organization, or an animal shelter or animal rescue
organization that operates out of or in connection with a pet store or pet
supply store.



   (d)   Adoption of shelter and rescue animals. Nothing in this
section shall prevent a pet store or pet supply store, its owner, operator,
or employees from providing space and appropriate care for dogs and cats at
the store if such animals are owned by an animal shelter or animal rescue
organization and are maintained at the store for the purpose of adopting
those animals to the public.



   (e)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Any person who commits an act in violation of this
section may be prosecuted for such violation in accordance with Chapter 2,
Administration of this code, F.S. Ch. 162, and/or any other means of
enforcement available under state or federal law.



      (2)   The city may initiate a civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this section.



   (f)   Effective date. Any pet store or pet supply store that is
lawfully operating on the effective date of this section [from which this
section derives] shall be permitted to continue its sale of dogs and cats for
a period of time not to exceed eighteen (18) months from September 6, 2018,
to wit: March 5, 2020.



(Ord. No. 18-032, § 3, 12-4-18)



 


Notes

§ 13-22(11) 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor

§ 13-22(12) 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor

§ 13-22(175) 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor



Chapter 5
CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS



Art. I.   Regulation of Rates for Basic Service and Equipment, §§
5-1—5-5



Art. II.   Franchising and Licensing of Cable and Open Video Service
Providers, §§ 5-6—5-30



Art. IIA.   General Provisions, §§ 5-6—5-5



Art. IIB.   Special Rules Applicable to Open Video Systems and Open Video
System Operators, §§ 5-16—5-20



Art. IIC.   Special Rules Applicable to Cable Television Stations, §§
5-21—5-30



ARTICLE I. REGULATION OF RATES FOR BASIC SERVICE AND EQUIPMENT



Sec. 5-1.  Scope and applicability.



   This article governs the regulation of rates for basic service and
equipment within the city for any franchisee which has been notified that (a)
the city has been certified to regulate its basic service and equipment
rates; (b) the city has adopted regulations governing regulation of basic
service and equipment rates; and (c) the city desires to exercise its
regulatory authority.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)



Sec.  5-2—5-5.  Reserved.



ARTICLE II. FRANCHISING AND LICENSING OF CABLE AND OPEN VIDEO SERVICE
PROVIDERS



IIA. GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 5-6.  Definitions.



   (1)   Generally.   For the purposes of this article, the following
terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings given
herein, unless otherwise expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in
the plural number include the singular number; and words in the singular
number include the plural number; and the masculine gender includes the
feminine gender. "And" and "or" may be read conjunctively or disjunctively. 
The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Unless
otherwise expressly stated, words not defined in this article shall be given
the meaning set forth in 47 USC, and, if not defined therein, their common
and ordinary meaning. References to governmental entities (whether persons or
entities) refer to those entities or their successors in authority. If
specific provisions of law referred to herein are renumbered, then the
reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered provision. References to
laws, ordinances or regulations shall be interpreted broadly to cover
government actions, however nominated, and include laws, ordinances and
regulations now in force or hereinafter enacted or amended.



   (2)   Definitions.



      Affiliate, means a person that, (directly or indirectly), owns or
controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control
with, another person. 



      Cable service means:



         1.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i)
video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and



         2.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required
for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming
service.



      Cable System means a facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community,
but such terms does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit
the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a
facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (C) a
facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the
provisions of Title II (Common Carriers) of the Communications Act of 1934,
as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to
the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide
interactive on-demand services; or (D) any facilities of any electric utility
used solely for operating its electric utility systems; or (E) an open video
system that is certified by the FCC. A reference to a cable system includes
pedestals, equipment enclosures (such as equipment cabinets), amplifiers,
power guards, nodes, cables, fiber optics and other equipment necessary to
operate the cable system.



      Construction, operation or repair.  "Const- ruction, operation
or repair" and similar formulations of that term means the named actions
interpreted broadly, encompassing, among other things, installation,
extension, maintenance, replacement of components, relocation,
undergrounding, grading, site preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready,
and excavation.



      FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or its designee.



      Franchise refers to the authorization granted by the city to an
operator of a cable system or an open video system, giving the operator the
non-exclusive right to provide, through facilities maintained or operated
upon, across, beneath, or over any public right-of-way in the city, a
specified service within a franchise area. Any such authorization, in
whatever form granted, shall not mean or include: (i) any other permit or
authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a
business within the city required by the ordinances and laws of the city;
(ii) any permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with
operations on public streets or property including, without limitation,
permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other
structures, whether owned by the city or a private entity, or for excavating
or performing other work in or along public rights-of- way.



      Franchise Agreement means a contract entered into in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter between the city and a franchisee that
sets forth, subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a
franchise will be exercised. 



      Franchise area  means the area of the city that a franchisee is
authorized to serve by its Franchise Agreement.



       Franchisee refers to a person holding a franchise issued under
this chapter, or a franchise issued prior to this chapter, subject to the
provisions of Section 5-12 hereof.



      License refers to the legal authorization, terminable at will, to
use a particular, discrete and limited portion of the public rights-of-way.



      Open Video System, or "OVS", refers to a facility consisting of a
set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, which includes
video programming, which is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community, and which the Federal Communications Commission or its successor
has certified as compliant with Part 76 of the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission, 47 CFR 76, as amended from time-to-time.



      Operator, when used with reference to a system, refers to a
person (A) who provides service over a cable system or an open video system
and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in
such facility; or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through
any arrangement, the management and operation of such a facility. 



      Person includes any individual, corporation, partnership,
association, joint stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not
the city.



      Public rights-of-way means the surface, the air space above the
surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane,
path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, parkway, waterway,
public easement, or similar property in which the city now or hereafter holds
any property interest, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was
dedicated, may be used for the purpose of constructing, operating and
repairing a cable system or open video system. Public rights-of- way do not
include buildings, parks, or other property owned or leased by the city. No
reference herein, or in any franchise agreement, to a public right-of-way
shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its
interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to
permit its use for such purposes, and a franchisee shall be deemed to gain
only those rights to use as are properly in the city and as the city may have
the undisputed right and power to give.



      Telecommunications services means the transmission, for hire, of
information in electronic or optical form, including, but not limited to
voice, video, or data, whether or not the transmission medium is owned by the
provider itself.  "Telecommunications services" includes telephone service
but does not include over-the-air broadcasts to the public-at-large from
facilities licensed by the Federal Communications Commission or any successor
thereto.



      Transfer means any transaction in which:  (i)  all or a portion
of the cable system or open video system is sold or assigned (except a sale
or assignment that results in removal of a particular portion of the facility
from the public rights-of-way); (ii) there is any change, acquisition, or
direct or indirect transfer of control of the franchisee or licensee; or
(iii) the rights and/or obligations held by the franchisee or licensee under
the franchise or license are transferred, sold, assigned, or leased, in whole
or in part, directly or indirectly, to another party. In succeeding
provisions of this chapter, all these activities are referred to as franchise
transfers.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)



Sec. 5-7.  Franchise required.



   (1)   Every operator must obtain.  A cable operator must obtain a
franchise prior to constructing a cable system or providing cable service; an
operator of an open video system must obtain a franchise before constructing
an open video system or providing services via an open video system. No
franchise shall become effective without the franchisee entering into a
franchise agreement with the city. The fact that a cable system or open video
system may be used for multiple purposes does not obviate the need to obtain
a franchise, license, or other authorization for those other purposes. By way
of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must
obtain a cable franchise, and, should it intend to provide telecommunications
services over the same facilities, it must comply with requirements
applicable to providers of telecommunications services or to operators of
telecommunication facilities. 



   (2)    Purpose and characteristics.  The purpose of requiring
authorizations by service is to ensure as far as possible and appropriate
that persons providing similar services are treated similarly, considering
differences in circumstances, and to comply with requirements of federal law
which may require the city to separate its authority over cable systems or
open video systems from its authority over other providers of
telecommunications services, the city shall require individual franchises for
the provision of particular services. The revocation of a franchise for one
particular service in and of itself will not affect the authority of a
franchise holder to continue to provide services for which it holds other
franchises. No franchise shall be exclusive and competition shall be
encouraged. The issuance of a franchise shall not affect the city's right to
itself construct, operate, or repair any cable system or open video system,
with or without a franchise.



   (3)   Exceptions.  A franchise requirement may be waived for a
cable system or an open video system that is not designed to provide service
in the city, and that does not provide service in the city. For such
facilities, the city may issue a license. Every license shall require the
licensee to obtain a franchise if it is determined that the license is being
used in a manner that creates  a competitive advantage for that operator or
otherwise unduly discriminates in favor of such operator.  In any case, the
license must provide that if limitations of license are violated, the
licensee must pay the maximum franchise fee required by Articles IIB and IIC
and otherwise bring itself into compliance with this chapter.



   (4)   Nature of grant.  Neither a franchise nor a license shall
convey title, equitable or legal, in the rights-of-way. The right is only the
personal right to occupy rights-of-way, for the purposes and for the period
stated in the franchise or license; the right may not be subdivided or
subleased.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)  Penalty, see Section 5-11



Sec. 5-8.  Compensation required.



   (1)   Every operator must pay.  Every cable operator and every
operator of an open video system must pay a fee except as provided in Section
5-8(2). Except as provided in Section 5-8(2), this fee  shall be based upon
a percentage of gross revenues. 



   (2)   Exceptions.  The franchise fees required under Articles IIB
and IIC need not be paid if:



      (A)   State law or Charter requires otherwise; or during any
transition period for a current franchise holder. In cases subject to this
exception, the highest permissible fee shall be paid.



      (B)   In the case of a cable system or an open video system
that is not designed to provide service in the city, and that does not
provide service in the city.  The city shall establish a fee in lieu of the
fees specified in Articles IIB and IIC that recovers an amount equivalent to
the fair market value of the property used in the City and reserves the right
to charge additional fees as contemplated by Section 5-8(4). 



   (3)   Application to persons that provide different types of
services.  The fact that a fee is paid on one type of service provided over
a cable  or open video system, does not excuse an operator from its duty to
pay fees on other types of services provided over that facility.  As an
example, and not as a limitation of the foregoing, a cable operator that pays
a franchise fee on revenues derived from the provision of cable services must
pay the fees imposed upon telecommunication service providers to the extent
that it provides telecommunications services; likewise, the operator of a
telecommunications facility must pay a franchise fee to the extent it
provides cable services to subscribers via a cable system.



    (4)   General rules for payment of fees. 



      (A)   Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement or a
license, franchise and license fees shall be paid to the city quarterly, and
not later than forty-five (45) calendar days after the end of each calendar
quarter.



      (B)   Unless a franchise agreement or license provides
otherwise, each franchise or license fee payment shall be accompanied by a
statement showing the manner in which the fee was calculated.



      (C)   No acceptance by the city of any franchise or license
fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the
correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such franchise fee payment be
construed as a release of any claim the city may have for additional sums
payable.



      (D)   The franchise or license fee payment is not a payment in
lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically provided in
this title, or as required by applicable law.  By way of example, and not
limitation, permit fees and business license taxes are not waived and remain
applicable, and other fees and assessments to recover costs associated with
operating and maintaining the right-of-way that may be established from time
to time by resolution of the city commission. 



      (E)   Within ninety (90) calendar days following the end of
the calendar year, each person which paid a franchise fee based upon gross
revenues shall submit a statement, attested to by a certified public
accountant or the chief financial officer of such person, setting forth gross
revenues of the cable or open video  system, by category, and describing
what revenues were included and what revenues, if any, generated or derived
from operations in the city were excluded in the fee calculation, and any
adjustments made to gross revenues. If payments are late, in addition to
paying any applicable penalties or damages, the person that owes the fee
shall pay interest on the amount owed at the statutory interest rates
applicable to judgments. 



      (F)   The city may, upon five (5) business days advance
written notice, inspect and examine any and all books and records reasonably
necessary to the determination of whether fees have been accurately computed
and paid. 



      (G)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that a
person that is obligated to pay a fee ceases to provide service for any
reason (including as a result of a transfer), such person shall make a final
payment of any amounts owed to the city within ninety (90) calendar days of
the date its operations in the city cease, and shall provide a statement of
gross revenues for the calendar year through the dates operations ceased,
which statement shall contain the information and certification required by
Section 5-8(4)(E).



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)  Penalty, see Section 5-11



Sec. 5-9.  General conditions upon use of rights-of-way.



   (1)   Responsibility for costs.  Except as expressly provided
otherwise, any act that a cable or open video systems operator, its
contractors or subcontractors are required to perform under this section
shall be performed at their cost. If a cable or open video systems operator
fails to perform work that it is required to perform within the time provided
for performance, the city may perform the work, and bill the cable or open
video systems operator therefor.  The cable or open video systems operator
shall pay the amounts billed within thirty (30) calendar days.



   (2)   Construction procedures and placement of facilities;
obligation to minimize interference with use of rights-of-way.



      (A)   The construction, operation and repair of cable or open
video systems are subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the
city that have jurisdiction in such matters, and shall be performed in
compliance with all laws, ordinances, departmental rules and regulations and
practices affecting such system. By way of example, and not limitation, this
includes zoning codes and safety codes.  In addition, the construction,
operation and repair shall be performed in a manner consistent with high
industry standards. Persons engaged in the construction, operation or repair
of cable or open video systems shall exercise reasonable care in the
performance of all their activities, and use commonly accepted methods and
devices for preventing failures and accidents that are likely to cause
damage, injury, or nuisance to the public or to property.



      (B)   Construction, operation or repair of a cable or open
video system shall not commence until written permits, if required, have been
properly filed for and obtained from the proper city officials and all
required permits and associated permit fees paid. In any permit so issued,
the city may impose as a condition of the granting of the permit such
conditions and regulations as may be necessary to the management of the
right-of-way, including, by way of example and not limitation, for the
purpose of protecting any structures in the public rights-of-way, for the
proper restoration of such public rights-of-way and structures, and for the
protection of the city and the public and the continuity of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.



      (C)   Without limiting the foregoing, cable or open video
systems shall be constructed, operated and repaired in accordance with good
engineering practices. No work on the facilities shall be performed except by
experienced and properly trained personnel.  The operator of a cable or open
video system is responsible for all the acts of its contractors and
subcontractors, and for ensuring that its contractors and subcontractors
perform all work in compliance with this chapter and any applicable franchise
agreement. 



      (D)    Operators of cable or open video systems must follow
city-established requirements for placement of facilities in rights-of-way,
and must in any event install facilities in a manner that minimizes
interference with the use of the rights-of-way by others, including others
that may be installing communications facilities. The city may require that
facilities be installed at a particular time, place, or manner as a condition
of access to a particular right- of-way, and may require a person using the
right-of-way to cooperate with others to minimize adverse impacts on the
right-of-way through joint trenching and other arrangements.



      (E)   To the extent possible, operators of cable or open video
systems shall use existing poles and existing conduit in installing their
system.  In no case may additional poles be installed in the right-of- way
without the permission of the city; any person who is permitted to install
poles must lease capacity on those poles to others, at a rate not higher than
the rate that would be permitted if 47 USC 224 applied. 



      (F)   Except as city may direct otherwise, cable or open video
systems may be constructed overhead where poles exist and electric or lines
of a local exchange carrier franchised before 1990 are overhead, but where
both electric or such telephone lines are underground, or are being initially
placed underground (whether voluntarily or at the city's direction), other
cable or open video systems shall be constructed underground. Whenever and
wherever the owner of the poles upon which aerial facilities are located
moves its plant from overhead to underground placement in an area, all cable
or open video systems in that area shall be similarly moved underground. 



      (G)   Any and all public rights-of-way, public property, or
private property that is disturbed or damaged during the construction,
operation or repair of a cable or open video system shall be promptly
repaired by the cable or open video system's operator.



      (H)   Tree trimming shall be performed in strict accordance
with the City Code.



   (3)   Relocation of facilities.



      (A)   A cable or open video system operator shall, by a time
specified by the city, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or
remove any of its property when required by the city or any other
governmental entity by reason of traffic conditions; public safety; public
right-of-way construction; public right-of-way repair (including resurfacing
or widening); change of public right-of-way grade; construction, installation
or repair of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks,
or any other type of government-owned communications or cable or open video
system, public work or improvement of any government-owned utility; public
right-of- way vacation; or for any other purpose where the work involved
would be aided by the removal or relocation of the cable or open video
system. Collectively, such matters are referred to below as the “public
work.”



         1.   Except in the case of emergencies, the city shall
provide written notice describing where the public work is to be performed at
least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the deadline by which a cable or
open video system operator must protect, support, temporarily disconnect,
relocate or remove its facilities.  A cable or open video system operator
may seek an extension of the time to perform such tasks where they cannot be
performed in thirty (30) calendar days and such request for an extension
shall not be unreasonably refused.



         2.   In the event of an emergency, or where a cable or
open video system creates or is contributing to an imminent danger to health,
safety, or property, the city may protect, support, temporarily disconnect,
remove, or relocate any or all parts of the cable or open video system
without prior notice, and charge the cable or open video system operator for
costs incurred. In case of such emergency, where in the judgment of the city,
conditions permit, the city shall reasonably attempt to notify the cable or
open video system operator. 



      (B)   If any person that is authorized to place facilities in
the right-of-way requests another cable or open video system operator
receiving the request to protect, support, temporarily disconnect, remove, or
relocate its facilities to accommodate the construction, operation, or repair
of the facilities of such other person, the cable or open video system
operator shall, after thirty (30) calendar days' advance written notice, take
action to effect the necessary changes requested.  Unless the matter is
governed by a valid contract or a state or federal law or regulation, or in
other cases where the cable or open video system that is being requested to
move was not properly installed, the reasonable cost of the same shall be
borne by the party requesting the protection, support, temporary
disconnection, removal, or relocation and at no charge to the city.



      (C)   A cable or  open video  system operator shall,  on
the  request of  any person  holding a  valid permit issued by a
governmental authority,  temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the
moving of buildings or other objects. The expense of such temporary removal
or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the
same.  A cable or open video system operator shall be given not less than
seven (7) calendar days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire
changes.



      (D)   A cable or open video system operator may abandon any
property in place upon notice to the city, unless the city determines, in the
exercise of its reasonable discretion within ninety (90) calendar days of the
notice of abandonment from the operator, that the safety, appearance,
functioning or use of the public right-of-way and facilities in the public
right-of-way will be adversely affected thereby, in which case the operator
must remove its property within a reasonable period of time specified by the
city. 



      (E)   If a state statute requires the city to compensate a
person for the cost of relocation or removal, nothing in this chapter shall
be read to abrogate any right such person may have to that compensation.



   (4)   Facility subject to inspection; operator must provide
information.  Every cable or open video system shall be subject to the right
of periodic inspection and testing by the city to determine compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, a franchise or license agreement, or other
applicable law. The city shall have the right, upon written request, to be
notified and present when the cable or open video system is tested by the
operator for its semi-annual FCC testing. Each operator must respond to
requests for information regarding its system and plans for the system as the
city may from time to time issue, including requests for information
regarding its plans for construction, operation and repair and the purposes
for which the plant is being constructed, operated or repaired. 



   (5)   Underground services alert.  Each operator of a cable or open
video system that places facilities underground shall be a member of the
regional notification center for subsurface installations (underground
services alert) and shall field mark the locations of its underground cable
or open video system upon request. The operator shall locate its facilities
for the city at no charge.



   (6)   Publicizing Work. 



      (A)   A cable or open video system operator shall publicize
the initial build or any substantial rebuild, upgrade, or extension of its
facility that involves work in public rights-of-way in each affected
neighborhood at least one (1) week prior to commencement of that work by
causing written notice of such construction work to be delivered to the city
and by notifying those persons whose property is within 300 feet of the work
in at least two (2) of the following ways: by telephone, in person, by mail,
by distribution of flyers to residences, by publication in local newspapers,
or in any other manner reasonably calculated to provide adequate notice.
Apart from any initial build or substantial rebuild or upgrade, any
underground construction will be publicized in accordance with applicable
notice requirements. In other cases, before entering onto any private
property to perform work, a cable or open video system operator shall use its
best efforts to contact the property owner or (in the case of residential
property) the resident at least one (1) day in advance, and describe the work
to be performed.



      (B)   Each cable or open video system owner shall provide the
city a plan for any initial system construction, or for any substantial
rebuild, upgrade or extension of its facility, which shall show its timetable
for construction of each phase of the project, and the areas of the city that
will be affected.



   (7)   No discrimination.



      (A)   A cable or open video system operator shall not deny
service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers,
programmers, or residents of the city on the basis of race, color, creed,
national origin, sex, age, conditions of physical handicap, religion, ethnic
background, marital status, or sexual orientation.



      (B)   A cable or open video system operator shall not
discriminate among persons or the city or take any retaliatory action against
a person or the city because of that entity's exercise of any right it may
have under federal, state, or local law, nor may the operator require a
person or the city to waive such rights as a condition of taking service.



      (C)   A cable or open video system operator shall not deny
access or levy different rates and charges on any group of potential
customers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which
such group resides.



      (D)   A cable or open video system operator shall comply with
all federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing equal employment
opportunities, as the same may be from time to time amended.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)  Penalty, see Section 5-11



Sec. 5-10.  Protection of the city and residents.



   (1)   Indemnification.



      (A)   The city may not enter into any franchise, or otherwise
authorize any cable or open video system operator to use the public
rights-of-way, until and unless the city obtains an adequate indemnity from
such operator. The indemnity must at least:



         1.   Release the city from and against any and all
liability and responsibility in or arising out of the construction, operation
or maintenance of the cable or open video system. 



         2.   Indemnify and hold harmless the city, its trustees,
elected and appointed officers, agents, and employees, from and against any
and all claims, demands, or causes of action of whatsoever kind or nature,
and the resulting losses, costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys' fees,
reasonable paralegal expenses, liabilities, damages, orders, judgments, or
decrees, sustained by the city or any third party arising out of, or by
reason of, or resulting from or of the acts, errors, or omissions of the
cable or open video system operator, or its agents, independent contractors
or employees related to or in any way arising out of  the construction,
operation or repair of the facility.



         3.   Provide that the covenants and representations
relating to the indemnification provision shall survive the term of any
agreement and continue in full force and effect as to the party's
responsibility to indemnify.



   (2)   Insurance.  The city may not enter into any franchise, or
otherwise authorize any cable or open video system operator to use the public
rights-of-way, until and unless the city obtains assurance that such operator
(and those acting on its behalf) have adequate insurance. At a minimum, the
following requirements must be satisfied.



      (A)   A cable or open video system operator shall not commence
construction or operation of the facility without obtaining all insurance
required under this section and approval of such insurance by Risk Management
of the city, nor shall a cable or open video system operator allow any
contractor or subcontractor to commence work on its contract or subcontract
until all similar insurance required of the same has been obtained and
approved. The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the
entire period the cable or open video system operator has facilities in the
right-of-way, and for a period thereafter as specified in the minimum
coverages described below. If the operator, its contractors or subcontractors
do not have the required insurance, the city may order such entities to stop
operations until the insurance is obtained and approved.



      (B)   Certificates of insurance, reflecting evidence of the
required insurance, shall be filed with the Risk Manager Coordinator. For
entities that are entering the market, the certificates shall be filed prior
to the commencement of construction and once a year thereafter, and as
provided below in the event of a lapse in coverage. For entities that have
facilities in the right-of-way as of the effective date of this chapter, the
certificate shall be filed within sixty (60) calendar days of the adoption of
this chapter, annually thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a
lapse in coverage, unless a pre-existing franchise agreement provides for
filing of certificates in a different manner.



      (C)   These certificates of insurance shall contain a
provision that coverages afforded under these policies will not be canceled
until at least thirty (30) calendar days prior written notice has been given
to the city. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business
under the laws of the State of Florida. Financial ratings must be no less
than "A" in the latest edition of Best's Key Rating Guide, published by A.M.
Best Guide.



      (D)   In the event that the insurance certificate provided
indicates that the insurance shall terminate or lapse during the period of
this contract, then in that event, the cable or open video system operator
shall furnish, at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the expiration of
the date of such insurance, a renewed certificate of insurance as proof that
equal and like coverage for the balance of the period of the franchise or
license under which cable or open video system operates.



      (E)   A cable or open video system operator, and its
contractors or subcontractors engaged in work on the operator's behalf in,
on, under or over public rights-of-way, shall maintain the following minimum
insurance:



         1.   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance to cover
liability bodily injury and property damage. Exposures to be covered are:
premises, operations, products/completed operations, and certain contracts.
Coverage must be written on an occurrence basis, with the following limits of
liability:



            Bodily Injury.



               Each Occurrence:  $1,000,000



               Annual Aggregate:  $3,000,000



            Property Damage.



               Each Occurrence:  $1,000,000



               Annual Aggregate:  $3,000,000



            Personal Injury.



               Annual Aggregate:  $3,000,000



      Completed Operations and Products Liability shall be maintained
for two (2) years after the termination of the franchise agreement or license
agreement (in the case of the cable or open video system operator) or
completion of the work for the cable or open video system operator (in the
case of a contractor or subcontractor).



      Property Damage Liability Insurance shall include coverage for
the following hazards: X – explosion, C – Collapse, U – underground.



         2.   Workers' Compensation Insurance shall be maintained
during the life of this contract to comply with statutory limits for all
employees, and in the case any work is sublet, each cable or open video
system operator shall require the subcontractors similarly to provide
Workers' Compensation Insurance for all the latter's employees, unless such
employees are covered by the protection afforded by each cable or open video
system operator.  Each cable or open video system operator and its
contractors and subcontractors shall maintain, during the life of this
policy, Employers Liability Insurance.  The following limits must be
maintained:



            Workers' Compensation:  Statutory



            Employer's Liability:  $500,000 per occurrence



         3.   Comprehensive Auto Liability.



            Bodily Injury.



               Each Occurrence:  $1,000,000



               Annual Aggregate:  $3,000,000



            Property Damage.



               Each Occurrence:  $1,000,000



               Annual Aggregate:  $3,000,000



   Coverage shall include owned, hired and non- owned vehicles.



      (F)   Each cable or open video system operator shall hold the
city, its agents, and employees, harmless on account of claims for damages to
persons, property or premises arising out of its construction, operation or
repair of its cable or open video system and name the city as an additional
insured.



   (3)   Performance/payment bonds. Every operator of a cable or open
video system may be required to obtain performance bonds and, if necessary, 
payment bonds to ensure the faithful performance of its responsibilities
under this chapter and any franchise agreement or license for an initial
build, any substantial rebuild, upgrade, or extension of its facility, or
when construction plans show that there would be more than one thousand
(1,000) feet of open trenching in the right-of-way at any given time. The
amount of the performance and payment bonds shall be set by the city manager
in light of the nature of the work to be performed, and is not in lieu of any
additional bonds that may be required through the permitting process. The
bond shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney. The city may, from
time to time, increase the amount of the required performance bond to reflect
increased risks to the city and to the public.



   (4)    Security fund.  Every cable or open video system operator
shall establish a $25,000 cash security fund, or provide the city an
irrevocable letter of credit in the same amount, to secure the payment of
fees owed, to secure any other performance promised in a franchise agreement,
and to pay any taxes, fees or liens owed to the city. The letter of credit
shall be in a form and with an institution acceptable to the city attorney
and director of financial management.  Should the city draw upon the cash
security fund or letter of credit, it shall promptly notify the cable or open
video system operator, and the cable or open video system operator shall
promptly restore the fund or the letter of credit to the full required
amount. This security fund/letter of credit may be waived or reduced by the
city for a franchisee or licensee where the city determines in its discretion
that a particular franchisee's or licensee's operations are sufficiently
limited that a $25,000 security fund/letter of credit is not necessary to
secure the required performance.  The city may, from time to time, upon
reasonable notice and after the cable or open video system operator has had
an opportunity to respond thereto,  increase the amount of the required
security fund/letter of credit to reflect increased risks to the city and to
the public.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)  Penalty, see Section 5-11



Sec. 5-11.  Enforcement and remedies.



   (1)   Administration. The city manager or its designee is
responsible for enforcing and administering this chapter, and the city
manager or its designee is authorized to give any notice required by law or
under any franchise agreement, including by way of example and not
limitation, a notice required under 47 USC 626.  The city manager or its
designee is also authorized to seek information from any cable or open
video  system operator, to establish forms for submission of applications
and other information, and to take all other actions necessary or appropriate
to the administration of this chapter. Franchises may only be issued or
revoked by action of the city commission.



   (2)   Application for a franchise. 



      (A)   An application must be filed for an initial franchise or
license; for a transfer; or for renewal of a franchise or license. Each
entity that is required to hold a franchise or license must submit an
application therefore to the financial management department or as otherwise
designated by the city, in accordance with the requirements of Articles IIB
and IIC. To be accepted for filing, an original and six (6) copies of a
complete application must be submitted to the purchasing division, financial
management department. All applications shall be available for public
inspection. All applications shall include the names and addresses of persons
authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application.



      (B)   An application may be filed by any person on that
person's own initiative or in response to a request for proposals. The
purchasing administrator is authorized to issue requests for proposals from
time to time. 



      (C)   Every application shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee in amounts established from time to time by the city
commission by resolution.



      (D)   An applicant that is awarded a franchise or license
shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all
publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of a
franchise or license pursuant to the provisions of this article. Such payment
shall be made within thirty (30) calendar days after the city furnishes the
franchisee or licensee with a written statement of such expenses by delivery
of same to the city clerk.



      (E)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter,
pledges in trust or mortgages of the assets of a franchised or licensed cable
or open video system to secure the construction, operation or repair of the
system may be made without application and without the city's prior consent;
except that no such arrangement may be made if it would in any respect under
any condition prevent the cable or open video system operator or any
successor from complying with the franchise or license and applicable law,
nor may any such arrangement permit a third party to succeed to the interest
of the operator, or to own or control the cable or open video system without
the prior consent of the city. Any mortgage, pledge or lease shall be subject
and subordinate to the rights of the city under this chapter or other
applicable law.



   (3)   Minimum contents of every franchise or license.  In addition
to satisfying the other applicable requirements of Article II, every
franchise agreement or license for a cable or open video system shall contain
the following provisions:



      (A)   The franchise agreement or license shall provide that
neither the granting of any franchise or license, or any provision thereof,
shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or
power, police power, or regulatory power of the city as may exist at the time
the franchise is issued or thereafter be obtained.



      (B)   The franchise agreement or license shall only authorize
occupancy of the right-of-way to provide the services and for the purposes
described in the franchise or license.



      (C)   A franchise or license shall be a privilege that is held
in the public trust and personal to the original franchisee. The franchise
agreement or license shall ensure that no transfer of the franchise or
license may occur, directly or indirectly, without the prior consent of the
city; except as contemplated by Section 5-11(2)(E).



      (D)   The franchise agreement or license shall ensure that any
person placing a cable or open video system in the right-of-way will not
discriminate in hiring, in contracting, or in the provision of services.



      (E)   The  franchise agreement or license shall contain
appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and protection of the
public, consistent with the other provisions of this chapter.



      (F)   The franchise or license shall be for a specified term,
set forth in the franchise agreement or license. No franchise issued under
this chapter shall be for a term of longer than ten (10) years; no license
issued under this chapter shall be for a term of longer than five (5) years. 



   (4)    Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be fined for each day the violation continues in accordance
with Chapter 162 of the 1996 Florida Statutes, as amended. 



   (5)   Revocation, reduction of term, or forfeiture of franchise or
license.



      (A)   Licenses shall be revocable at the will of the city
commission.



      (B)   Where, after notice and providing the franchisee an
opportunity to be heard (if such opportunity is timely requested by a
franchisee), the city finds that the facility is being operated in violation
of this chapter or substantial violation of the terms of the franchise
agreement, the city may make an appropriate reduction in the remaining term
of the franchise or to revoke the franchise. The city manager is authorized
to establish and conduct a proceeding that comports with the requirements of
this Section 5-11(5)(B), and to issue a recommended decision, but any such
decision may be appealed to the city commission. Any appeal must be filed
within thirty (30) calendar days of the decision of the city manager or it
shall be deemed waived. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchise may not
be revoked unless the franchisee:



         1.   Was given notice of the default;



         2.   Was given thirty (30) calendar days to cure the
default; and



         3.   Failed to cure the default, or to propose a
schedule for curing the default acceptable to the city where it is impossible
to cure the default in thirty (30) calendar days. 



      The required notice may be given before the city conducts the
proceeding required by this section. No opportunity to cure is required for
repeated violations, and fraud shall be deemed incurable. 



      (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may declare a
franchise forfeited where the franchisee:



         1.   Fails to begin to exercise its rights under the
franchise within a period specified in the franchise agreement;



         2.   Stops providing service it is required to provide
in the franchise;



         3.   Without the prior consent of the city, transfers
the franchise; or



         4.   Fails to pay any fees required hereunder,
including, but not limited to, application fees, permit fees, or franchise
fees. 



      (D)   The city shall give a franchisee thirty (30) calendar
days notice of an intent to declare a franchise forfeited, and shall provide
the franchisee an opportunity to show cause why the franchise should not be
forfeited.



      (E)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any franchise may, at the
option of the city following a public hearing before the city commission, be
revoked one hundred twenty (120) calendar days after an assignment for the
benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over
the business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization,
bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or
proceeding, unless within that one hundred twenty (120) calendar day period:



         1.   Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has
been vacated; or



         2.   Such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully
complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise
agreement and has executed an agreement, approved by a court having
jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions
of this chapter and the franchise agreement.



      (F)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of
foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment or
property of a franchisee, the city may revoke the franchise, following a
public hearing before the city commission, by serving notice upon the
franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the
franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise will be revoked and
will terminate thirty (30) calendar days after serving such notice, unless:



         1.   The city has approved the transfer of the franchise
to the successful bidder; and



         2.   The successful bidder has coven- anted and agreed
with the city to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the
franchise agreement and this chapter.



   (6)   Effect of termination or forfeiture.  Upon termination or
forfeiture of a license or franchise, whether by action of the city as
provided above, or by passage of time, the franchisee or licensee shall be
obligated to cease using the cable or open video system for the purposes
authorized by the franchise.  The city may either take possession of some or
all of the licensee's or franchisee's facilities in the public rights-of-way
after furnishing the cable or open video system operator with written notice
and granting the cable or open video system operator a reasonable period of
time, but in no event more than thirty (30) calendar days, to remove same, or
require the licensee or franchisee or its bonding company to remove some or
all of the licensee's or franchisee's facilities from the public
rights-of-way and restore the public rights- of-way to their proper
condition. Should the franchisee or licensee neglect, refuse, or fail to
remove such facility, the city may remove the facility at the expense of the
franchisee or licensee. The obligation of the licensee or franchisee to
remove shall survive the termination of the franchise or license for a period
of two (2) years. Provided that the city may not take possession of, or
require the franchisee or licensee to remove, any facilities that are used to
provide another service for which the franchisee holds a valid franchise or
license issued by the city.



   (7)   Remedies cumulative.  All remedies under this chapter and any
franchise agreement are cumulative unless otherwise expressly stated. The
exercise of one remedy shall not foreclose use of another, nor shall the
exercise of a remedy or the payment of liquidated damages or penalties
relieve a cable or open video system operator of its obligations to comply
with its franchise. Remedies may be used singly or in combination; in
addition, the city may exercise any rights it has at law or equity. Recovery
by the city of any amounts under insurance, the performance bond, the
security fund or letter of credit, or otherwise does not limit a cable or
open video system operator's duty to indemnify the city in any way; nor shall
such recovery relieve a cable or open video system operator of its
obligations under a franchise, limit the amounts owed to the city, or in any
respect prevent the city from exercising any other right or remedy it may
have. Nothing herein shall be read to authorize the double-recovery of
damages.



   (8)   Access to books and records.



      (A)   Each cable or open video system operator shall, upon
thirty (30) calendar days, if reasonably possible, but in no event less than
five (5) business days written notice, provide the city access to all books
and records related to the construction, operation, or repair of the cable or
open video system so that the city may inspect these books and records.  Any
and all non-proprietary or non-confidential books and records may be copied
by the city. The operators' obligation includes the obligation to produce all
books and records related to revenues derived from the operation of the cable
or open video system. An operator is responsible for obtaining or maintaining
the necessary possession or control of all books and records related to the
construction, operation or repair of the cable or open video system, so that
it can produce the documents upon request. Books and records must be
maintained for a period of five (5) years, except that any record that is a
public record must be maintained for the period required by state law; and a
franchise may specify a shorter period for certain categories of voluminous
books and records where the information contained therein can be derived
simply from other materials.



      (B)   For purposes of this chapter, the terms "books and
records" shall be read expansively to include information in whatever format
stored. Books and records requested shall be produced to the city at City
Hall, except by agreement or pursuant to Section 5-11(8)(C).



      (C)   If any books and records are too voluminous, or for
security reasons cannot be copied and moved, then a cable or open video
system operator may request that the inspection take place at some other
location mutually agreed to by the city and the operator, provided that the
operator must make necessary arrangements for copying documents selected by
the city after its review; and the operator must pay all travel and
additional copying expenses incurred by the city in inspecting those
documents or having those documents inspected by its designee.



      (D)   Without limiting the foregoing, the operator of a cable
or open video system shall provide the city the following within ten (10)
calendar days of their receipt or (in the case of documents created by the
operator or its affiliate) filing:



         1.   Notices of deficiency or forfeiture related to the
operation of the cable or open video system, and 



         2.   Copies of any request for protection under
bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy by
the franchisee or by any partnership or corporation that owns or controls the
franchisee directly or indirectly. 



   (9)   Retention of records; relation to privacy rights.  Each cable
or open video system operator shall take all reasonable steps required, if
any, to ensure that it is able to provide the city all information which must
be provided or may be requested under this chapter, a franchise agreement, or
applicable law, including by providing appropriate subscriber privacy
notices. Each operator shall be responsible for reacting any data that
applicable law prevents it from providing to the city. Nothing in this
section shall be read to require an operator to violate state or federal law
protecting subscriber privacy.



      (10)   Reports.  The city may require operators of a cable or
open video system to maintain records, and to prepare reports relevant to
determining the compliance of the cable or open video system operator with
the terms and conditions of this chapter and a franchise agreement. 



      (11)   Maps.  Each cable or open video system operator shall
maintain accurate maps and improvement plans which show the location, size,
and a general description of all facilities installed in the rights-of-way
and any power supply sources (including voltages and connections). Maps shall
be based upon post-construction (as-built) inspection to verify location. The
operator of each cable or open video system shall provide a map to the city
showing the location of its facilities, in such detail and scale as may be
directed by the city engineer. New maps shall be promptly submitted to the
city when the facility expands or is relocated. Copies of maps shall be
provided on disk, in a format specified by the city engineer.



      (12)   Compliance with laws.  Each franchisee shall comply
with all applicable laws heretofore and hereafter adopted or established
during the entire term of its franchise.



      (13)   Reservation of authority.  The city may do all things
which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under
this article. The city manager or its designee is hereby authorized and
empowered to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy involving
performance or charges arising from the operations of any franchisee under
this article on behalf of the city. The city commission may accept, reject or
modify the decision of the city manager, and the city commission may adjust,
settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the
operations of any franchisee or from any provision of this article.



      (14)   No waiver.  The failure of the city to insist on
timely performance or compliance by any person holding a license or franchise
shall not constitute a waiver of the city's right to later insist on timely
performance or compliance by that person or any other person holding such a
license or franchise.



      (15)   Ordinance not a contract.  The city expressly reserves
the right to amend this chapter from time to time in the exercise of its
lawful powers. This and any ordinance adopting provisions of this chapter
shall not be construed to be a contract.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 02-033, § 1, 8-20-02)



Sec. 5-12.  Transitional provisions.



   (1)   Persons operating without a franchise or license.  The
operator of any facility, the operation of which is required to be franchised
or licensed under this chapter, shall have three months from the effective
date of this chapter to file one or more applications for a franchise or a
license under this chapter.



   (2)   Persons holding franchises or licenses.  Any person holding
an outstanding franchise from the city for a cable system to provide
specified services may continue to operate under the existing franchise to
the conclusion of its present term (but not any renewal or extension thereof)
with respect to those activities expressly authorized by the franchise or
license;  provided, however, that such franchisee or licensee may elect at
any time to apply for a superseding franchise or license under this chapter,
and must seek additional franchises or licenses to provide other services.
Provided further, that licenses that are revocable at will may be revoked by
the city, and the licensee may be required to obtain a new license under this
chapter.



   (3)    Persons with pending applications.  Pending applications
shall be subject to this chapter. A person with a pending application shall
be provided thirty (30) calendar days from the effective date of this chapter
to submit additional information to comply with the requirements of this
governing applications chapter.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)  Penalty, see Section 5-11



Sec. 5-13.  Special rules for government entities.



   Nothing herein requires the city to apply the provisions of these
articles to a government entity if the city determines that it is not in the
public interest to do so, and nothing in this chapter shall be read to
require a government entity to comply with this chapter, where the city
cannot enforce the chapter against such entity as a matter of law.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)



Secs. 5-14.—5-15. Reserved.



IIB.  SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM
OPERATORS



Sec. 5-16.  Application for a franchise.



   (1)   Contents of application for initial or renewal franchise.  In
order to obtain an initial or renewal franchise, an operator of an open video
system must apply for a franchise. The application must contain the following
information, and such information as the city may from time to time require.



      (A)   Identity of the applicant, the persons who exercise
working control over the applicant and the persons who control those persons,
to the ultimate parent.



      (B)   A proposal for construction of the open video system
that sets forth at least the following:



         1.   A description of the services that are to be
provided over the facility.



         2.   The location of proposed facility and facility
design, including a description of the miles of plant to be installed, where
it is to be located, and the size of facilities and equipment that will be
located in, on, over, or above the rights-of-way.



         3.   Identification of the area of the city to be served
by the proposed system, including a description of the proposed franchise
area's boundaries.



      (C)   A description of the manner in which the system will be
installed, and the time required to construct the system, and the expected
effect on right- of-way usage, including information on the ability of the
rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed system, including, as appropriate
given the system proposed, an estimate of the availability of space in
conduits and an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of
existing facilities.



      (D)   A description, where appropriate, of how services will
be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and what will be
done with existing facilities.



      (E)   Proof in the form of financial statements, attested to
by a certified public accountant, that the applicant has the financial
resources to complete the proposed project, and to construct, operate and
repair the proposed facility over the franchise term. It is not the intent of
the city to require an applicant to prove that the services it proposed to
offer will succeed in the marketplace. 



      (F)   Proof that applicant is technically qualified to
construct, operate and repair the proposed facility. At a minimum, the
applicant must show that it has experience or resources to ensure that work
is to be performed adequately, and can respond to emergencies during and
after construction is complete.



      (G)   Proof that the applicant is legally qualified, which
proof must include a demonstration that the applicant:



         1.   Has received, or is in a position to receive,
necessary authorizations from state and federal authorities;



         2.   Has not engaged in conduct (fraud, racketeering,
violation of antitrust laws, consumer protection laws, or similar laws) that
allows city to conclude the applicant cannot be relied upon to comply with
requirements of franchise, or provisions of this article;



         3.   Was not a convicted vendor thirty-six (36) months
or fewer prior to the date of the application pursuant to Chapter 287,
Florida Statutes, or was removed from the convicted vendor list pursuant to
Section 287.133, Florida Statutes;



         4.   Is willing to enter into a franchise, to pay
required compensation and to abide by the provisions of applicable law,
including those relating to the construction, operation or maintenance of its
facilities, and has not entered into any agreement that would prevent it from
doing so.



      (H)   An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or
authorized officer thereof certifying the truth and accuracy of the
information in the application, and certifying that the application meets all
requirements of applicable law.



   (2)   Additional information regarding affiliates; presumptions. 
To the extent that the applicant is in any respect relying on the financial
or technical resources of another person, including another affiliate, the
proofs required by Section 5-16(1)(C)-(E) should be provided for that person.
An applicant will be presumed to have the requisite financial, or technical
or legal qualifications to the extent such qualifications have been reviewed
and approved by a state agency of competent jurisdiction; or if applicant is
a holder of a franchise in the city for a cable system or open video system,
and conduct under such other franchise provides no basis for additional
investigation. 



   (3)    Applications for transfer.  An application for a transfer of
a franchise must contain same information required by Section 5-16(1), except
that, if the transferor submitted an application pursuant to Section 5-16(1),
to the extent information provided by the transferor under Section 5-16(1)
remains accurate, the transferee may simply cross-reference the earlier
application.



   (4)   City review.  The city may request such additional
information as it finds necessary, and require such modifications to the
application as may be necessary in the exercise of the city's authority over
open video systems. Once the information required by the city has been
provided, the application shall be promptly reviewed and shall be granted if
the city finds that:



      (A)   The applicant has the qualifications to construct,
operate and repair the system proposed in conformity with applicable law. The
city shall provide a reasonable opportunity to an applicant to show that it
would be inappropriate to deny it a franchise under Section 5-16(1)(G)2, by
virtue of the particular circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps
taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their
recurrence, the lack of involvement of the applicant's principals, or the
remoteness of the matter from the operation of an open video system. An
application for a franchise area shall not be granted if the franchisee has
no plans for constructing a system within the entire area for which the
franchise is sought.



      (B)   The applicant accepts the modifications required by the
city to its proposed system. This section shall not be read to authorize the
city to exercise authority it does not otherwise have under applicable law.



      (C)   The applicant enters into a franchise agreement and
complies with any conditions precedent to its effectiveness.



      (D)   In the case of a transfer, the city must also determine
that:



         1.   There will be no adverse effect on the public
interest, or the city's interest in the franchise;



         2.   Transferee agrees to be bound by all the conditions
of the franchise and to assume all the obligations of its predecessor;  and



         3.   Any outstanding compliance and compensation issues
are resolved or preserved to the satisfaction of the city.



      (E)   An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it
files, or in the previous three years, filed materially misleading
information in a franchise application; or intentionally withheld information
that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.



   (5)   Compensation.  Every operator of an open video system shall
pay compensation to the city as follows:



      (A)   To the extent that the system is used to provide cable
services: a percentage of gross revenues (as that term is defined in Article
IIC as if the open video system operator were a cable operator) each quarter
equal to the gross revenue percentage paid by any cable operator for the same
quarter. In addition, unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, an
open video system operator shall pay to the city, at a time directed by the
city, an amount equal to the highest amount contributed by any cable operator
under its franchise for and in support of public, educational and government
use (including institutional network use) of its cable system. To the extent
that a cable operator is providing other support for public, educational or
governmental use, the operator must duplicate that support within a time and
in a manner directed by the city, or provide a cash equivalent acceptable to
the city. In applying this section, the city shall ensure that the
obligations borne by the open video system operator are no greater or lesser
than the obligation imposed upon the cable operator providing the greatest
benefits to the community. The compensation required under this section or
specified in a franchise shall increase as the compensation that a cable
operator is required to provide (in cash and in other forms) increases.



      (B)   To the extent that the open video system is used for the
provision of telecommunications services, the open video system operator
shall pay the fee required of a telecommunications service provider. 



      (C)   Such other compensation as the city may charge in the
future, consistent with federal or state law, including fees imposed upon
open video system lessees. 



   (6)   Customer Service Standard Certification.  An open video
system that enters into an agreement to comply with the customer service
standards applicable to cable systems may be certified by the city as
"Consumer Friendly - CITY OF BOYNTON BEACH" for so long as it complies with
those requirements.



   (7)   Every cable or open video system and every cable or open video
system operator shall be required to interconnect with every other cable or
open video system and cable or open video system operator within the city on
fair and reasonable terms for purposes of providing PEG and I-Net services.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00) Penalty, see Section 5-11



Secs. 5-17 – 5-20  Reserved.



IIC.  SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS



Sec. 5-21.  Definitions.



   Access channel means any capacity on a cable system set aside by a
franchisee for public, educational, or governmental use.



   Basic cable service or basic service means any service tier that
includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.



   Cable Act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 USC 521
et seq., as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, as further amended by the Telecommunications Act of
1996, as further amended from time to time.



   Equitable price means fair market value adjusted downward for the harm
to the city or subscribers, if any, resulting from a franchisee's breach of
its franchise agreement or violation of this chapter and as further adjusted
to account for other equitable factors that may be considered consistent with
47 USC 547.



   Fair market value  means the price for the cable system valued as a
going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself.



   Governmental access channel means any capacity on a cable system set
aside by a franchisee for government use.



   Gross revenues means any and all cash or other consideration of any
cable operator of a cable system in any way derived from the operation of
that cable system  to provide cable services in the franchise area.  Gross
revenues include, by way of illustration and not limitation, monthly fees
charged subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per-channel, or
per-program service; installation, disconnection, reconnection, and
change-in-service fees; leased channel fees; late fees and administrative
fees; revenues received from programmers for carriage of programming on the
cable system (excluding money received from programmers which is passed
through to offset the cost of launching the service including equipment
expense and cost, advertising expense as well as other pass through incomes
for advertising or marketing such programming); revenues from rentals or
sales of converters or other equipment; advertising revenues; revenues from
program guides; and revenues from home shopping channels. Home shopping
revenue shall be based on the number of homes in a zip code area provided
that where a common zip code serves more than one city, the revenues from
that zip code shall be allocated based on the number of homes in the zip code
area attributable to the city divided by the total homes in the zip code
area. This provision shall be read broadly to prevent the avoidance of
franchise fees by a cable operator through arrangements with affiliates.
Gross revenues shall not include any taxes on services furnished by a
franchisee which are imposed directly on any subscriber or user by the state,
city, or other governmental unit and which are collected by a franchisee on
behalf of said govern- mental unit; bad debt expense; subscriber deposits in
segregated accounts; or copyright fees. If an amount written off as bad debt
is recovered, or if a deposit is applied to unpaid service revenues, said
amount shall be included in the gross revenue base. 



   Non-cable service means any service that is authorized to be
distributed over the cable system, other than a cable service. 



   Public access channel  means any capacity on a cable system set aside
by a franchisee for use by the general public, including groups and
individuals, and which is available for such use on a non- discriminatory
basis.



   Service tier  means a package of two or more cable services for which
a separate charge is made by the franchisee, other than a package of premium
and pay-per-view services that is not subject to rate regulation under the
Cable Act and applicable FCC regulations because those services are also sold
on a true à la carte basis.



   Subscriber means the city, any government entity or any person who
legally receives any cable service from a cable operator delivered over that
cable operator’s cable system.



   User  means a person or the city utilizing a channel, capacity or
equipment and facilities for purposes of producing or transmitting material,
as contrasted with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)



Sec. 5-22.  No exclusivity.



   A franchisee may not require a subscriber or a building owner or
manager to enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of providing or
continuing service. However, nothing herein prevents a franchisee from
entering into an otherwise lawful, mutually desired exclusive arrangement
with a building owner or manager of a multiple dwelling unit or commercial
subscriber.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)  Penalty, see Section 5-11



Sec. 5-23.  Relation to 47 USC 545—546.



   This Article IIC shall be read and applied so that it is consistent
with Sections 625 and 626 of the Cable Act, 47 USC 545—546.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)



Sec. 5-24.  Applications for grant, renewal, or modification of franchise.



   (1)   Written application.



      (A)   A written application shall be filed with the city for
grant of an initial franchise; renewal of a franchise under 47 USC
546(a)-(g); or modification of a franchise agreement pursuant to this chapter
or a franchise agreement. A request for renewal may also be filed informally,
pursuant to 47 USC 546(h), as provided in Section 5-24(5). 



   (2)   Contents of applications.  A request for proposals for a
franchise, including for a renewal franchise under 47 USC 546(c), shall
require, and any application submitted pursuant to this Section 5-24(1) (and
expressly not an informal renewal application submitted pursuant to 47 USC
546(h)) shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:



      (A)   Identity of the applicant, the persons who exercise
working control over the applicant, and the persons who control those
persons, to the ultimate parent.



      (B)   Identification of the area of the city to be served by
the proposed cable system, including a description of the proposed franchise
area's boundaries.



      (C)   A detailed description of the physical facilities
proposed, which shall include at least the following:



         1.   A description of the channel capacity, technical
design, performance characteristics, head-end, access (and institutional
network) facilities and equipment.



         2.   The location of proposed facility and facility
design, including a description of the miles of plant to be installed, where
it is to be located, and the size of facilities and equipment that will be
located in, on, over, or above the rights-of-way. 



         3.   A description of the manner in which the system
will be installed, and the time required to construct the system, and the
expected effect on rights-of-way usage, including information on the ability
of the rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed system, including, as
appropriate given the system proposed, an estimate of the availability of
space in conduits and an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement
of existing facilities.



         4.   A description, where appropriate, of how services
will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and what will
be done with existing facilities.



      (D)   A demonstration of how the applicant will reasonably
meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including
descriptions of the capacity, facilities and support for public, educational,
and governmental use of the cable system (including institutional networks)
applicant proposes to provide and why applicant believes that the proposal is
adequate to meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the
community.



      (E)   A demonstration of the financial qualifications of the
applicant, including at least the following:



         1.   The proposed rate structure, including projected
charges for each service tier, installation, converters, and all other
proposed equipment or services;



         2.   A financial statement attested to by a certified
public accountant demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to complete
the construction and operation of the cable system proposed; and



         3.   Pro forma financial projections for the proposed
franchise term, including a statement of projected income, and a schedule of
planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions explained in
notes or supporting schedules.



      (F)   A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to
construct and/or operate the proposed cable system;



      (G)   Proof that the applicant is legally qualified, which
proof must include a demonstration that the applicant:



         1.   Has received, or is in a position to receive,
necessary authorizations from state and federal authorities;



         2.   Has not engaged in conduct (fraud, racketeering,
violation of antitrust laws, consumer protection laws, or similar laws) that
allows city to conclude the applicant cannot be relied upon to comply with
requirements of franchise, or provisions of this article;



         3.   Was not a convicted vendor thirty- six (36) months
or fewer prior to the date of the application pursuant to Chapter 287, 
Florida Statutes, or was removed from the convicted vendor list pursuant to
Section 287.133, Florida Statutes;



         4.   Is willing to enter into a franchise, to pay
required compensation and to abide by the provisions of applicable law,
including those relating to the construction, operation or repair of its
facilities; and has not entered into any agreement that would prevent it from
doing so; and



         5.   The applicant must not have submitted an
application for an initial or renewal franchise to the city, which was denied
on the ground that the applicant failed to propose a cable system meeting the
cable-related needs and interests of the community, or as to which any
challenges to such franchising decision were finally resolved (including any
appeals) adversely to the applicant, within three (3) years preceding the
submission of the application.



   The city shall provide a reasonable opportunity to an applicant to show
that it would be inappropriate to deny it a franchise under Section
5-24(2)(G)2., by virtue of the particular circumstances surrounding the
matter and the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing
therefrom and prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the
applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of
a cable system. 



      (H)   To the extent that the applicant is in any respect
relying on the financial or technical resources of another person, including
another affiliate, the proofs required pursuant to Sections 5-24(2)(E) and
(F) should be provided for that person. 



      (I)   A description of the applicant's prior experience in
cable system ownership, construction, and operation, and identification of
cities and counties in Florida in which the applicant or any of its
principals have a cable franchise or any interest therein, provided that an
applicant that holds a franchise for the city and is seeking renewal of that
franchise need only provide this information for other cities and counties in
Florida where its franchise is scheduled to expire during the twelve (12)
month period prior to the date its application is submitted to the city and
for other cities and counties in Florida where its franchise had been
scheduled to expire during the twelve (12) month period after the date its
application is submitted to the city. If an applicant has no other franchise
in Florida, it shall provide the information for its operations in other
states.



      (J)   An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or
authorized officer thereof certifying the truth and accuracy of the
information in the application, and certifying that the application meets all
requirements of applicable law.



   (3)   Procedure for applying for grant of a franchise, other than a
Cable Act renewal franchise.



      (A)   A person may apply for a franchise in response to a
request for proposals ("RFP") issued by the city. Any response to an RFP
shall contain the information required by Section 5-24(2), and such other
information as the RFP may require, and must be submitted in accordance with
the restrictions in the RFP. A properly filed response to an RFP shall be
evaluated in accordance with Section 5-24(3)(C). The city may conduct such
investigations from time to time as may be appropriate to establish RFP
requirements.



      (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5-24(3)(A), a
person may apply for an initial franchise by submitting an unsolicited
application containing the information required in Section 5-24(2) and
requesting an evaluation of that application pursuant to Section 5-24(3)(C).
Prior to evaluating that application, the city may conduct such
investigations as are necessary to determine whether the application
satisfies the standards set forth in Section 5-24(3)(C), including by
commencing a proceeding to identify the future cable-related needs and
interests of the community. It also may seek additional applications prior to
evaluating the application. An applicant for an initial franchise shall be
provided an opportunity to amend its application in light of the result of
any investigation conducted by the city, prior to evaluation of that
application pursuant to Section 5-24(3)(C).



      (C)   In evaluating an application for a franchise, the city
shall consider, among other things, the following factors:



         1.   The extent to which the applicant has substantially
complied with the applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable
franchise for the city;



         2.   Whether the quality of the applicant's service
under any existing franchise in the city, including signal quality, response
to customer complaints, billing practices, and the like, has been reasonable
in light of the needs and interests of the communities served;



         3.   Whether the applicant has the financial, technical,
and legal qualifications to hold a cable franchise;



         4.   Whether the application satisfies any minimum
requirements established by the city under this article or in the RFP or and
is otherwise reasonable to meet the future cable-related needs and interests
of the community, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and
interests;



         5.   Whether, to the extent not considered as part of
Section 5-24(3)(C)4., the applicant will provide adequate public,
educational, and governmental use capacity, facilities, or financial support;



         6.   Whether issuance of a franchise is in the public
interest considering the immediate and future effect on the rights-of-way and
private property that would be used by the cable system, including the extent
to which installation or maintenance as planned would require replacement of
property or involve disruption of property, public services, or use of the
rights-of-way; and the comparative superiority or inferiority of competing
applications; and



         7.   Whether the approval of the application may
eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery of cable service in the city.



      (D)   If the city finds that it is in the public interest to
issue a franchise considering the factors set forth above, and subject to the
applicant's entry into an appropriate franchise agreement, it shall issue a
franchise. If the city denies a franchise, it will issue a written decision
explaining why the franchise was denied. Prior to deciding whether or not to
issue a franchise, the city shall hold one or more public hearings or
implement other procedures under which comments from the public on an
application may be received as required by state or federal statute. The city
also may grant a franchise based on its review of an application without
further proceedings and may reject any application that is incomplete or
fails to respond to an RFP. 



   (4)   Procedure for applying for grant of a Cable Act renewal
franchise.  Requests for renewal under the Cable Act shall be received and
reviewed in a manner consistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47 USC 
546. It is the proposal submitted by a franchisee under 47 USC 546(b), and
not the request for commencement of the renewal proceedings submitted under
47 USC 546(a), that must contain the information required under Section
5-24(2). If neither a franchisee nor the city activates in a timely manner,
or can activate the renewal process set forth in 47 USC 546(a)-(g)
(including, for example, if the provisions are repealed), and except as to
applications submitted pursuant to 47 USC 546(h), the provisions of Section
5-24(3) shall apply and a renewal request shall be evaluated using the same
criteria as any other request for a franchise. The following requirements
shall apply to renewal requests properly submitted pursuant to the Cable Act:



      (A)   If the provisions of 47 USC 546(a)-(g) are properly
invoked, the city shall issue an RFP after conducting a proceeding to review
the franchisee’s past performance and to identify future cable-related
community needs and interests. The city shall make available for review by a
franchisee the results of the city's review and ascertainment proceedings.
The city shall establish deadlines and procedures for responding to the RFP,
may seek additional information from the franchisee related to the city’s
evaluation of the proposal given the standards for review of that proposal
under applicable law, and shall establish deadlines for the submission of
that additional information. Following receipt of the application responding
to that RFP (and such additional information as may be provided in response
to requests), the city commission will determine that the franchise should be
renewed, or make a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be
renewed in accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act applicable to that
preliminary decision. The preliminary determination shall be made by
resolution.  If the city commission determines that the franchise should not
be renewed, and the franchisee notifies the city, either in its RFP response
or within thirty (30) business days of the preliminary assessment, that it
wishes to pursue any rights to an administrative proceeding it has under the
Cable Act, then the city shall commence an administrative proceeding after
providing prompt public notice thereof, in accordance with the Cable Act. If
the city commission decides preliminarily to grant renewal, it shall prepare
a final franchise agreement that incorporates, as appropriate, the
commitments made by the franchisee in the application. If the franchisee
accepts the franchise agreement, and the final agreement is approved by the
city commission, the franchise shall be renewed. If the franchise agreement
is not so accepted and approved within the time limits established by 47 USC
546(c)(1), renewal shall be deemed preliminarily denied, and an
administrative proceeding commenced if the franchisee requests it within
thirty (30) business days of the expiration of the time limit established by
47 USC 546(c)(1), unless the time limit is extended by mutual agreement of
the city and the franchisee.



      (B)   If an administrative hearing is commenced pursuant to 47
USC 546(c), the franchisee’s application shall be evaluated considering
such matters as may be considered consistent with federal law. The following
procedures shall apply:



         1.   The proceeding shall be conducted with all
deliberate speed in accordance with such lawful procedures as the city may
adopt by resolution.



         2.   The City Commission may appoint an administrative
hearing officer or officers or may conduct the administrative hearing itself.
The entity that will conduct the administrative hearing is referred to as the
"hearing officer."



         3.   The hearing officer shall establish a schedule for
proceeding. The hearing officer shall have the authority to require the
production of evidence from any person as the interests of justice may
require. Any order regarding the production of evidence may be enforced by a
court of competent jurisdiction or by imposing appropriate sanctions in the
administrative hearing.



         4.   The hearing officer may conduct a pre-hearing
conference and establish appropriate pre- hearing orders. Intervention by
non-parties is not authorized except to the extent required by the Cable Act.



         5.   The hearing officer shall require the city and the
franchisee to submit prepared testimony prior to the hearing. Unless the
parties agree otherwise, the franchisee shall present evidence first, and the
city shall present evidence second.



         6.   Any reports or the transcript or summary of any
proceedings conducted pursuant to 47 USC 546(a) shall be, for purposes of the
administrative hearing, regarded no differently than any other evidence. The
city and the franchisee shall be afforded fair opportunity for full
participation in the proceeding, including the right to introduce evidence
(including evidence related to issues raised in the proceeding under
subsection 47 USC 546(a)), to require the production of evidence, and to
question witnesses.



         7.   Following completion of any hearing, the hearing
officer shall require the parties to submit proposed findings of fact with
respect to the matters that the city is entitled to consider in determining
whether renewal ought to be granted.  Based on the entire record of the
administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall then prepare written
findings, and submit those findings to the city commission and to the parties
(unless the hearing officer is the city commission, in which case the written
findings shall constitute the final decision of the city).



         8.   If the hearing officer is not the city commission,
the parties shall have thirty (30) calendar days from the date the findings
are submitted to the city commission to file exceptions to those findings. 
The city commission shall thereafter issue a written decision granting or
denying the application for renewal, consistent with the requirements of the
Cable Act and based on the record of such proceeding. A copy of the final
decision of the city commission shall be provided promptly to the applicant.



   (5)   Informal applications for renewal.  Notwithstanding the
above, a cable operator may submit a proposal for renewal of a franchise
pursuant to 47 USC 546(h) at any time, and the city may, after affording the
public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, grant or deny such
proposal. An application shall not be granted unless the city determines that
it is in the public interest to do so. An application may be denied for any
reason, without prejudice to the applicant's right to seek renewal under
other provisions of this section.



   (6)   Application for modification of a franchise.



      (A)   An application for modification of a franchise agreement
shall include, at minimum, the following information:



         1.   The specific modification requested;



         2.   The justification for the requested modification,
including the impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others,
and the financial impact on the applicant if the modification is approved or
disapproved, demonstrated through, inter alia, submission of pro forma
financial statements.



         3.   A statement indicating whether the modification is
sought pursuant to Section 625 of the Cable Act, 47 USC 545, and, if so, a
demonstration that the requested modification meets the standards set forth
in 47 USC 545;



         4.   Any other information that the applicant believes
is necessary for the city to make an informed determination on the
application for modification; and



         5.   An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or
applicant's authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the
information in the application, and certifying that the application is
consistent with the requirements of applicable law.



      (B)   A request for modification submitted pursuant to 47 USC
545 shall be considered in accordance with the requirements of that section.



   (7)   Public hearings.  An applicant shall be notified of any
public hearings held in connection with the evaluation of its application and
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard. In addition, prior to
the issuance of a franchise, the city shall provide for the holding of a
public hearing within the proposed franchise area, following notice to the
public, at which each applicant and its application shall be examined and the
public and all interested parties afforded a reasonable opportunity to be
heard. 



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)  Penalty, see Section 5-11



Sec. 5-25.  Construction provisions.



   (1)   System construction schedule. Every franchise agreement shall
specify the construction schedule that will apply to any required
construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable system. The schedule shall
provide for prompt completion of the project, considering the amount and type
of construction required.



   (2)   Use of franchisee facilities. The city shall have the right to
install and maintain free of charge upon any poles or in any conduit owned by
a franchisee any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere
with the cable system operations of the franchisee. Provided that, if the
city uses a franchisee's conduit or poles to install a cable system that
competes with that franchisee in the provision of cable service to
residential subscribers, the franchise agreement may provide that the
franchisee may charge the city a fair market rate pursuant to that franchise
agreement. Franchisee shall notify the city when it enters into an agreement
for use of its poles and conduits. Copies of agreements for use of
franchisee's conduits or poles in the public rights- of-way or on other
public property shall be available for review upon the city's request. A
franchise agreement may include a provision under which the city shall
indemnify, defend and hold a franchisee harmless for all claims arising out
of the city's use of that franchisee's poles and conduits where the
franchisee and the city do not have a joint pole or conduit use agreement. 



   (3)   Provision of service/quality of service.  In addition to
satisfying such requirements as may be established in a franchise, every
cable system shall be subject to the following conditions, except as
prohibited by federal law:



      (A)   It is the policy of the city to ensure that every
franchisee provide service in the franchise area upon request to any person
or any government building. Each franchisee shall extend service upon request
within its franchise area, provided that a franchise agreement may permit a
franchisee to require a potential subscriber to contribute a fair share of
the capital costs of installation or extension as a condition of extension or
installation in cases where such extension or installation may be unduly
expensive. Service must be provided within time limits specified in Section
5-25(3)(B).



      (B)   Except as a franchise agreement otherwise provides, a
franchisee must extend service to any person or to any government building in
the franchise area which requests it within seven (7) business days of the
request, where service can be provided by activating or installing a drop;
within ninety (90) calendar days of the request where an extension of
one-half mile or less is required; or within six (6) months where an
extension of one-half mile or more is required. Provided that, in cases where
a franchise agreement permits a franchisee to require a potential subscriber
to bear a share of extension or installation costs, and franchisee requires
the potential subscriber to bear such costs, the time for extension shall be
measured from the date the subscriber agrees to bear such costs or, if a
franchisee requires prepayment of all or a portion of the estimated costs,
from the date the prepayment is made.  A franchisee that requires a
potential subscriber to bear a portion of installation or extension costs
must prepare a written estimate of extension costs within seven (7) business
days of a request for an installation or extension that would be subject to
cost-sharing.



      (C)   Any cable system within the city shall meet or exceed
the technical standards set forth in 47 CFR 76.601 and any other applicable
technical standards.



      (D)  A franchisee shall perform all tests necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the franchise agreement and
other technical and performance standards established by applicable law.
Unless a franchise agreement or applicable law provides otherwise, all tests
shall be conducted in accordance with federal rules and in accordance with
the most recent edition of National Cable Television Association's
Recommended Practices for Measurements on Cable Television Systems, or such
other manual as may be directed under FCC regulations. A written report of
any test results shall be filed with the city within seven (7) calendar days
of a request by the city. If a location fails to meet technical or
performance specifications, the franchisee, without requirement of additional
notice or request from city, shall promptly take corrective action, and
retest the locations.



      (E)   Every cable or open video system and every cable or open
video system operator shall be required to interconnect with every other
cable or open video system and cable or open video system operator within the
city on fair and reasonable terms for purposes of providing PEG and I-Net
services.



   (4)   System maintenance. Scheduled maintenance shall be performed
so as to minimize the effect of any necessary interruptions of cable service.



   (5)   Continuity of service. Each franchise agreement shall, during
the term of the franchise, ensure that subscribers are able to receive
continuous service and that, in the event the franchise is revoked or
terminated, the franchisee may be obligated to continue to provide service
for a reasonable period to assure an orderly transition of service from the
franchisee to another entity.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00) Penalty, see Section 5-11



Sec. 5-26.  Operation and reporting provisions.



   (1)   Communication with regulatory agencies.  If requested by the
city in writing, a franchisee shall file with the city all reports required
by the FCC including, without limitation, any proof of performance tests and
results, Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) reports, and all petitions,
applications, and communications of all types directly related to the cable
system, or a group of cable systems of which the franchisee's cable system is
a part, submitted or received by the franchisee, an affiliate, or any other
person on the behalf of the franchisee, either to or from the FCC, the
Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory
commission or agency having jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation
of the franchisee's cable system. Provided that, nothing herein requires the
franchisee to produce regulatory or court filings that are treated by the
agency or court as confidential, such as Hart-Scott-Rodino Act filings. 
Nothing in this section affects any rights the city may have to obtain books
and records under Article II.



   (2)   Reports.



      (A)   If requested by the city in writing within forty-five
(45) calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter, a franchisee shall
submit a report to the city containing the following information, within
thirty (30) calendar days of such written request:



         1.   The number of service calls (calls requiring a
truck roll); and



         2.   The number and type of outages known by the
franchisee for the prior quarter, identifying separately the following:



         a.   Each planned outage, the time it occurred, its
duration, and the estimated area affected;



         b.   Each known unplanned outage, the time it occurred,
its estimated duration and the estimated area affected, and if known, the
cause;



         c.   The total estimated hours of known outages. An
outage is a loss of sound and video on all channels.



      (B)   Upon written request of the city, no later than ninety
(90) calendar days after the end of its fiscal year, a franchisee shall
submit a written report, within forty-five (45) calendar days of such
request, that shall contain such information as may be required from time to
time by the city, and at least the following, unless the city waives the
requirement:



         1.   A summary of the previous year's activities in the
development of the cable system, including descriptions of services begun or
discontinued, the number of subscribers gained or lost for each category of
cable service;



         2.   A summary of service calls for which records are
required under Section 5-26(3)(A), identifying both the number and nature of
the service calls received and an explanation of their dispositions, if any;



         3.   A revenue report from the previous fiscal year for
the cable system, audited by a certified public accountant;



         4.   An ownership report, indicating all persons who at
the time of filing control or own an interest in the franchisee of ten
percent (10%) or more;




         5.   A list of officers and members of the board of
directors of the franchisee and any affiliates directly involved in the
operation or the maintenance of the cable system;



         6.   An organizational chart showing all corporations or
partnerships with more than a ten (10) percent interest ownership in the
franchisee, and the nature of that ownership interest (limited partner,
general partner, preferred shareholder, etc.); and showing the same
information for each corporation or partnership that holds such an interest
in the corporations or partnerships so identified and so on until the
ultimate corporate and partnership interests are identified;



         7.   An annual report of each entity identified in
Section 5-26(2)(B)6. which issues an annual report;



         8.   A complete report on its plant.  This plant report
shall state the physical miles of plant construction and plant in operation
during the prior calendar year categorized as aerial and underground, provide
revisions to the cable system maps filed with the city, and report the
results of appropriate electronic measurements to show conformity with FCC
technical standards.



         9.   A report showing, for each cable customer service
standard in force, the franchisee’s performance with respect to that
standard for each quarter of the preceding year. In each case where
franchisee concludes it did not comply fully, the franchisee will describe
the corrective actions it is taking to assure future compliance.



         10.  Notwithstanding the above, once the information
required by Sections 5-26(2)(B)4.-6. has been filed once, it need only be
refiled if it changes. 



   (3)   Records Required.  A franchisee shall at all times maintain:



      (A)   Records of all service calls received with information
sufficient to allow the franchisee to prepare the reports required in this
section;



      (B)   Records of outages known to the franchisee, with
information sufficient to allow a franchisee to prepare the reports required
in this section;



      (C)   Records of service calls for repair and maintenance
indicating the date and time, if available, service was requested, and date
and time, if available,  service was scheduled (if it was scheduled), and
the date and time, if available, service was provided, and (if different) the
date and time the problem was solved, if available; and



      (D)   Records of installation/reconnection and requests for
service extension, indicating date of request, date of acknowledgment, if
available, and the date and time, if available service was provided.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)



Sec. 5-27.  Rate regulation and consumer protection.



   (1)   Scope and applicability.  The city reserves all rights to
implement and impose regulation of a franchisee's rates and charges to the
maximum extent permitted by law, and may do so by amendment to this chapter,
by amendment to a franchise agreement, or in any other lawful manner. 



   (2)   Rate regulation procedures.  Rate regulation shall be
performed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the FCC. The city
manager, or his designee, may take any required steps to file complaints,
toll rates, issue accounting orders or take any other steps required to
comply with FCC regulations. The city commission shall be responsible for
issuing final rate orders that establish rates or order refunds. No rate may
be put into effect without the prior review and approval of the city, except
as federal law may otherwise require.



   (3)   Rate discrimination prohibited.  Except to the extent the
city may not enforce such a requirement, a franchisee is prohibited from
discriminating in its rates or charges or from granting undue preferences to
any subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of subscribers or potential
subscribers; provided, however, that a franchisee may offer temporary, bona
fide promotional discounts in order to attract or maintain subscribers, so
long as such discounts are offered on a non-discriminatory basis to similar
classes of subscribers throughout the franchise area; and a franchisee may
offer discounts for the elderly, the disabled, or the economically
disadvantaged; and such other discounts as it is expressly entitled to
provide under federal law, if such discounts are applied in a uniform and
consistent manner. A franchisee shall comply at all times with all applicable
federal, state, and city laws, and all executive and administrative orders
relating to non- discrimination.



   (4)   Cable consumer protection standards.  Each franchisee must
satisfy cable consumer protection standards established by the city from time
to time by ordinance or by resolution. In addition, each franchisee shall at
all times satisfy any additional or stricter requirements established by
applicable law including, without limitation, FCC customer service standards
and consumer protection laws. 



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)  Penalty, see Section 5-11



Sec. 5-28.  Franchise fee.



   A franchisee shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount equal
to five percent (5%) of gross revenues.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)  Penalty, see Section 5-11



Sec. 5-29.  Transfers.



   (1)   City approval required.  No transfer shall occur without
prior written notice to and approval of the city commission. Transfer without
the prior written approval of the city shall be considered to impair the
city's assurance of due performance. The granting of approval for a transfer
in one instance shall not render unnecessary approval of any subsequent
transfer.



   (2)   Application.



      (A)   The franchisee shall promptly notify the city of any
proposed transfer.  If any transfer should take place without prior notice
to the city, the franchisee will promptly notify the city that such a
transfer has occurred.



      (B)   At least one hundred twenty (120) calendar days prior to
the contemplated effective date of a transfer, the franchisee shall submit to
the city an application for approval of the transfer. Such an application
shall provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including
details on the legal, financial, technical, and other qualifications of the
transferee, and on the potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates
and service. At a minimum, the following information must be included in the
application, provided that a franchisee is not required to duplicate
information that it submits to the city to comply with its obligations under
federal or state law:



         1.   All information and forms required under federal
law or the equivalent of such forms if no longer required by federal law;



         2.   All information required in Sections 5-24(2)(A) and
5-24(2)(E)-J. of this chapter;



         3.   Any contracts or other documents that relate to the
proposed transaction, and all documents, schedules, exhibits, or the like
referred to therein to the extent that such documentation is required by the
FCC;



         4.   Any shareholder reports or filings with the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) that discuss the transaction;



         5.   Other information  necessary to provide a complete
and accurate understanding of the financial position of the cable system
before and after the proposed transfer;



         6.   Complete information regarding any potential impact
of the transfer on subscriber rates and service;



         7.   A brief summary of the proposed transferee's plans
for at least the next five (5) years regarding line extension, plant and
equipment upgrades, channel capacity, expansion or elimination of services,
and any other changes affecting or enhancing the performance of the cable
system.



      (C)   For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent
to a transfer, the city or its agents may inquire into all qualifications of
the prospective transferee and such other matters as the city may deem
necessary to determine whether the transfer is in the public interest and
should be approved, denied, or conditioned as provided under Section 5-29(3).
The franchisee and any prospective transferees shall assist the city in any
such inquiry, and if they fail to do so, the request for transfer may be
denied.



   (3)   Determination by city. In making a determination as to whether
to grant, deny, or grant subject to conditions an application for a transfer
of a franchise, the city shall consider the legal, financial, and technical
qualifications of the transferee to operate the cable system; any potential
impact of the transfer on subscriber rates or services; whether the incumbent
cable operator is in compliance with its franchise agreement and this chapter
and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment to cure such noncompliance;
whether the transferee owns or controls any other cable system in the city,
and whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce competition
in the delivery of cable service in the city; and whether operation by the
transferee or approval of the transfer would adversely affect subscribers,
the public, or the city's interest under this chapter, the franchise
agreement, or other applicable law.



   (4)   Transferee's Agreement.  Subject to any transitional
provisions that may apply, no application for a transfer of a franchise shall
be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and
accept all terms of this chapter and the franchise agreement, and that it
will assume the obligations, liabilities, and responsibility for all acts and
omissions, known and unknown, of the previous franchisee under this chapter
and the franchise agreement for all purposes, including renewal, unless the
city, in its sole discretion, expressly waives this requirement in whole or
in part.



   (5)   Approval does not constitute waiver.  Approval by the city of
a transfer of a franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of
the rights of the city under this chapter or a franchise agreement, whether
arising before or after the date of the transfer.



   (6)   Exception for intra-company transfers.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a franchise agreement may provide that transfers to affiliates of
a franchisee shall be excepted from the requirements of Section 5-29(1) and
(2) where the affiliate is wholly-owned and managed by an entity that will
guarantee the performance under a franchise agreement; and, subject to any
transitional provisions that may apply the transferee affiliate:



      (A)   Notifies the city of the transfer at least sixty (60)
calendar days before it occurs and, at that time provides the agreements and
warranties required by this section, describes the nature of the transfer,
and submits complete information describing who will have direct and indirect
ownership and control of the cable system after the transfer;



      (B)   Warrants that it has read, accepts and agrees to be
bound by each and every term of the franchise and related amendment,
regulations, ordinances and resolutions then in effect;



      (C)   Agrees to assume all responsibility for all liabilities,
acts and omissions known and unknown of its predecessor franchisees for all
purposes, including renewal;



      (D)   Agrees that the transfer shall not permit it take any
position or exercise any right which could not have been exercised by its
predecessor franchisees;



      (E)   Warrants that the transfer will not substantially
increase the financial burdens upon or substantially diminish the financial
resources available to the franchisee (the warranty to be based on comparing
the burdens upon and resources that will be available to the transferee
compared to its predecessors), or otherwise adversely affect the ability of
the franchisee to perform;



      (F)   Warrants that the transfer will not in any way adversely
affect the city or subscribers (including by increasing rates);



      (G)   Notifies the city that the transfer is complete within
five (5) business days of the date the transfer is complete; and



      (H)   Agrees that the transfer in no way affects any
evaluation of its legal, financial or technical qualifications that may occur
under the franchise or applicable law after the transfer, and does not
directly or indirectly authorize any additional transfers.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00) Penalty, see Section 5-11



Sec. 5-30.  Connections to cable system; use of antennae.



   (1)   Subscriber right to attach.  To the extent consistent with
federal law, subscribers shall have the right to attach VCRs, receivers, and
other terminal equipment to a franchisee's cable system to receive services
for which they paid. Subscribers also shall have the right to use their own
remote control devices and converters, and other similar equipment to receive
services for which they paid.



   (2)   Removal of existing antennae.  A franchisee shall not, as a
condition of providing service, require a subscriber or potential subscriber
to remove any existing antenna, or disconnect an antenna except at the
express direction of the subscriber or potential subscriber, provided that
such antenna is connected with an appropriate device and complies with
applicable law.



(Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-20-00)



Chapter 6
CEMETERIES



Sec. 6-1.  Described.



   The following shall be the cemeteries of the city:



   MUNICIPAL CEMETERY, CITY OF BOYNTON BEACH: Blocks A thru G (excluding
Block A), Official Plat Book #21, Page 84.



   BOYNTON BEACH MEMORIAL PARK: Blocks H thru M, Official Plat Book #27,
Page 186.



   BOYNTON BEACH MEMORIAL PARK, ADDITION #1: Blocks N thru Y (excluding Q,
U, X and Z), Official Plat Book #30, Pages 154 and 155, and the BOYNTON BEACH
MAUSOLEUM: Replat of Driveways 2, 3, 5 and 6, Municipal Cemetery. Official
Plat Book #44, Page 46.



   SARA SIMS MEMORIAL GARDENS: Official Plat Book #26, Page 84.



(Ord. No. 94-49, § 1, 11-1-94)



Sec. 6-2.  Applicability.



   Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all cemeteries of the city.



(Code 1958, § 6-1)



Sec. 6-3.  Cemetery fund established; use, investment.



   The City of Boynton Beach, Florida, is hereby authorized to establish a
separate fund for the perpetual care, upkeep and maintenance of said
cemeteries and to provide that all funds derived from the sale of cemetery
lots and equipment use charges shall be paid into said fund to be designated
as Boynton Municipal Cemeteries Fund, and used solely for the perpetual care,
upkeep and maintenance of said cemeteries. The city is authorized to transfer
and pay over to this separate account all funds designed for the perpetual
care, upkeep and maintenance of municipal cemeteries.



(Code 1958, § 6-16; Ord. No. 83-9, § 1, 4-4-83; Ord. No. 98-22, § 1,
7-21-98)



Sec. 6-4.  City Manager to perform duties and responsibilities of former
Cemetery Board of Governors.



   (a)   The Cemetery Board of Governors is abolished and all duties
and responsibilities delegated to or performed by the Cemetery Board of
Governors will be performed by the City Manager or his or her designee.



   (b)   All references to the Cemetery Board of Governors contained in
the City Code or applicable non-codified ordinances or city resolutions shall
hereinafter be interpreted to mean the City Manager or his or her designee.



(Ord. No. 15-018, §§ 2, 3, 8-4-15)



Sec. 6-5. —6-10.   Reserved.



   Editor’s note—The Cemetery Board of Governors was abolished
pursuant to Ord. No. 15-018, § 2, passed August 4, 2015.



Sec. 6-11.  Council to provide for lot sales, prices, fees.



   (a)   The City Council shall from time to time by resolution,
provide for the sale of cemetery lots, fix the price to be charged therefor,
and the terms and conditions of such sales, and provide for the conveyance of
such lots, and shall fix the schedule of fees to be charged for permits,
burials, and other services.  (Code 1958, § 6-3)



   (b)   All sales of interment rights in mausoleum crypts or niches
shall be originated by Boynton Beach Mausoleum, Inc., who is the city’s
sole agent for  sales within the mausoleum until the end of the contract
term, which is October 20, 2008. 



(Ord. No. 96-24, § 1, 4-2-96)



Sec. 6-12.  Issuance of deeds.



   The Mayor and the City Clerk shall have full power and authority to
issue a deed or deeds for the sale of lots in a cemetery, and crypts and
niches in the mausoleum when the provisions of this chapter have been
complied with by the purchasers thereof, and they have complied in all
respects with the rules and regulations established by the City Manager or
his or her designee.



(Code 1958, § 6-18; Ord. No. 94-49, § 3, 11-1-94; Ord. No. 15-018, § 3,
8-4-15)



Sec. 6-13.  Conveyances and burials prohibited until settlement of debts due
city.



   No purchaser of a cemetery lot shall be entitled to a deed to any lot
until all accounts relating thereto and due the city are paid and no owner or
proprietor of any lot or lots shall have the right to bury in his said lot or
lots without first having paid any and all arrearages due the city therefor
or for anything relating thereto.



(Code 1958, § 6-13)



Sec. 6-14.  Lot enclosures, cornerstones, brickwork, grading, spacing, etc.;
regulations governing.



   All cemetery lot enclosures of any kind whatever are hereby prohibited.
Cornerstones properly numbered and set flush with the surface of the ground
shall be allowed. No brickwork shall be allowed above the ground level in any
portion of the cemetery. No mounds are permitted over any grave or graves.
The grade of all lots shall be determined by the board of governors. A space
of not less than eighteen (18) inches shall be reserved on sides of abutting
lots so that the graves shall not be contiguous. All workmen employed in the
construction of vaults, erection of monuments, or other work, shall be
subject to and under the control and direction of the City Manager or his or
her designee.



(Code 1958, § 6-7; Ord. No. 15-018, § 3, 8-4-15)



Sec. 6-15.  Excavations to be by city at owner's expense.



   To protect the cemetery grounds, and especially to protect the improved
portions and lots therein from injury, all excavations shall be made by the
city at the expense of the owners, under the jurisdiction and control of the
City Manager or his or her designee.



(Code 1958, § 6-9; Ord. No. 15-018, § 3, 8-4-15)



Sec. 6-16.  Headstones and vaults; removal of earth or rubbish.



   Cemetery lot owners may place headstones on burial plots but all such
headstones or monuments shall be flush with the ground. No vault shall be
built without the permission in writing of the City Manager or his or her
designee. All parts of vaults above ground shall be of marble, granite, cut
stone, or cement stone or blocks, and in any event shall be of such strength,
construction, and character as may be  approved by the City Manager or his
or her designee.  All earth or rubbish accumulated by the owner or owners of
a lot or lots or other workmen must be carefully removed as soon as possible
and deposited at such place as the City Manager or his or her designee may
direct.



(Code 1958, § 6-10; Ord. No. 15-018, § 3, 8-4-15)



Sec. 6-17.  “For sale” signs prohibited.



   No sign or other device indicating that a cemetery lot or vault is
“For Sale” shall be permitted in or on the cemetery grounds.



(Code 1958, § 6-11)



Sec. 6-18.  Transfer of lots.



   (a)   Cemetery lots.  The owner or owners of cemetery lots shall
not allow interments made in their lots for remuneration, nor shall any
transfer, assignment, or conveyance of any lot so owned, or of any interest
therein, be valid without the owner thereof first having secured the written
consent of the City Manager or his or her designee to make such transfer,
assignment, or conveyance, and such written consent must be endorsed upon
such transfer, assignment, or conveyance.  Provided, however, that no
transfer, assignment or conveyance of any lot or of any interest therein can
be made after an actual interment in it, except with the consent of the City
Manager or his or her designee and the City Manager or his or her designee
cannot grant such consent until after the body or bodies first therein
interred shall be lawfully removed therefrom. The City Manager or his or her
designee may adopt procedures, not inconsistent with this section, for
processing and approving requests for transfers.



   (b)   Mausoleum crypts or niches.



      (1)   Prior to interment, an owner may transfer or resell the
mausoleum crypt or niche provided the owner first obtains the written consent
of the city board of governors and Boynton Beach Mausoleum, Inc.  Such
consent shall be given automatically provided that the new purchaser’s
name, address and phone number are on file with the City Clerk and an
administrative fee equal to the cost of relettering the mausoleum crypt or
niche is paid to Boynton Beach Mausoleum, Inc.



      (2)   After interment, resale or transfer of ownership shall
be allowed only to the city at a cost of 50% of the original purchase price
paid for the crypt or niche and provided that disinterment has occurred and
is implemented by the proper authorities.  The city may not offer these
crypts or niches for sale until the end of the contract term (October 20,
2008) with Boynton Beach Mausoleum, Inc.



(Code 1958, § 6-5; Ord. No. 94- 49, § 4, 11-1-94; Ord. No. 96-24, § 2,
4-2-96; Ord. No. 98-14, § 1, 5-5-98; Ord. No. 01-65, § 1, 1-2- 02; Ord. No.
15-018, § 3, 8-4-15)



Sec. 6-19.  Disinterments.



   No disinterment of any lot, crypt or niche shall be allowed except by
the consent of the City Manager or his or her designee following written
request by the owner or owners and in every case shall be made by the proper
authorities.  Provided, however, that any lawfully constituted authority
may, with proper court order, disinter any body for the purposes of
investigating a crime.



(Code 1958, § 6-5)  (Ord. No. 96-24, § 3, 4-2-96; Ord. No. 98-41, § 1,
10-6-98; Ord. No. 15-018, § 3, 8-4-15)



Sec. 6-20.   Use by residents.



   (a)   Cemetery lots may only be purchased by current full time
residents of the city for their use and that of their immediate family and
their direct descendants. Immediate family means father, mother, children,
spouse, domestic partners, siblings, step children, half siblings and in-laws.



   (b)   Multiple lots may be purchased by a resident but must be
contiguous and all grave sites limited to the interment of the resident and
their immediate family and descendants.



   (c)   Ownership of a lot descends through family blood lines, i.e.
from parent to child or other heirs-at-law. A spouse or domestic partner of a
deceased resident owner has the right to burial.



   (d)   If the present owner desires, and the lot configuration
permits, the City authorized to purchase unused graves at 80% their original
cost.



   (e)   Interpretation and application of the foregoing rules are
delegated to the City Manager.



   (f)   Exceptions to residency rule:



      (1)   Any person who maintained full time residency in the
City for at least ten (10) years but has moved away.



      (2)   Any Military Veteran.



      (3)   Any former Mayor or City Commissioner.



(Ord. No. 17-004, § 2, 2-7-17)



Chapter 7
COMMUNITY ANTENNA
TELEVISION SYSTEMS*



Art. I.   In General, §§ 7-1—7-20



Art. II.   Franchises, §§ 7-21—7-41



Art. III.   Installation and Maintenance, §§ 7-42—7-49



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 83-13, enacted May 3, 1983, granted a
nonexclusive license to Centel Cable Television Company of Florida, to
operate a community antenna television system within certain areas of the
municipal limits of the city.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 7-1.  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.



   CATV.  “CATV” shall mean a community antenna television system as
hereinafter defined.



   City. “City” shall mean the City of Boynton Beach, a municipal
corporation of the State of Florida, in its present incorporated form or in
any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.



   Community antenna television system.  “Community antenna television
system” shall mean a system of antenna, coaxial cables, wires wave guides,
or other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or used
for the purpose of providing television or FM radio service by cable or
through its facilities as herein contemplated. CATV shall not mean:



   (a)   The transmission of any special program or event for which a
separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in the manner
commonly  known and referred to as “pay television.”



   (b)   A private community antenna system, e.g., which is a system of
equipment designed to receive and distribute television and radio signals
serving a minimum of ten (10) residential units in a condominium or nonprofit
homeowners' association.



   Council. “Council” shall mean the present governing body of the
city or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city.



   Franchise. “Franchise” shall mean and include any authorization
granted hereunder in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or
otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the city. Any
such authorization, in whatever terms granted, shall not mean and include any
license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a
business within the city in accordance with Chapter 13 of this Code of
Ordinances.



   Grantee shall mean the person, firm or corporation to whom or which a
franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the council under this
chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person,
firm or corporation.



   Gross annual receipts shall mean any and all compensation and other
consideration in any form whatever and any contributing grant or subsidy
received directly or indirectly by a grantee from subscribers or users in
payment for television or FM radio signals or service received within the
city.



   Gross annual receipts shall not include installation and line extension
charges, or any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly
on any subscriber or user by any city, state or other governmental unit and
collected by the grantee for such governmental unit.



   Property of grantee shall mean all property owned, installed or used by
a grantee in the conduct of a CATV business in the city under the authority
of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter.



   Street shall mean the surface of and the space above and below any
public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk,
parkway, or drive, now or hereafter existing as such within the city.



   Subscriber shall mean any person or entity receiving for any purpose
the CATV service of a grantee.



(Code 1958, § 7A-1; Ord. No. 81-20, § 1, 6-16-81)



Sec. 7-2.  Licensee; when term to be used.



   When and in the event that the grantee of any franchise granted
hereunder constructs, operates and maintains a CATV system exclusively
through telephone company facilities constructed, operated and maintained
pursuant to a state-granted telephone franchise and offers satisfactory proof
that in no event during the life of such franchise shall the grantee make any
use of the streets independently of such telephone company facilities, said
grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions hereof as a
“licensee” and in such event whenever the term “grantee” is used
herein it shall be deemed to mean and include “licensee.”



(Code 1958, § 7A-2)



Sec. 7-3.  Franchise required; unlawful acts and practices.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or
to carry on the business of distributing to any persons in this city any
television signals or radio signals by means of a CATV system unless a
franchise therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or
maintain within any public street in the city, or within any other public
property of the city, or within any privately-owned area within the city
which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a
proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city,
any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio
signals through a CATV system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of
such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and
effect.



   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically,
inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchise CATV system within
this city for the purpose of taking  or receiving television signals, radio
signals, pictures, programs, or sound.



   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically,
acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV
system within this city for the purpose of enabling himself or others to
receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound,
without payment to the owner of said system.



   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of
the owner, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or
equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals,
pictures, programs or sound.



(Code 1958, § 7A-3)



Sec. 7-4.  Violations.



   Any person, firm or corporation operating or attempting to operate a
community antenna television system within the municipal limits of the city,
without complying with the provisions of this chapter with particular
reference to obtaining a franchise to conduct such business, or after having
obtained such a franchise, by failing to comply with all provisions hereof,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as for a violation of this Code
of Ordinances. Any day upon which a violation exists or continues shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense.



(Code 1958, § 7A-4)



Sec. 7-5.  Filings to be with city manager.



   When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be
filed with the city shall be filed with the city manager.



(Code 1958, § 7A-5)



Sec. 7-6.  Payment of publication expenses.



   The grantee shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to
reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with
the granting of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such
payment shall be made within thirty (30) days after the city furnishes the
grantee with a written statement of such expenses by delivery of same to the
city manager.



(Code 1958, § 7A-5)



Sec. 7-7.  Office in city required.



   The grantee shall maintain an office within the city limits or at a
location which subscribers may call without incurring added message or toll
charges so that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available to
subscribers.



(Code 1958, § 7A-5)



Sec. 7-8.  Duty to provide service.



   No person, firm or corporation in the existing service area of the
grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the
grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does
not pay the applicable connection fee or monthly service charge.



(Code 1958, § 7A-5)



Sec. 7-9.  Council to perform duties in absence of city manager.



   In the event of the inability of the city manager to act or in the
event of said officer's absence, all functions, duties and responsibilities
herein prescribed or vested in said officer shall be performed by the city
council.



(Code 1958, § 7A-6)



Sec. 7-10.  Deregulation of rates.



   (a)   The regulation of rates controlled by this chapter is hereby
suspended with authority and permission to the cable franchise holder to
establish its own rates, subject however, to the requirement that such rates
as are established be filed with the city at least thirty (30) days before
said rates are to become effective. The provision for deregulation of rates
provided by this section shall have no effect upon the continued obligation
of the franchisee to pay to the city franchise fees provided by prior
agreement between the parties.



   (b)   The city council recognizes the unique attributes of the cable
television business which distinguish it from other industries. However, this
council also notes that actual competition among cable television companies
in the city is extremely limited, thereby allowing a potential for
monopolistic profits, which by their nature are contrary to established
public policy. For this reason, the city reserves the right to reinstitute
rate regulation at any time it deems necessary in the future.



(Ord. No. 78-13, §§ 1, 2, 4-4-78)



Secs. 7-11—7-20. Reserved.



ARTICLE II. FRANCHISES



Sec. 7-21.  Council may grant.



   A nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV
system within all or any portion of the city may be granted by the council to
any person, firm or corporation, whether operating under an existing
franchise or not, who or which offers to furnish and provide such system
under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter.



   No provision of this chapter may be deemed or construed as to require
the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the council it is in the
public interest to restrict the number of grantees to one or more.



(Code 1958, § 7A-11)



Sec. 7-22.  Acceptance and effective date of franchise.



   (a)   No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall become effective unless and until the ordinance granting same
has become effective and, in addition, unless and until all things required
in this section and sections 7-29 and 7-30(a) and (b) hereof are done and
completed, all of such things being hereby declared to be conditions
precedent to the effectiveness of any such franchise granted hereunder. In
the event any of such things are not done and completed in the time and
manner required, the council may declare the franchise null and void.



   (b)   Within twenty (20) days after the effective date of the
ordinance awarding a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the
council in its discretion may authorize, the grantee shall file with the city
manager his written acceptance, in form satisfactory to the city attorney, of
the franchise, together with the bond and insurance policies required by
sections 7-29 and 7-30(a) and (b) hereof, respectively, and his agreement to
be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of him by the
provisions of this chapter and the franchise. Such acceptance and agreement
shall be acknowledged by the grantee before a notary public, and shall in
form and content be satisfactory to and approved by the city attorney.



(Code 1958, § 7A-12)



Sec. 7-23.  Term; grounds for termination prior to expiration of term.



   No franchise granted by the council under this chapter shall be for a
term longer than twenty (20) years following the date of acceptance of such
franchise by the grantee or the renewal thereof.



   Any such franchise granted hereunder may be terminated prior to its
date of expiration by the council in the event that said council shall have
found, after thirty (30) days' notice of any proposed termination and public
hearing, that:



   (a)   The grantee has failed to comply with any provision of this
chapter, or has, by act or omission, violated any term or condition of any
franchise or permit issued hereunder; or



   (b)   Any provision of this chapter has become invalid or
unenforceable and the council further finds that such provision constitutes a
consideration material to the grant of said franchise; or



   (c)   The city acquires the CATV system property of the grantee.



(Code 1958, § 7A-13)



Sec. 7-24.  Payments by grantee; fee; reports; inspection of records;
compensation during “hold over.”



   (a)   Any grantee granted a franchise under this chapter shall pay
to the city, during the life of such franchise, a fee to be established by
either negotiations between the grantor and the city or by receipt of
competitive bids for said franchise received pursuant to specifications and
terms established by the city council.  Such payment by the grantee to the
city shall be made annually, or as otherwise provided in the grantee's
franchise, by delivery of the same to the city manager of the city, or in his
absence to the city finance director.



   (b)   The grantee shall file with the city, within thirty (30) days
after expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which such
franchise is in force, a financial statement prepared by a certified public
accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the council, showing in
detail the gross annual receipts, as defined herein, of grantee during the
preceding calendar year or portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the
grantee to pay to the city, within fifteen (15) days after the time for
filing such statements, the sum hereinabove prescribed or any unpaid balance
thereof for the calendar year or portion thereof covered by such statements.



   The city reserves the right to establish a minimum amount which any
grantee hereunder shall pay to the city as a base fee hereunder during any
franchise year, with said minimum amount to be determined at the time said
franchise is granted.



   (c)   The city shall have the right to inspect the grantee's records
showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and
the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this
chapter. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as
an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or
additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any
other obligation hereunder.



   (d)   In the event of any holding over after expiration or other
termination of any franchise granted hereunder, without the consent of the
city, the grantee shall pay to the city reasonable compensation and damages,
of not less than one hundred per cent (100%) of its total gross profits
during said period.



(Code 1958, § 7A-14)



Sec. 7-25.  Rights granted under franchise.



   Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and
providing a CATV system in the city, and for that purpose to erect, install,
construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over,
under, upon, across and along any public street, such poles, wires, cable,
conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the
CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar
facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or
corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other
grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the city. The grantee shall
not use the system to interfere or conflict with the services offered by
public utilities regulated by the Public Service Commission.



   No franchise granted hereunder shall be construed as a franchise,
permit or license to transmit any special program or event for which a
separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in the manner commonly
known and referred to as “pay television,” and no grantee shall directly
or indirectly install, maintain or operate on any television set a coin box
or any other device or means for collection of money for individual programs.



   The grantee may make a charge to subscribers for installation or
connection to its CATV system and a fixed monthly charge as filed and
approved as herein provided. No increase in the rate and charges to
subscribers, as set forth in the schedule filed and approved with grantee's
application, may be made without the prior approval of the council expressed
by resolution.



(Code 1958, § 7A-15)



Sec. 7-26.  Franchise limitations.



   (a)   Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive.



   (b)   No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any
franchise granted under this chapter except those specifically prescribed
herein.



   (c)   Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by the grantee
in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior
lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property.



   (d)   Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal
trust by the original grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred,
leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or
involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise,
without the prior consent of the council expressed by resolution, and then
only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed.  Any such transfer
or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, a duly executed
copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city manager within thirty
(30) days after any such transfer or assignment. The said consent of the
council may not be arbitrarily refused; provided, however, the proposed
assignee must show financial responsibility and must agree to comply with all
provisions of this chapter; and provided, further, that no such consent shall
be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation as a
whole, to secure an indebtedness.



   (e)   Time shall be of the essence of any such franchise granted
hereunder. The grantee shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply
promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter or by any failure of the
city to enforce prompt compliance.



   (f)   Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer,
employee, department, or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by
the city to any other officer, employee, department, or board of the city.



   (g)   The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city
for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of any provision or
requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued hereunder or because
of its enforcement.



   (h)   The grantee shall be subject to all requirements of city
ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter
enacted or established.



   (i)   Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of
any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the
city, utility company, or for others maintaining poles in streets.



   (j)   Any franchise granted hereunder shall be in lieu of any and
all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned,
possessed, controlled, or exercisable by grantee, or any successor to any
interest of grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation, or
maintenance of any CATV system in the city; and the acceptance of any
franchise hereunder shall operate, as between grantee and the city, as an
abandonment of any and all such rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and
authorities within the city; to the effect that, as between grantee and the
city, any and all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of
any CATV system in the city shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in
all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to said franchise, and
not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity, or
authority whatsoever.



(Code 1958, § 7A-16)



Sec. 7-27.  Rights reserved to the city.



   (a)   Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or
affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the city to acquire the
property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the
right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include
any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges
granted, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or
to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the city's right of
eminent domain.



   (b)   There is hereby reserved to the city every right and power
which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any ordinance of the
city, and the grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to be bound
thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its
exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or
established.



   (c)   Neither the granting of any franchise hereunder nor any of the
provisions contained herein shall be construed to prevent the city from
granting any identical, or similar, franchise to any other person, firm or
corporation, within all or any portion of the city.



   (d)   There is hereby reserved to the city the power to amend any
section or part of this chapter so as to require additional or greater
standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise, on the part
of the grantee.



   (e)   Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof
shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or
power of the city.



   (f)   The council may do all things which are necessary and
convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may
determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any
franchise granted hereunder. The city manager is hereby authorized and
empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising
from the operations of any grantee under this chapter, either on behalf of
the city, the grantee, or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public.
Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with
the decision of the city manager may appeal the matter to the council for
hearing and determination. The council may accept, reject or modify the
decision of the city manager, and the council may adjust, settle or
compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations
of any grantee or from any provision of this chapter.



(Code 1958, § 7A-17)



Sec. 7-28.  Application; council action; condition included in franchise.



   (a)   Application. Application for a franchise hereunder shall be in
writing, shall be filed with the city manager, and shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant
is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall also be set
forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state
the names and addresses of its directors, main offices, major stockholders
and associates, and the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary
companies.



      (2)   A statement and description of the CATV system proposed
to be constructed, installed, maintained or operated by the applicant; the
proposed location of such system and its various components; the manner in
which applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the
same; and, particularly, the extent and manner in which existing or future
poles or other facilities of other public utilities will be used for such
system.



      (3)   A description, in detail, of the public streets, public
places and proposed public streets within which applicant proposes or seeks
authority to construct, install or maintain any CATV equipment or facilities;
a detailed description of the equipment or facilities proposed to be
constructed, installed or maintained therein; and the proposed specific
location thereof.



      (4)   A map specifically showing and delineating the proposed
service area or areas within which applicant proposes to provide CATV
services and for which a franchise is requested.



      (5)   A statement or schedule in a form approved by the city
manager of proposed rates and charges to subscribers for installation and
services, and a copy of proposed service agreement between the grantee and
its subscribers shall accompany the application. For unusual circumstances,
such as underground cable required, or more than one hundred fifty (150) feet
of distance from cable to connection of service to subscribers, an additional
installation charge over that normally charged for installation as specified
in the applicant's proposal may be charged, with easements to be supplied by
subscribers. For remote, relatively inaccessible subscribers within the city,
service may be made available on the basis of cost of materials, labor, and
easements if required by the grantee.



      (6)   A copy of any contract, if existing, between the
applicant and any public utility providing for the use of facilities of such
public utility, such as poles, lines, or conduits.



      (7)   A statement setting forth all agreements and
understandings, whether written, oral or implied, existing between the
applicant and any person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed
franchise or the proposed CATV operation. If a franchise is granted to a
person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the representative of
another person, firm or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in
the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force
and effect whatsoever.



      (8)   A financial statement prepared by a certified public
accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the council, showing
applicant's financial status and his financial ability to complete the
construction and installation of the proposed CATV system.



      (9)   The council may at any time demand, and applicant shall
provide, such supplementary, additional or other information as the council
may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested franchise
should be granted.



   (b)   Council action. Upon consideration of any such application,
the council may refuse to grant the requested franchise or the council may by
ordinance grant a franchise for a CATV system to any such applicant as may
appear from said application to be in its opinion best qualified to render
proper and efficient CATV service to television viewers and subscribers in
the city. The council's decision in the matter shall be final. If favorably
considered, the application submitted shall constitute and form part of the
franchise as granted.



   (c)   Condition. Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter
shall include the following condition:



      “The CATV system herein franchised shall be used and operated
solely and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by Ordinance of
the City of Boynton Beach, Florida, and no other purpose whatsoever.”



   Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall not be
deemed to limit the authority of the city to include any other reasonable
condition, limitation or restriction which it may deem necessary to impose in
connection with such franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by this
chapter.



(Code 1958, § 7A-18)



Sec. 7-29.  Faithful performance bond.



   (a)   The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of and
acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter, file with
the city manager, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and
effect for the term of such franchise or any renewal thereof, at grantee's
sole expense, a corporate surety bond in a company and in a form approved, by
the city attorney, in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00),
renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of grantee,
and upon the further condition that in the event grantee shall fail to comply
with any one or more of the provisions of this chapter, or of any franchise
issued to the grantee thereunder, there shall be recoverable jointly and
severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss
suffered by the city as a result thereof, including the full amount of any
compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any
property of the grantee as prescribed hereby which may be in default, plus a
reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of
the bond; said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of
such franchise and any renewal thereof and thereafter until the grantee has
liquidated all of its obligations with the city that may have arisen from the
acceptance of said franchise or renewal by the grantee or from its exercise
of any privilege therein granted. The bond shall provide that thirty (30)
days' prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation, or
material change, be given to the city.



   (b)   Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bond accepted
by the city pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the city
thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee
or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or
for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.



(Code 1958, § 7A-19)



Sec. 7-30.  Insurance policies required for indemnification of city.



   (a)   The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an
acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter, furnish to
the city and file with the city manager, and at all times during the
existence of any franchise granted hereunder, maintain in full force and
effect, at its own cost and expense, a liability insurance policy in the
amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in a company approved by
the city manager and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney,
indemnifying and saving harmless the city, its officers and employees from
and against any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, and proceedings by
others, against all liability to others, including but not limited to any
liability for damages by reason of or arising out of any failure by the
grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or
licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee's CATV system, and
against any loss, cost, expense and damages resulting therefrom, including
reasonable attorney's fees, arising out of the exercise or enjoyment of its
franchise, irrespective of the amount of the comprehensive liability
insurance policy required hereunder.



   (b)   The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an
acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter, furnish to
the city and file with the city manager and at all times during the existence
of any franchise granted hereunder, maintain in full force and effect, at its
own cost and expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy, in
protection of the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and
employees, in a company approved by the city manager and a form satisfactory
to the city attorney, protecting the city and all persons against liability
for loss or damage for personal injury, death and property damage, occasioned
by the operations of grantee under such franchise, with minimum liability
limits of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injury or
death of any one person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) occurrence, and
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for damage to property resulting from any
one occurrence.



   (c)   The policies mentioned in the foregoing paragraph shall name
the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, as
additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of
cancellation or reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to
the city ten (10) days in advance of the effective date thereof; if such
insurance is provided by a policy which also covers grantee or any other
entity or person other than those above named, then such policy shall contain
the standard cross-liability endorsement.



(Code 1958, § 7A-20)



Sec. 7-31.  Franchise renewal.



   Any franchise granted under this chapter is renewable at the
application of the grantee, in the same manner and upon the same terms and
conditions as required herein for obtaining the original franchise, except
those which are by their terms expressly inapplicable; provided, however,
that the council may at its option waive compliance with any or all of the
requirements of section 7-28 hereof.



(Code 1958, § 7A-21)



Secs. 7-32—7-41. Reserved.



ARTICLE III. INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE



Sec. 7-42.  Permits, installation and service.



   (a)   Permits. Within thirty (30) days after acceptance of any
franchise the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all
necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its
business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment
agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and
authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems, or their associated
microwave transmission facilities.



   (b)   Construction and installation. Within ninety (90) days after
obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, grantee shall
commence construction and installation of the CATV system.



   (c)   Service. Within ninety (90) days after the commencement of
construction and installation of the system, grantee shall proceed to render
service to subscribers, and the completion of the construction and
installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that
service to all areas designated on the map accompanying the application for
franchise, as provided in section 7-29 hereof, shall be provided within one
year from the date that service was first provided.



   (d)   Failure to supply service. Failure on the part of the grantee
to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to
complete each of the matters set forth herein, shall be grounds for
termination of such franchise, under and pursuant to the terms of section
7-23 hereof; provided, however, that the council in its discretion may extend
the time for the commencement and completion of construction and installation
for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith,
experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his control.



(Code 1958, § 7A-26)



Sec. 7-43.  Operational standards.



   The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
the highest and best accepted standards of the industry to the effect that
subscribers shall receive the highest possible service. In determining the
satisfactory extent of such standards the following among others shall be
considered:



   (a)   That the system be installed using all band equipment capable
of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum, and that it have the further
capability of converting UHF for distribution to subscribers on the VHF band.



   (b)   That the system, as installed, be capable of passing standard
color TV signals without the introduction of material degradation on color
fidelity and intelligence.



   (c)   That the system and all equipment be designed and rated for
twenty-four (24) hours per day continuous operation.



   (d)   That the system provides a nominal signal level of 2000
microvolts at the input terminals of each TV receiver.



   (e)   That the system signal-to-noise ratio is not less than 40
decibels.



   (f)   That hum modulation of the picture signal is less than 5%.



   (g)   That the system use components having a VSWR of 1.4 or less.



(Code 1958, § 7A-27)



Sec. 7-44.  Location of property of grantee.



   (a)   Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of
the grantee to be constructed or installed in streets, shall be so
constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall
be approved by the city engineer acting in the exercise of his reasonable
discretion.



   (b)   The grantee shall not install or erect any facilities or
apparatus in or  on other public property, places or rights-of-way, or
within any privately-owned area within the city which has not yet become a
public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on
any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, except those installed or
erected upon public utility facilities now existing, without obtaining the
prior written approval of the city engineer and city manager.



   The grantee shall not place any fixture or equipment where the same
will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, or sewer or water lines,
fixtures, and equipment and the location by the grantee of its lines and
equipment shall be in such manner as to not interfere with the usual travel
on said streets, alleys, and public ways, and the use of the same by gas,
electric, telephone, and water and sewer lines and equipment.



   (c)   In those areas and portions of the city where the transmission
or distribution facilities of both the public utility providing telephone
service and those of the utility providing electric service are underground
or hereafter may be placed underground, then the grantee shall likewise
construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution
facilities underground. For the purposes of this subsection,
“underground” shall include a partial underground system, e.g.
streamlining. Amplifiers in grantee's transmission and distribution lines may
be in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground as approved by the
city manager and city engineer.



(Code 1958, § 7A-28)



Sec. 7-45.  Removal and abandonment of property of grantee.



   (a)   In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is
discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, or
in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or
public place without complying with the requirements of grantee's franchise
or this chapter, or the franchise has been terminated, cancelled or has
expired, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given ten (10) days' notice,
remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such
system other than any which the city manager may permit to be abandoned in
place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the
street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition
satisfactory to the city manager.



   (b)   Any property of the grantee remaining in place thirty (30)
days after the termination or expiration of the franchise shall be considered
permanently abandoned. The city manager may extend such time not to exceed an
additional thirty (30) days.



   (c)   Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be
abandoned in such manner as the city manager shall prescribe. Upon permanent
abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall
become that of the city, and the grantee shall submit to the city manager an
instrument in writing, to be approved by the city attorney, transferring to
the city the ownership of such property.



(Code 1958, § 7A-29)



Sec. 7-46.  Changes required by public improvements.



   The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from
the street or other public place, any property of the grantee when required
by the city manager by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street
vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street
grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal
lines, and tracks or any other type of structures or improvements by public
agencies; provided, however, that the grantee shall in all such cases have
the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of
the grantee in place, as provided in section 7-45 hereof.



(Code 1958, § 7A-30)



Sec. 7-47.  City manager's action upon grantee's failure to perform street
work.



   Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any work
required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or by its franchise to
be done in any street or other public place, within the time prescribed, and
to the satisfaction of the city manager, the city manager may, at his option,
cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the city the cost
thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the city manager to the grantee
within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report.



(Code 1958, § 7A-31)



Sec. 7-48.  Agreement for joint use of utility poles to be filed with city
manager.



   When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public
utility poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreements for such
joint use of poles and facilities shall be filed with the city manager.



(Code 1958, § 7A-32)



Sec. 7-49.  Inspection of grantee's property and records by city.



   (a)   At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly
authorized representative of the city to examine all property of the grantee,
together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or
without the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other
records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal
with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee with
respect to its franchise. If any such maps or records are not kept in the
city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the
council shall determine that an examination thereof is necessary or
appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in
making such examination shall be paid by the grantee.



   (b)   The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city manager and
the city finance director at the times and in the form prescribed by either
of said officers, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs,
transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to
the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city or any
of its officers in connection with the franchise.



   (c)   The grantee shall at all times make and keep in the city full
and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system
equipment installed or in use in streets and other public places in the city.



   (d)   The grantee shall file with the city manager, on or before the
last day in June of each year, a current map or set of maps drawn to scale,
showing all CATV system equipment installed and in place in streets and other
public places of the city.



(Code 1958, § 7A-33)



Chapter 8
   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT



Sec. 8-1   Economic Development Generally.



Sec. 8-2   Economic Development in Planned Industrial Development District.



Sec. 8-1   Economic Development Generally.



   A.   Findings.



      1.   The recitals set forth above are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference herein to the same extent as if set forth here in
full.



      2.   The City Commission does hereby find that it is necessary
and appropriate and in the public interest that certain incentives in the
form of fee reductions or waivers be provided for new businesses locating
within the Community Redevelopment Area in order to promote economic growth,
to expand the ad valorem tax base, to increase job opportunities for all
citizens of the City, and to improve the economic condition of the City and
its residents and citizens.



      3.   The City Commission does hereby find that the creation
and use of such incentives and their application to certain business in the
Community Redevelopment Area is in the public interest and furthers a public
purpose.



      4.   The City Commission does hereby find that the economic
incentives contemplated by this section are consistent with the goals,
objectives and principles of the Community Redevelopment Plan for the
Community Redevelopment Area, as adopted by Ordinance 90-21 enacted on August
7, 1990, and as expanded by Ordinance No. 00-59 (the "Community Redevelopment
Plan"), and such incentives further the purposes of the Community
Redevelopment Plan, and are intended to promote and encourage private
enterprise within the Community Redevelopment Area as contemplated and
provided by Part III, Chapter 163, Florida Statutes.



   B.   Eligible Business.  The City Commission does hereby determine
that the economic development incentives created and established by this
chapter shall be granted to:



      1.  A business now located in the Community Redevelopment Area
which is improving or enlarging its place of business within the Community
Redevelopment Area or,



      2.  A business locating a new place of business within the
Community Redevelopment Area.



Any business satisfying the conditions of this division is hereinafter
referred to as an “Eligible Business,” which may, in its discretion, file
an application with the City as provided below requesting one or more of the
economic incentives established by this section subject to the review,
discretion and approval of the City Commission. Nothing in this section is
intended or should be construed or applied as creating or granting any vested
right in any Eligible Business to be entitled to any or all of the economic
incentives established by this section not that there is any obligation or
duty on the part of the City or the City Commission to consider, approve,
grant or provide any or all of the economic incentives established by this
section to any person, including an Eligible Business.



   C.   Waiver of Impact Fees.  Upon an application from an Eligible
Business and recommendation of the City Manager as provided in Division E.
below, the City Commission may, in its discretion and subject to such
conditions as it may establish, waive or defer the payment of impact fees by
the Eligible Business and the City shall pay from legally available funds the
amount of such impact fees by whatever name known that would have otherwise
been paid by the Eligible Business in the absence of such approval by the
City Commission and cause that payment to be deposited in the fund or account
in which the impact fees are customarily deposited. For purposes of this
division, “impact fees” means a land development regulatory fee charged
to new development which creates a need for capital improvements.



   D.   Waiver of Building Permit Fees.  Upon an application from an
Eligible Business and recommendation of the City Manager as provided in
division E. below, the City Commission may, in its discretion and subject to
such conditions as it may establish, waive or defer the payment of building
permit fees for the construction or improvements being done by the Eligible
Business in the Community Redevelopment Area and the City shall pay from
legally available funds the amount of such building permit fees and causes
such funds to be placed in the fund or account in which City building permit
fees are customarily deposited.  For purposes  of  this  division, 
“building  permit  fees” means those fees charged by the City for
reviewing and inspecting structural, mechanical, plumbing, gas and electrical
construction in the City.



   E.   Water and Sewer Facilities Construction and Installation. 
Upon an application from an Eligible Business and recommendation of the City
Manager as provided in division E. below, the City Commission may, in its
discretion and subject to such conditions as it may establish, authorize and
provide for the payment by the City of the cost to construct and install
improvements to the City's water or sewer system, or both, which are not
located on property owned by the Eligible Business, but which are necessary
or required in order for the Eligible Business to locate in the Redevelopment
Area. For purposes of this division, “improvements to the City's water and
sewer system” means improvements not located on property owned by the
Eligible Business such as lift stations, water lines, sewer lines, or
oversized lines, but does not include any connections or any improvements
located on property owned by the Eligible Business.



   F.   Procedure for Economic Incentive Applications.  The City
Manager shall establish appropriate forms and procedures for the filing of an
application by an Eligible Business for any of the economic development
incentives established by divisions C., D., and E. of this chapter. Upon
receipt of an application the City Manager shall review the application and
determine (1) the applicant is in fact an Eligible Business, (2) the economic
development incentives established by this chapter are necessary and
appropriate to encourage the Eligible Business to locate in the Redevelopment
Area or to improve or enlarge an existing location within the Redevelopment
Area, (3) the amount of funds necessary to pay for such economic development
incentive being requested, and (4) sufficient funds are available to the City
to pay such costs. Upon making such a determination, the City Manager shall
notify the City Commission of the application and recommend to the City
Commission whether the application should be approved, approved with
conditions, or denied. The City Commission shall consider the application and
the City Manager's recommendation at its next regular or special meeting
following receipt of the City  Manager's  recommendation. At that time the
City Commission may, in its discretion, accept the City Manager's
recommendation or take such other action as the Commission deems to be
necessary and appropriate, including establishing conditions to the approval
of the economic development incentives that were not recommended by the City
Manager, but the City Commission may not enlarge or increase the amount or
extent of the economic development incentive beyond that requested by the
Eligible Business in its application filed with the City Manager. 



   G.   Implementing Actions Authorized.  The appropriate City
officials are hereby authorized and directed to take such actions as are
necessary to implement the provisions of this section.



   H.   Reports to the City Commission.  The City Manager is hereby
directed to periodically from time to time report to the City Commission as
to the use of the economic development incentives established by this
section, including information as to the number of new or enlarged or
improved business facilities in the Redevelopment Area subject to such
incentives, the number requesting such incentives, the dollar value of the
incentives to the businesses requesting them, and the number of jobs created
as a result of such facilities being located within the Redevelopment Area
and the amount of increase in the City's ad valorem tax base or other
increases in City revenues.  The City Manager may at any time make
recommendations to the City Commission regarding the modification of economic
development incentives or curtailing or eliminating them based upon the
experience of the City with such incentives and their effectiveness.



(Ord. No. 96-46, §§ 1-8, 11-11-96; Ord. No. 01-31, §§ 1-5, 7-3-01)



Sec.  8-2.  Economic Development in Planned Industrial Development District.



   A.   Findings.



      1.   The recitals set forth above are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference herein to the same extent as if set forth here in
full.



      2.   The City Commission does hereby find that it is necessary
and appropriate that certain incentives in the form of fee reduction or
waivers be provided for new businesses locating within certain parts of the
City zoned Planned Industrial Development (PID) in order to promote economic
growth, to expand the ad valorem tax base, to increase job opportunities for
all citizens of the City, and to improve the economic condition of the City
and its residents and citizens.



      3.   The City Commission does hereby find that the creation of
such incentives and their application to certain businesses is in the public
interest and furthers a public purpose.



   B.   Eligible Businesses.  The City Commission does hereby
determine that the economic development incentives contemplated by this
section shall only be granted to new businesses or expanding existing
businesses as hereinafter defined:



      1.   Business - Any activity engaged in by any person,
partnership, corporation or firm with the object of private or public gain,
benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect. A business is further and
more specifically defined as follows:



         a.   New Business -



            (1)   A business establishing fifty (50) or more
jobs to employ fifty (50) or more full-time employees in this City, which
manufactures, processes, compounds, fabricates, or produces for sale items of
tangible personal property at a fixed location and which comprises an
industrial or manufacturing plant;



            (2)   An office space in this City owned and used
by a corporation newly domiciled in this City; provided such office space
houses fifty (50) or more full-time employees of such corporation.



            Provided that such businesses or office referred to
in subsections (1) or (2) above, first begins operation on a site clearly
separate from any other commercial or industrial operation owned by the same
business.



         b.   Expansion of an Existing Business-



            (1)   A business establishing fifty (50) or more
jobs to employ fifty (50) or more full-time employees in the City, which
manufactures, processes, compounds, fabricates, or produces for sale items of
tangible personal property at a fixed location and which comprises an
industrial or manufacturing plat.



            Provided that such business increases operations on a
site co-located with a commercial or industrial operation owned by the same
business, resulting in a net increase in employment of not less than
twenty-five (25%) percent.



         c.   Eligible Business -



            (1)   A business that meets the criteria set forth
herein for a new business or an expansion of an existing business, and



            (2)   Moves to or expands its operations to a
location within a Planned Industrial District within the City of Boynton
Beach, and



            (3)   Maintains its business operation at the
levels referenced herein for a period of three (3) years after opening for
business, and



            (4)   The wages paid to its full-time
non-management employees must be on average a minimum of $12.74 per hour.
Wages shall be defined as the total of the hourly wage, plus the cost of all
fringe benefits paid on behalf of the employees.



   C.   Payment of City Impact Fees.  Upon application of any Eligible
Business submitted prior to the issuance of a building permit for
construction of the Eligible Business' facility within the City and upon a
determination that the Eligible Business satisfies the requirements of this
section, the City Commission may, by ordinance and at its sole discretion,
cause the City to pay from legally available funds all, or a portion of City
impact fees by whatever name known that would have otherwise been paid by the
Eligible Business for water and sewer service provided by the City.  The
City Commission may also decide to defer the payment of any impact fees by
the Eligible Business. For the purpose of this division, “City impact
fees” means a land development regulatory fee charged to a new development
which creates a need for capital improvements.



   D.   Payment or Deferral of Building Permit Fees.  Upon application
of any eligible business, submitted prior to the issuance of a building
permit, and upon a determination that the eligible business satisfies the
requirements of this section, the City Commission may, as set forth in a
Resolution:



      1.   Authorize payment on behalf of the eligible business all
or part of building permit fees required by City Code; or



      2.   Defer payment of building permit fees for a time certain
to be set forth in the body of the Resolution.



         For the purpose of this section, "Building Permit Fees"
means those fees charged by the City for structural, mechanical, plumbing,
gas, and electrical review and inspection.



   E.   Fees Due if Facility Not Maintained.  Notwithstanding the
payment or deferral of City impact fees contemplated by division C. or the
waiver or deferral of building permit fees contemplated by division D., the
Eligible Business shall remain liable for and obligated to pay such fees if
the Eligible Business fails to maintain the corporate headquarters or
manufacturing an industrial facility in the City or fails to employ at least
fifty (50) individuals at that facility for a period of three (3) years
following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the facility.



   F.   Implementing Actions Authorized.  The appropriate City
officials are hereby authorized and directed to take such actions as are
necessary to implement the provisions of this section, including the City
Attorney who is authorized to prepare such other resolutions or such
ordinances as may be necessary to provide for the payment or waiver
contemplated by this section.



   G.   Reports to the City Commission.  The City Manager is hereby
directed to periodically from time to time report to the City Commission as
to the use of the economic development incentives contemplated by this
section, including information as to the number of new business facilities in
the City subject to such incentives, the number requesting such incentives,
the dollar value of the incentives to the businesses requesting them, and the
number of jobs created as a result of such facilities being located within 
the  City  and the amount of  increase  in  the City's ad valorem tax
base. The City Manager may at any time make recommendations to the City
Commission regarding the enlargement of economic development incentives or
curtailing or eliminating them based upon the expertise of the City with such
incentives and their effectiveness.



   H.   Non-vesting of Right.  The power of the City Commission to
grant the economic development incentives provided herein is a discretionary
and legislative function of the City Commission. Neither the adoption of this
section nor any subsequent act by the City Commission or the City
Administration shall vest any person or entity with any right to the waiver
of all or part of any fee as referenced herein.



   I.   Appropriation of Funds.  The City Commission prior to granting
an economic incentive as provided herein shall either appropriate funds for
the payment of such incentive, designate a specific funding source previously
appropriated through the budget process, or waive such fees.



(Ord. No. 96-47, §§ 1-9, 11-6-96; Ord. No. 01-32, §§ 2-4, 6-19-01)



Chapter 9
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION*



Art.   I.   General, §§ 9-1—9-4



Art.   II.   Fire Alarms and Automatic Fire Alarm Extinguishing
Systems, §§ 9-5—9-10



Art.   III.   Fire Codes, §§ 9-11—9-18



Art.   IV.   Fire and Life Safety Division, §§ 9-19—9-133



   *Editor’s note-note-Ord. No. 98-45, § 2, adopted December 1, 1998,
enacted Chapter 9, Fire Protection and Prevention, as amended by Ord. 99-26,
§ 1, adopted September 21, 1999, Ord. 00-08, § 1, adopted April 4, 2000,
Ord. 00-73, § 1, adopted December 19, 2000, Ord. 02-008, § 1, adopted
February 19, 2002, Ord. 03-040, § 2, adopted September 2, 2003, Ord. 04-005,
§ 2, adopted May 4, 2004, Ord. 04-028, April 20, 2004, Ord. 04-041, § 2,
adopted June 15, 2004, Ord. 06-015, § 2, adopted February 21, 2006, Ord.
06-096, § 2, adopted January 2, 2007, Ord. 07-012, § 2, adopted June 19,
2007, Ord. 08-030, § 2, adopted October 21, 2008, was subsequently repealed
and replaced by Ord. 18-008, §§ 2, 3, adopted May 1, 2018, as new Chapter
9, Fire Protection and Prevention.



   *Cross references-Code compliance board generally, § 2-72 et seq.;
enforcement of this chapter by board, § 2-75; building regulations
generally, Ch. 5; fire districts established, § 5-5; fireworks displays, §
15-5; fires and fire hazards in parks, § 16-43; Social Security for firemen,
§ 18-37 et seq.; pensions for firemen, § 18-179 et seq.; fire hydrants
required in subdivisions, App. C, Art. IX, § 6; design specifications for
fire hydrants in subdivisions, App. C, Art. X, § 16.



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL



Sec. 9-1.  Boynton Beach Fire Code; fire codes adopted.



   The Florida Fire Prevention Code, the NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code, 2015
edition, the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, 2015 edition, and any subsequent
additions adopted by state statute, are adopted as thefire prevention code of
the city.  These standards and codes are hereby adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length in this section.  Not less than one (1) copy
of the adopted issue of the NFPA Fire Prevention Code, 2015 edition, the NFPA
101 Life Safety Code, 2015 edition, and any subsequent additions adopted by
state statute shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city, and
within any municipality which has entered into an interlocal agreement or
contract for services from Boynton Beach Fire Rescue unless otherwise
provided for.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-2.  Enforcement authority.



   (a)   All regulations issued by the State Fire Marshal under
authority of F.S. Ch. 633 shall be enforceable by the Fire Chief and the Fire
Marshal, or designee.  The Fire Marshal is hereby authorized to perform
within the city any duties that may be imposed upon by such law, or in
accordance therewith, and to have such assistance, as needed, from other
officials of the city in the discharge of such duties.



   (b)   Periodic fire safety inspections.



      (1)   The Florida Fire Prevention Code and the Florida
statutes provide that each municipality, county, and special district with
fire safety responsibilities is required to enforce the Florida Fire
Prevention Code.  Such enforcement requires inspections of each new
structure or buildings whose occupancy type as defined by the state statute
and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.  Fire safety annual inspections shall
be conducted on each existing structure or building as defined by the F.S.
Ch. 633 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire
Marshal.



      (2)   No such building shall be occupied without the required
fire safety inspection.  The frequency of the inspections shall be annually
or as otherwise determined by the Fire Marshal.  A building occupied in
violation of this section is subject to a fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) per day.  Each day constitutes a separate and continuing
offense.  The city may enforce this provision of the code by action before
the Code Enforcement Board, by notice to appear for violation of a municipal
ordinance, or by action for injunctive relief.  The fines provided herein
are in addition to the penalties authorized by F.S. § 205.053.



      (3)   The inspection or permitting of any building or plan
under the requirements of this code shall not be construed as a warranty of
the physical condition of such building or the adequacy of such plan.  The
city or its employees shall not be liable in tort for damages for any defect
or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building or plan, or
for any failure of any component of such building, which may occur subsequent
to such inspection or permitting, pursuant to this code.



      (4)   Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance
required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for
a minimum of three (3) years, and shall be provided to the fire district
through a third-party inspection reporting system,.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-3.  Examination of building permits.



   (a)   No building permit shall be issued by the Building Department
for new construction, demolition, moving of existing buildings or renovation
of existing structures normally requiring a building permit until a complete
set of plans and/or specifications have been examined and approved by the
Fire and Life Safety Division.



   (b)   No building that requires a certificate of occupancy (CO) from
the Building Official shall be occupied for any purpose until a Fire
Department fire final has been approved.



   (c)   Nothing in this section shall apply to single-family or duplex
residential units.  Exceptions: fire sprinkler systems, generators, or gas
installations.



   (d)   When work for which a permit is required by this chapter is
started prior to issuance of a permit, the fees herein specified shall be
four (4) times the original fees.



   (e)   The payment of such fees shall not relieve any person from
fully complying with the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the
work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-4.  Penalty for violations.



   (a)   Failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a violation.



   (b)   Any person or entity violating any provision of this chapter
shall be punishable as provided in the Florida Fire Prevention Code, section
1-16 of NFPA 1, and as provided in the City of Boynton Beach Code of
Ordinances.



   (c)   The application of a penalty for violation of this chapter
shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



ARTICLE II.  FIRE ALARMS AND AUTOMATIC FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS



Sec. 9-5.  Automatic fire protection systems.



   Existing building or structure, for purposes of this section, means a
building or structure for which an application for building permits is sought
after the date of the adoption of this chapter.



   (a)   All automatic fire protection systems (i.e., sprinkler,
standpipe, fire pump systems and other suppression systems) shall be
maintained under a written service contract with service companies licensed
by the State of Florida to provide such services, and which possess a current
business tax receipt for the city, providing for regular maintenance and
testing of the systems in accordance with all applicable codes and standards.



      (1)   The service company performing the maintenance and tests
shall forward a written report to the Fire and Life Safety Division,
indicating the nature of any repairs, modifications and/or corrections
completed by the service company, the date and time of such tests and
inspections, and any other information which may be required by the Fire
Rescue Department. In addition, a copy of the service report must be
maintained on the premises, and it shall be subject to inspection at any time.



      (2)   All fire alarm signal systems, automatic extinguishing
and/or detection systems shall be provided with an approved annunciator panel
designed to indicate the floor number and the section of the building
reporting a fire alarm or fire condition.  Each alarm-initiating device
shall indicate an individual location on such annunciator.  The alarm
initiating device shall indicate its individual location to the monitoring
central station.  The annunciator shall respond to either manual or
automatic devices, and all devices within the system shall be connected to
the annunciator.  The location of the annunciator panel shall be designated
by the Fire and Life Safety Division, and it shall be so located as to be
immediately available to the Fire Rescue Services Department at all times. 
In a complex with multiple buildings, each building shall have its own
transmitter for alarm signal disposition to the central station.



      (3)   All new buildings and structures more than three (3)
stories or thirty-six (36) feet in height, or all buildings more than two (2)
stories in height and more than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet per
floor level, shall be equipped with approved Class 1 standpipes to provide
reasonable safety to persons and property.



      (4)   Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems, as
hereinafter defined, shall be installed throughout the following buildings
and structures:  buildings of an institutional or educational character,
hospitals, nursing homes, homes for the aged, convalescent centers,
rehabilitation facilities, day care centers for more than twelve (12) clients
under one (1) year of age, adult congregate living facilities, and all
occupancies and uses of similar nature to those herein stated, without regard
to the type of construction or height of the building involved.



   (b)   An approved audible and visual waterflow alarm (horn/strobe)
shall be provided on the exterior of the building in an approved location,
facing the street front of the building.



   (c)   A weatherproof horn/strobe or speaker/ strobe shall be
installed directly above the key box at a height easily seen upon approach to
the area.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-6.  Fire alarm system certification requirements.



   (a)   The applicant for a required fire alarm installation permit
shall submit to Fire Rescue Services Department plan review, along with the
permit application, documentation listing the NRTL central station for the
alarm system, and provide documentation of the Nationally Recognized Testing
Laboratory (NRTL) certification at time of acceptance testing of the fire
alarm system or added components.



   (b)   The applicant must demonstrate that the fire alarm monitoring
will be performed by a NRTL certificated central station.



   (c)   All required NRTL certificated fire alarm systems must
maintain NRTL compliance and NRTL monitoring.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-7.   False alarm signal service charge; collection.



   (a)   For response to excessive false alarm signals by the Fire
Rescue Department, the alarm user shall be charged a service fee by the city,
as established by resolution of the City Commission and on file in the City
Clerk’s office, for the first false alarm signal in excess of three (3)
false alarm signals in any twelve (12) month period, a service fee as
established by resolution of the City Commission for the second false alarm
signal in excess of three (3) in any in any twelve (12) month period, and a
service fee as established by resolution of the City Commission for the third
and each successive false alarm signal in excess of three (3) in any twelve
(12) month period.  The provisions of this section shall not apply for a
period of three (3) months from the date a permit is issued by the city for
the installation of an automatic fire detection system.  The Fire Marshal
shall determine whether a false alarm signal has been transmitted and the
frequency of such false alarm signals, and the city shall notify alarm users
of the amount owed to the city and shall make demand thereof pursuant to the
provisions of this section.



   (b)   False alarms could also be defined as excessive public assist
calls wherein no medical services are provided.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-8.   Alarm registration.



   All required fire alarm systems must comply with the requirements of
Chapter 2.5. of the City of Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-9.   Fire protection water supply requirements.



   (a)   In accordance with NFPA 24 (2013), Section 5.1.1, design of
water-based suppression systems that are not supplied by fire pumps, shall be
based on drought conditions (forty-five (45) psi static per the Utilities
Department).



   (b)   New construction projects must provide the results of a
hydrant flow test performed by the Fire Rescue Department, indicating a fire
flow not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) gpm @ twenty (20) psi
above domestic use.  This applies to new or existing hydrants within the
required two hundred (200) feet of the facility.



   (c)   The required fire flow for hydrants protecting high-rise
buildings shall be three thousand (3,000) gpm @ twenty (20) psi above
domestic use.



   (d)   Hydrants not in service (no water available) shall be covered
with a black plastic bag so as not to be mistaken for active hydrants
available for fire suppression.



   (e)   Water meters are prohibited on fire sprinkler supply lines.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-10.   Fire hydrants and Fire Department connections.



   (a)   Reflective blue markers shall be placed to indicate the
location of a hydrant.



   (b)   Reflective red markers shall be placed to indicate the
location of Fire Department connections to a sprinkler or standpipe system.



   (c)   Fire hydrants shall be painted red in accordance with
specifications approved by the Fire Chief.



   (d)   A fire hydrant shall be located within one hundred (100) feet
of the Fire Department connection, along access roadways with all-weather
driving surfaces, distance measured as the fire track travels.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



ARTICLE III.  FIRE CODES



Sec. 9-11.   Open fires.



   (a)   Defined.Open fires are defined as any outdoor fire or open
combustion of material, except barbecuing.  Charcoal and propane fires,
contained within a manufactured hibachi, grill, smoker or gas grill for food
preparation, do not constitute open burning.



   (b)   Prohibited generally. It shall be unlawful to have any open
fires within the city limits on public or private property, except for fire
training purposes or recreational or ceremonial occasions for which written
permits from the Fire Rescue Department are required.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-12.   Roadway security gates and emergency access.



   (a)   All security gates across roadways used by emergency response
vehicles must be provided with an authorized key box or key switch to operate
the gate, in addition to any other devices specified by the Fire Chief. 
Information on where authorized key security, boxes can be obtained is
available from the Fire and Life Safety Division.



   (b)   In case of power failure, any electronic gate shall open
automatically and remain open until power is restored.



   (c)   In the event that emergency personnel are unable to gain rapid
entry with the methods above, forcible entry methods to gain entry may be
used.  The city and/or the Fire Rescue Department shall not be responsible
for, nor incur any costs as a result of gaining access to a specific area.



   (d)   Trees with branches over areas accessible to fire apparatus
must maintain sixteen (16) feet of vertical clearance.  Vegetation shall not
intrude into the roadway such that would limit the free passage of emergency
vehicles.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-13.   Key boxes/entry systems.



   In all new and existing buildings, except individual residential
dwelling units of any kind, there shall be installed a key box for such areas
or buildings, when the Fire Marshal, determines that access to or within a
structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured doors and
windows, security gates, or where immediate access is necessary for all
life-saving or firefighting purposes.  The key box shall be a type approved
by the Fire Marshal, and shall contain:



   (a)   Keys to locked points of egress, whether in common areas or on
the interior or exterior of such buildings;



   (b)   Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms;



   (c)   Keys to fire alarm control panels;



   (d)   Keys to suppression system components;



   (e)   Keys to locked electrical rooms;



   (f)   Keys to elevator controls; and



   (g)   Keys to other areas where fire rescue personnel may need
emergency access as directed by the Fire Marshal.  The Fire Marshal shall
approve the location of the lock box.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-14.   Control of automatic elevators; emergency use.



   (a)   Emergency auxiliary power required.



      (1)   Emergency auxiliary electrical power shall be provided
for all elevators equipped with the key switch service for Fire Rescue
Services Department personnel.  The auxiliary power supply shall be capable
of supplying power to the elevators for a period of at least twenty-four (24)
hours.  The auxiliary power supply shall be approved by the Fire Rescue
Services Department.



      (2)   Emergency auxiliary power shall remain on for the car in
use by firefighters regardless of selection switch devices, which may also be
installed to rotate emergency power to other cars in the building.



      (3)   No more than ten (10) seconds shall be required for the
auxiliary power to be in full operation and the operation of the emergency
power supply shall automatically transfer to the firefighters’ service car.



      (4)   A maintenance schedule shall be maintained in the
generator equipment room to record all tests and operation of such auxiliary
power equipment.  The records shall be posted and available to the Fire
Rescue Services Department at all times.



      (5)   All auxiliary power equipment and automatic transfer
apparatus shall be tested weekly.



      (6)   For all buildings designed and constructed having
separate towers, each tower shall be treated as though it were a separate
building.



   (b)   In all buildings equipped with automatic elevators, at least
one (1) designated elevator servicing all floors of the structure shall be
arranged for emergency use (firefighters’ service) by Fire Department
personnel. The control of automatic elevators shall meet the requirements as
set forth under the state elevator code and ASME/ANSI, A17.1.



   (c)   Emergency use elevator to be identified.



   (d)   A standard emergency access door key shall be provided for all
elevators in the city.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-15.   Fireworks.



   (a)   The term fireworks shall mean and include any combustible or
explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or
article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect
by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, as defined by F.S. Ch.
791.



   (b)   The Fire Marshal may adopt reasonable rules and regulations
for the granting of permits for supervised displays of fireworks by the city,
fair associations, civic groups, and other organizations or groups of
individuals.  Prior to any outdoor use of fireworks, pyrotechnic special
effects, flame effects, or any other item listed in subsection (a) or (b) of
this section, a permit shall be obtained from the City Manager, or designee,
after submission of an application for such permit and payment of an
application fee.  Such outdoor use shall be in accordance with NFPA Code
1123 and NFPA Code 1124.  The City Manager, or designee, may include such
conditions in such permit as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with all
applicable requirements and protect the public health, welfare and safety,
including, but not limited to, payment of inspection fees.  No permit
granted hereunder shall be transferable.



   (c)   Before the issuance of a permit for a display of fireworks,
the applicant shall furnish proof of financial responsibility, in the form of
liability insurance with a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
coverage for each occurrence to satisfy claims for damages to property or
personal injuries arising out of any act or omission on the part of the
applicant, or any agent of employee thereof, in such amount, character and
form as the Fire Marshal determines to be necessary for the protection of the
public.



   (d)   No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this section
to an applicant not having an established place of business within the state
for conduct of a display of fireworks until the applicant has fulfilled the
legal requirements for service of process upon the person or entity seeking a
permit.  In the case of a corporation, proof of registration, with the
Secretary of State, as a nonresident corporation shall be required.



   (e)   During times of water shortages or water shortage emergencies,
as determined by the South Florida Water Management District and/or the city
and defined in Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, as it may be
amended from time to time; the possession, use. or sale of consumer
fireworks, including sparklers as defined in F.S. § 791.01(8), is prohibited
within the city limits without a permit as discussed above.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-16.   Fees for fire code inspections and other fire code
inspection-related services.



   Fees shall be charged to the user/consumer for new construction
permits, inspections and yearly fire prevention code inspections and
re-inspections performed on structures or buildings by the Fire Rescue
Department, as set forth in a resolution adopted by the City Commission. 
Fees for other fire code inspection-related services, including, but not
limited to, fire pump tests, hydrant tests, and preliminary plans review,
shall be charged to the user/consumer as set forth in a resolution adopted by
the City Commission.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-17.   Requirements for high-rise buildings.



   The following life safety features shall be provided and maintained in
working order by the property owner in accordance with approved plans and
specifications, and shall be tested, certified and proved to be in proper
working condition, at the owner’s cost, to the satisfaction of the Fire
Marshal, before issuance of the certificate of compliance.



   (a)   Equipment storage rooms.  Equipment rooms or areas, as
described in the Fire Department Design Guide, for purpose of storing
equipment for Fire Department use shall be provided.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-18.  Public safety radio communication system.



   In all new buildings, minimum radio signal strength for public radio
signals shall be required within the building.  In buildings that cause
reduction of public safety, radio signals below the acceptable level for
reliable communications, a bi-directional amplifier (BDA) shall be
required.  In buildings where phone jacks are required as part of an alarm
system, a BDA shall be installed and maintained by the building owner, in
lieu of the phone jacks.  Installation and signal strength shall be the
minimum requirements per NFPA 1, Annex O (In-Building Public Safety Radio
Enhancement Systems), or NFPA 72 edition, or as specified by the AHJ.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



ARTICLE IV.  FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY DIVISION



Sec. 9-19.  Inspection complaint; order to remedy danger; evacuation of
occupied buildings or structures.



   (a)   The Chief of the Fire Rescue Services Department, the Fire
Marshal, or Fire Inspector of the Fire and Life Safety Division may order the
immediate cessation of any activity, operation or process, when such
operation, activity, or process is deemed to constitute a severe and
immediate hazard to persons or property.



   (b)   It is unlawful for any person who, after being served with
either a verbal or written order to cease such severe and immediate hazardous
activity, operation or process, to fail or refuse to comply with such an
order.



   (c)   The Fire Marshal, or designee, may order the immediate
evacuation of any occupied building or structure or assembly area when such
building, structure or assembly area is deemed hazardous due to fire hazard,
obstruction to exits, overcrowding of the premises, or any other hazard or
potential which presents immediate danger to the occupants.  The premises,
or any portion thereof, may not be reoccupied until it has been examined and
deemed free of the hazard or potential which caused the evacuation to be
ordered.  Persons refusing to obey either a verbal or written order of the
Fire Marshal, or designee, shall be subject to immediate arrest.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-20.  Authority to require employment of standby emergency services
personnel for events held within the city.



   (a)   The Fire Marshal, or designee, is hereby authorized to require
the employment of one (1) or more standby  city emergency services
personnel, by any owner, lessee, agent or promoter, when in the Fire
Marshal’s opinion it is essential that such personnel be on duty in any
place of public assembly or any other place where people congregate.  The
determination that standby emergency services personnel are required shall be
based upon the number of persons in attendance and the nature of the
performance, exhibition, display, contest, event or activity.  While so
employed, such personnel shall he subject to the Fire Chief’s orders at all
times, and shall be in uniform and remain on duty during the times such
places or events are open to the public, or when the activity is being
conducted.  Paramedics or EMTs shall not be required or permitted, while on
duty, to perform any other duties than those specified in this article.



   (b)   Standby emergency services shall be provided exclusively
through the City Fire Rescue Department.  The Fire Rescue Department is
authorized to charge for services rendered under this section, based upon the
Fire Rescue Department’s cost to provide the required level of emergency
services, including any administrative expenses.  The Fire Chief may reduce
or waive fees if deemed appropriate.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Sec. 9-21.  Definitions; authority and responsibility; cost recovery for
special operations and cleanup of hazardous materials.



   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings given herein:



      (1)   Costs. Those necessary and reasonable costs incurred by
the city in connection with investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing
or abating discharges of hazardous substances, or in connection with costs
incurred by any activity of the special or tactical operations unit,
including, but not limited to, actual labor costs of city personnel or its
authorized agents; costs of equipment operation and rental; costs of
expendable items, including, but not limited to, firefighting foam, chemical
extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand, recovery drums, acid suits,
acid gloves, goggles and protective clothing.



      (2)   Discharge.  Any intentional or unintentional action or
omission resulting in the releasing, spilling, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying or dumping of a hazardous substance upon public or private property
located within the corporate limits of the city.



      (3)   Hazardous substances.  Any substances or materials in a
quantity or form which, in the determination of the Fire Department, pose an
unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health, safety of welfare of
persons or property within the city, and shall include, but not be limited
to, those substances listed in the NFPA guide on hazardous materials, the
EPA’s list of extremely hazardous substances, or the Florida substance list
promulgated by the State Department of Labor and Employment Security.



   (b)   The. Fire Rescue Department is hereby authorized to take such
steps as necessary to clean up, remove or abate the effects of any hazardous
substances discharged upon or into public or private property or facilities
located within the corporate limits of the city, and is authorized to use its
special or tactical operations unit to effectively deal with specific
emergencies, including, but not limited to, high-angle, confined-space, and
other forms of vertical rescue.



   (c)   Any person responsible for causing or allowing an unauthorized
discharge of hazardous substances which requires action by the Fire Rescue
Department, or its authorized agents, in order to protect the public health,
safety or welfare, shall reimburse the city for the full amount of all costs
associated with the investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing and
abating any such discharge, or otherwise providing relief to a
life-threatening situation involving special and tactical operations. 
Reimbursement shall be made within thirty (30) days after receipt of an
itemized bill for such costs from the city.



   (d)   When responding to the emergency caused by the unauthorized
discharge of hazardous substances, or to an emergency requiring the use of
the special or tactical operations unit, the Fire Rescue Department shall
keep a detailed record of the costs attributable thereto.



   (e)   The authority to recover costs under this section shall not
include costs incurred for actual fire suppression services, which are
normally or usually provided by the Fire Department or its authorized agents.



   (f)   Any person responsible for causing or allowing an unauthorized
discharge of hazardous substances, or responsible for an emergency requiring
the use of the special operations and tactical unit, and who fails to
reimburse the city within the, time set forth herein, shall be subject to a
late fee in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the bill
for each additional day that the bill for such costs remains unpaid.



   (g)   The remedy provided for in this section shall be supplemental
to and in addition to all other available remedies by law and equity.



(Ord. 18-008, § 3, 5-1-18)



Secs. 9-22—9-133.  Reserved.



Chapter 10
GARBAGE, TRASH AND OFFENSIVE CONDITIONS*



Art. I.   In General, §§ 10-1—10-21



Art. II.   Refuse, Garbage and Trash, §§ 10-22—10-49



Art. III.   Abandoned Property, §§ 10-50—10-53



Art. IV.    Property Maintenance Requirements, §§ 10-54—10-62



   *Cross references-Solid Waste placed within Department of Public Works,
§ 2-2; removal of dead animals, §§ 4-10, 4-11; nuisances arising from
keeping of animals, § 4-13; open burning, § 9-3; stench bombs and other
offensive matter, § 15-11; litter, § 15-26 et seq.; disposal of refuse and
trash on beaches and in parks, § 16-49.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 10-1.  Reserved.



   Editor's note-Section 2 of Ord. No. 88-39, adopted Sept. 7, 1988,
repealed former § 10-1, which pertained to penalties and derived from Code
1958, § 13-42.



Sec. 10-2.  Lands to be kept free from trash or filth.



   The owners of lands within the City shall keep the land and one-half of
any abutting street, alley or easement free from any accumulation of trash or
filth, broken tree limbs or branches, uncontained garbage or refuse, any
containers or materials which could hold or conceal pools of water, and heavy
dense or dank growth of weeds, grass, underbrush, palmettos, Florida holly
trees, or other uncultivated vegetation, or other dead or living plant life,
which might constitute a fire hazard, serve as a breeding place for or harbor
insects, rodents, wild animals, snakes or other pests or vermin, give off an
offensive odor, or which otherwise is considered to be a hazard to the health
and safety of individuals residing or working on neighboring property and the
general public, which shall in each constitute a nuisance when any parts or
accumulationof growth are located within fifty (50) feet of the boundary of
any developed or maintained adjacent property located in the corporate limits
of the City of Boynton Beach. It is further found and declared that said
accumulation and growth are detrimental to the economic welfare of the
adjacent property, and injurious to the public safety, health and welfare of
the City of Boynton Beach and its inhabitants. Said nuisances also adversely
affect economic growth, stability and prosperity of said city and its
inhabitants. It is further found and declared that dense, undergrowth, weeds
and vegetation either cultivated or uncultivated that are allowed to grow so
as to impede and obstruct the normal view of intersections, railroad
crossings or traffic signs from streets, roads and highways are traffic
hazards and are hereby declared to be a nuisance.



(Code 1958, §§ 13-15, 13-18, 13-27; Ord. No. 80-27, § 1, 7-15-80; Ord. No.
82-28, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04)



Sec. 10-3.  Lands to be kept free from matter occasioning hurricane hazards.



   All lands in the City shall be kept free from debris, vegetation
(including trees) or any other matter, which by reason of height, proximity
to neighboring structures, physical condition, or other peculiar
characteristics, might, in time of hurricane winds, cause damage to life or
property within the immediate area surrounding the same. The existence of any
debris, vegetation or other matter as shall create such a hazard is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.



(Code 1958, § 13-17; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04)



Sec. 10-4.  Inspection of lands to determine violation.



   The City Manager or the designated representative shall, as often as
may be necessary, inspect lands within the City to determine if violation of
this chapter exists.



(Ord. No. 89-47, § 1, 12-5-89; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04)



Sec. 10-5.  Notice of violation required.



   If the City Manager or the designated representative determines that a
public nuisance exists, in accordance with the standards set forth in these
sections on any lot, tract, parcel, or other real property, within the City,
whether improved or unimproved, the City Manager, or the designated
representative, shall notify the owner of the property, as the ownership
appears upon the last complete records of the county tax assessor. The notice
shall be given in writing by first class mail, postage prepaid, which shall
be effective and complete when properly addressed as set forth above and
deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid, and shall be
considered sufficient notice. In case of multiple or joint ownership, service
as herein provided on any one (1) owner shall be sufficient. The personal
hand delivery by the City Manager or the designated representative in lieu of
mailing shall be equivalent to mailing. In the event that the mailed notice
is returned by the postal authorities, the City Manager or the designated
representative shall cause a copy of the notice to be hand delivered upon the
occupant of the property, or upon any agent of the owner thereof. In the
event that personal service upon the occupant of the property or upon any
agent of the owner thereof cannot be performed after reasonable search, the
notice shall be given by a physical posting of the notice on the subject
property.



(Ord. No. 89-47, § 2, 12-5-89; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04)



Sec. 10-6.  Content and form of notice.



   (a)   The Notice provided for in section 10-5 shall notify the owner
of the land of the following:



      (1)   That it has been determined that a public nuisance
exists on the land, and what constitutes that nuisance.



      (2)   That the owner of the land shall have no more than ten
(10) days from the date of the receipt of the notice to remove the condition
causing the nuisance on the land.



      (3)   That if the conditions are not corrected or removed, the
City shall have the conditions corrected or removed at the expense of the
owner, including, but not limited to all administrative and inspection costs.



      (4)   That the owner(s) have no more than ten (10) days from
the date of receipt, delivery, or posting of the notice to bring the property
into conformance with the City's Code of Ordinances, to file a written appeal
with the City Manager or designee for a hearing before a three-person appeal
panel.  The three-person panel shall be composed of the City Manager, the
Director of Public Works, and the Code Compliance Administrator, or their
designees. The hearing regarding the owner's appeal shall be held within five
(5) days of the date the petition is received by the City Manager.



      (5)   That the written appeal shall address the following
issues:



         (a)   Whether the conditions do in fact exist;



         (b)   Why the City should not abate the conditions on
the property, at the expense of the owner, and



         (c)   The time limits for abatement.



      (6)   That the source of the condition shall not be a defense
against the requirement that the condition shall be abated by the owner.



      (7)   That if, after a hearing, the board determines that the
conditions which exist on the property constitute a public nuisance, the
board may grant the owner of the property such additional time as the board
should deem as appropriate  to correct or remove the conditions after which
the City shall have the right to have the conditions abated at the expense of
the property owner.  If the owner does not request a hearing within the
designated time allotted, the City shall have the right to have the
objectionable condition corrected or removed at the expense of the owner. If
the City has the condition abated and payment is not received within thirty
(30) days after the mailing of a notice of assessment for the cost of the
work together with all costs of inspection and administration, the City shall
have a lien placed against the property for the cost of the work, including
inspection and administration costs, plus interest at the rate of eight 
percent (8%) per annum, plus reasonable attorney's fees, and other costs of
collecting the sums, without further hearing by the board or commission.



(Ord. No. 89-47, § 3, 12-5-89; Ord. No. 02-033, § 1, 8-20-02; Ord. No.
04-030, § 2, 5-18-04)



Sec. 10-7.  Hearing.



   (a)   The owner of the property shall have the right to file a
written petition with the City Manager for a hearing no later than  ten (10)
days from the date of the notice of public nuisance provided for in this
chapter. The hearing shall be held before a three-person board composed of
the City Manager, the Director of Public Works/Engineer and the Code
Compliance Administrator, or their designees. The hearing shall be held no
later than ten (10) days after the City Manager receives the petition.



   (b)   The issues to be determined at the hearing are whether the
conditions do in fact exist, and why the conditions should not be abated by
the City at the expense of the owner, and the time limits for theabatement.
The source of the condition shall not be a defense against the requirement
that the condition shall be abated by the owner.



(Ord. No. 89-47, § 4, 12-5-89; Ord. No. 02-033, § 1, 8-20-02; Ord. No.
04-030, § 2, 5-18-04)



Sec. 10-8.  Abatement by city; notice of estimated cost.



   (a)   If,  after a hearing, as provided for in section 10-7, the
board determines that the conditions which exist on the property constitute a
public nuisance, the owner of the property shall have additional time as the
board should deem as appropriate to remove or correct the conditions, after
which the City shall have the right to have the conditions abated at the
expense of the property owner. If the owner has not requested a hearing, the
City shall have the right to have the objectionable condition corrected or
removed at the expense of the owner. If the City has the condition abated and
payment is not received within thirty (30) days after the mailing of a notice
of assessment for the work together with all costs of inspection and
administration, the City shall assess the costs of the work, against the
property as provided in this Chapter, including inspection and administration
costs, plus interest at the rate of eight  percent (8%) per annum, plus
reasonable attorney's fees, and other costs of collecting the sums.



   (b)   Prior to the condition being corrected by the City, notice
shall be delivered or sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the owner
notifying the owner of the estimated cost of abating the condition.



(Ord. No. 89-47, § 5, 12-5-89; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04)



Sec. 10-09.  Assessment of costs, interest, and attorney's fees; lien.



   As soon as possible after the abatement takes place, the City Manager
shall report to the City Commission the cost of the abatement, including the
costs of inspection and administration. Thereafter, the City Commission
shall, by resolution, assess the costs against the subject parcel. This
resolution shall describe the property assessed, show the costs of the
abatement, including costs of inspection and administration, and indicate
that the assessment shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per
annum plus, if collection proceedings are necessary, that the property owner
would be required to pay the cost of the proceedings including a reasonable
attorney's fee. This resolution shall become effective thirty (30) days from
the date of adoption, and the assessment contained therein shall become due
and payable thirty (30) days after the mailing date of the notice of the
assessment. In the event that payment has not been received within thirty
(30) days after the mailing date of the notice of assessment, the City Clerk
shall record a certified copy of the resolution in the public records of Palm
Beach County, and upon the date and time of recording the certified copy of
the resolution, a lien shall become effective on the subject property which
shall secure the cost of abatement, including costs of inspection and
administration, and collection costs including a reasonable attorney's fee.
At the time the City Clerk sends the certified copy of the resolution for
recording, the Clerk shall also notify the property owner that the City is
recording a certified copy of the resolution in the public records of Palm
Beach County.



(Ord. No. 89-47, § 8, 12-5-89; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04)



Sec. 10-10.  Enforcement of assessment.



   The City may enforce the assessment by either an action at law or
foreclosure of the lien provided in section 10-9, which shall be foreclosed
in the same manner as mortgages are foreclosed under state law. In either
type of action, the city shall be entitled to interest at the rate of eight
percent (8%) per annum from the date of assessment, in addition to collection
costs, and reasonable attorney's fees.



(Ord. No. 89-47, § 9, 12-5-89; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04)



Secs. 10-11—10-21. Reserved.



ARTICLE II. REFUSE, GARBAGE AND TRASH*



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 82-29, § 1, enacted Sept. 21, 1982, repealed
former Art. II, §§ 10-22—10-39, relative to refuse, garbage and trash,
and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. II, pertaining to the same subject
matter. Former Art. II was derived from Code 1958, §§ 13-2—13-6, 13-9,
13-11, 13-13, 13-33—13-41, and Ord. No. 80-20, § 1, adopted June 3, 1980.



Sec. 10-22.  City to collect and dispose of garbage; supervision; regulatory
authority.



   All refuse, garbage,  trash of all types, vegetative trash, recycling,
construction and demolition material accumulated in the City shall be
exclusively collected, conveyed and disposed of by the City under the
supervision of the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works
shall have authority to make administrative regulations concerning the days
of collection, type and location of waste containers and such other matters
pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal not otherwise set by
the City Commission or the City Manager as he shall find necessary, and to
change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided that
such regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof.



(Ord. No. 82-29, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04; Ord. No.
14-022, § 2, 9-16-14)



Sec. 10-23.  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms are
defined as follows:



   Commercial means any public or private place, building and/or
enterprise or business devoted in whole or in part to a business enterprise,
whether nonprofit or profit-making in nature, including, but not limited to
hotels, motels, restaurants, offices, industries, stores, markets, theaters,
hospitals and other institutions which hold themselves out to the public as
places of business, services or accommodations.



   Containers or receptacles:



      (1)   “Non-containerized” means the use of a "roll-out
cart" provided by the City for the use of garbage collection purposes. The
cart as defined will be of a special design and construction as to allow for
the mechanical or automation of collection of garbage.



      (2)   "Containerized" or "Dumpster" means a detachable metal
container provided by the City designed and intended to be mechanically
dumped into a packer-type solid waste vehicle and varying in size from two
(2) cubic yards to eight (8) cubic yards adaptable to City equipment. This
type receptacle is normally associated with collection service for commercial
or multifamily developments.



      (3)   "Containerized or Dumpster with wheels" are containers
supplied by the occupants, business, or institution who choose to use them
inside buildings and roll them to the designated outside location for pickup.
This type receptacle is normally associated with multifamily or commercial
developments.



      (4)   "Compactor" is a mechanical device to accept garbage,
trash, and other types of materials, mechanically press or compact the
material into a more dense form, and to be serviced by City trucks designed
for such operations. The compactor shall be the property of the business,
institution, or customer, and shall not be owned, maintained, or repaired by
the City. The City shall service the compactor to the extent of collecting
and disposal of the material, and will not be responsible for the mechanical
operation, repair, energy to operate, or longevity of the device. The
customer shall be responsible for consulting with the City prior to
purchasing a compactor to assure the compactor and the City trucks used to
service the compactor are compatible. Failure on the part of the customer to
conduct such coordination shall not waive the requirement that the compactor
is to be serviced by City equipment. The City will bear no responsibility for
modifying either the compactor, or its equipment to offer the necessary
service. This type receptacle can be associated with commercial, mobile home
parks, or institutional type of customers.



      (5)   "Roll-out garbage carts" are specialized garbage carts
provided exclusively by the City as a part of the residential garbage
collection service. The carts are of a design that would allow the City to
mechanically collect the garbage, or to automate the garbage collection
process.



      (6)   "Roll-off containers" are various sized metal containers
specially designed for the collection of noncombustible trash, construction,
demolition, cleaning, renovation, industrial, or garbage wastes normally
associated with construction projects or special events. The containers are
provided by the City upon request and qualification of the customer, and
shall be serviced by the City exclusively on an as needed basis.



   Dispose means to deliver to approved landfill or transfer station or
other approved disposal method.



   Director of Public Works means the Director of Public Works and/or the
duly authorized agent.



   Mandatory Service Charge means an automatic fifty dollar ($50.00)
service charge will be assessed for any bulk trash/vegetation that is placed
for pickup on the wrong day.



   Recycling means any process by which solid waste, or materials which
would otherwise become solid waste, are collected, separated, or processed
and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products.



   Refuse shall mean any or all of the following: garbage, noncombustible
trash, vegetative trash, contaminated yard trash, bulk trash, construction
and demolition material, hazardous, industrial waste, infectious waste, and
recycling material. Such items are hereby further defined as follows:



      (1)   "Garbage:" Every accumulation of animal, fruit, or
vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking and dealing in or
storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables, and any other matter, of
any nature which is subject to decay, putrefaction and generation of noxious
or offensive gases or odors, or which, during or after decay may serve as a
breeding or feeding material for flies or other germ carrying insects; and
any bottles, cans or other containers, except recyclable containers, which
due to their ability to retain water, may serve as a breeding place for
mosquitoes or other insects.  Garbage shall not include human solid waste.
Garbage is collected from each residential unit in the City twice a week, and
from each commercial establishment as requested by the customer or as
required by the Director of Public Works when public safety or appearance is
jeopardized.



      (2)   “Noncombustible trash:” Materials that are not
burnable at ordinary incineration temperatures, such as metals, mineral
matter, metal furniture and auto bodies and parts, dirt, bricks, paving and
other types of building or demolition materials.  The City shall not collect
non-combustible trash on a scheduled, routine basis.



      (3)   “Containerized or Dumpster with wheels” are
containers supplied by the occupants, business, or institution who choose to
use them inside buildings and roll them to the designated outside location
for pickup. This type receptacle is normally associated with multifamily or
commercial developments.



      (4)   "Contaminated yard waste:" Shall mean any yard and
garden waste pile containing material other than containerized grass or
leaves, shrubbery cuttings, or vegetative matter of any type incidental to
the care of residential lawns and gardens, including limbs and branches less
than four (4) inches in diameter or four (4) feet in length.



      (5)   "Bulk trash:" Shall mean large objects and items,
however not necessarily limited to the following: washers, dryers, furniture
(including mattresses and springs), rugs, cabinets, wooden boxes, and other
types of household items. Bulk trash shall also include owner generated
construction debris less than one (1) cubic yard.



      (6)   "Construction and demolition material:" Commonly
referred to as C&D debris, shall be any byproduct material from either the
construction or demolition or remodeling, or repair of any type building,
structure, or roadway, or driveway materials. Material would commonly
contain, but not be limited to, building materials, rubble, stone, brick,
earthwork, paving materials, concrete, blocks, wood, roofing materials of all
types, metal, piping, asphalt, fencing, cabinets, HVAC ducting, heating and
air conditioning equipment, plumbing fixtures and the like. This material
will not be collected routinely by the City. The customer should contact the
Director of Public Works to schedule the removal, or arrange for a roll-off
container to be provided but the City. The cost of this service will be in
accordance with the type of materials and the cost of associated disposal.



      (7)   "Hazardous material:" Shall be any type material or
product whose chemical or biological nature make it dangerous to the human
health if disposed improperly, or that could cause harm to the environment.
This includes any material which requires special handling due to its acute
or chronic effects on air and water quality, on fish, wildlife, or other
biota and on the health and welfare of the public, including but not limited
to explosives, pathological wastes, radioactive materials, oil-based paints,
thinners, fluorescent bulbs, auto fluids, pesticides, flares, pool chemicals,
sharps or needles, batteries, and acidic, caustic, toxic or highly flammable
chemicals. The City will not collect hazardous material on any regular Solid
Waste services. Arrangements for the special disposal shall be made by the
customer for the proper, safe, and legal disposal of hazardous material by
calling the Solid Waste Authority.



      (8)   "Infectious waste:" Is any type of waste material
resulting from the operation of medical clinics, hospitals, abattoirs, and
other facilities producing waste which may consist of human and/or parts,
contaminated bandages, pathological specimens, hypodermic needles,
contaminated clothing and surgical gloves. The City will not routinely
collect infectious waste. Arrangements for special disposal shall be made
privately by the customer for the proper, safe, and legal disposal of
infectious waste according to standards within the relevant industry.



      (9)   "Recyclable materials:" Shall mean newspaper (including
inserts), aluminum, plastic containers, glass bottle and jars, milk and juice
cartons, aseptic containers, corrugated cardboard, brown paper bags, mixed
paper, tin, and ferrous cans, household dry-cell batteries (no wet-cell
batteries) and other type materials that have known recycling potential, can
be feasibly recycled, and have been diverted and source separated or have
been removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, or reuse as raw
materials, whether or not the materials require materials would include items
that are capable of being recycled and which would otherwise be processed or
disposed of as solid waste. Recycled material shall be collected on a
scheduled routine basis from each residential unit in the City.



   Residential dwelling unit means any structure or shelter, house,
apartment building, or any part thereof used or constructed for human
habitation and shall include bath and culinary accommodations for one or more
families.



      (1)   "Single-family dwelling:" means a residential dwelling
unit designed to contain only one (1) family, or any residential dwelling
unit, or any number of residential dwelling units receiving Solid Waste
service for each individual dwelling unit.



      (2)   "Multi-family dwelling:" means a residential dwelling
unit designed to contain more than one (1) family, and received containerized
Solid Waste service.



   Sanitation Supervisor. See Director of Public Works.



   Special pickup, and costs referenced herein, shall apply when
residential solid waste, exclusive of construction debris, greater than six
(6) cubic yards must be collected and disposed of separate from other
provisions of this Article. Special pickups will be coordinated with the
resident and a Solid Waste Supervisor as to time, place, date, and items to
be picked up. Items to be picked up will not be deposited at the curbside
more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the scheduled special pickup. All
special pickups shall be at additional cost to the resident.  An estimate of
the cost of the special pickup should be obtained by contacting the office of
the Director of Public Works. Special pickups will be made as soon as
practicable upon acceptance of the cost estimate by the owner.  The minimum
fee for this service is seventy-five dollars ($75.00).



(Ord. No. 82-29, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 92-12, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 94-28,
§ 1, 9-9-94; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04; Ord. No. 08-012, § 2, 6-3- 08;
Ord. No. 14-022, § 2, 9-16-14)



Sec. 10-24.  Single family residential  refuse collection.



   (a)   The City will collect noncontainerized residential refuse
under the following conditions:



      (1)   Garbage will be collected twice per week at curbside
only from each single family residential unit in the City provided with
roll-out garbage carts.  The placement of household garbage in a loose and
uncontained manner on the roadside, swale or other locations adjacent to the
roadway with the expectation of collection shall be strictly prohibited. 
All material intended for disposal with the roll-out garbage carts shall be
placed inside the cart, and the lid of the cart must be closed. All refuse
cans and carts shall be aboveground, placed off the street, but within three
(3) feet of the curb or edge of pavement and shall be located a minimum of
three (3) feet from any obstruction that may interfere with routine
collection. Yard trash and combustible trash will not be collected with
household garbage, but will be picked up once per week on a scheduled trash
pickup day. Yard trash and combustible trash capable of being containerized
should be placed in a standard garbage can, roll-out garbage cart, plastic
bag, or disposable container, only yard waste generated by residential
property will be eligible for collection. Collection of yard trash should be
piled separately from all other trash at curbside. Any mixing of household
garbage, combustible, noncombustible, or bulk trash with the yard trash shall
be strictly prohibited. Materials classified as hazardous material will not
be collected by the City. Household garbage, trash or any type of other
material intended for collection, shall not be set out prior to the day
proceeding the scheduled pickup.



      (2)   All garbage cans provided by the individual customer
shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Director of Public Works
or designee at all times. A container not approved by the Director of Public
Works and which is set out for collection will have a notice placed upon the
container, handed to the owner or occupant, or left at his residence and the
occupant shall no longer use the container for collection.



      (3)   Special waterproof disposable refuse bags or any other
containers may be used for vegetative materials. When such bags or any other
containers are used, the responsibility for protection of either the bag or
the container and the contents shall rest with the individuals occupying or
residing on the property. Rupture of, or damage to the bag or container, from
any cause which results in the scattering of refuse prior to the arrival of
City collection personnel will obligate the user to reassemble all of the
refuse in an undamaged bag or container prior to pickup by the City.



      (4)   No yard trash shall be placed on property owned or
occupied by others without permission.



      (5)   Refuse containers, cans, and carts shall not be kept or
maintained upon or adjacent to any street, sidewalk, parkway, front yard,
side yard or other place within the view of persons using any street or
sidewalk located within the City, except as provided herein. Protection of
the containers placed for collection is the responsibility of the resident.



      (6)   Curbside residential recycling service will be given to
each residential dwelling unit with the City, once a week. The City shall
provide each resident with two (2) recycling bins or carts. One shall be used
for the accumulation of plastic containers, glass, aluminum and other
allowable co-mingled materials. The other shall be used for newspaper,
magazines, glossy paper, office grade paper, and corrugated cardboard. The
bins shall be set out on the designated collection day.



      (7)   Where the resident of a dwelling unit is physically
unable to deliver residential solid waste to curbside the resident can
complete an application for request for reasonable accommodation.  The
Public Works Director or his or her designee shall review the request and
make a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation based upon a
finding that the proposed accommodation is reasonable, and the applicant is
an individual with a disability as defined in 42 U.S.C. § 12102 of the
Americans with Disabilities Act. The applicant will be notified in writing of
the decision on the request for reasonable accommodation. Regardless of any
accommodation made pursuant to the facts described in this paragraph,
vegetative waste must continue to be placed at curbside.



      (8)   Hazardous wastes, infectious wastes, construction and
demolition material, dead animals and any other prohibited waste shall not be
placed in garbage cans, bags, or any other types of containers or placed
loose on the ground with the expectation of having the material collected by
the City. These materials are not part of Single Family Residential Refuse
Collection Service. The resident and/or property owner should contact the
Director of Public Works in order to inquire  as to the proper disposal
method for such materials.



(Ord. No. 82-29, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 92-12, §§ 2—4, 6-2-92; Ord. No.
94-28, § 2, 9-9-94; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04; Ord. No. 08-012, § 2,
6-3-08; Ord. No. 08-029, § 2, 10-21-08; Ord. No. 14-022, § 2, 9-16-14)



Sec. 10-25.  Containerized commercial and residential collection.



   (a)   Regulations governing containerized service:



      (1)   Containerized refuse service shall be carried out by the
City at commercial or multifamily residential establishments in the promotion
of improved sanitary conditions for the prevention of health hazard.
Containers are supplied by and shall remain the property of the City. The
landowner is responsible for the protection of containers placed to serve the
premises. The landowner shall be liable to the extent of the cost of repairs
and cleanliness or replacement of containers when damaged by fire,
negligence, vandalism or other forms of abuse.



      (2)   Unimpeded access to containers at all times shall be
provided by the landowner. All containers shall be located so that the
collection vehicle driver can dump containers without leaving the vehicle.



      (3)   Customers using garbage chutes or interior storage shall
provide containers on rollers which will be the responsibility of the owner
or occupant for maintenance. The landowner shall be responsible for placing
(rolling) them to the proper position for emptying and in time for emptying.



      (4)   The size or number of containers shall be determined by
the volume of refuse to be deposited and will be in direct relationship to
the manner in which the user elects to utilize the space provided in said
container or containers. Charges shall be assessed on the basis of cubic
yards of refuse removed from premises whether manually compacted or loose.



      (5)   At each multifamily site, located adjacent to the
dumpsters, or a location approved by the City, the City may place a minimum
of two (2) recycling carts. The carts are for the purpose of collecting
recycling materials. The landowner must allow space for the carts adjacent to
the dumpsters, and properly accessible by the City trucks for servicing. The
residents of the multifamily development shall be encouraged to conduct
recycling. The carts will be serviced a minimum of once a week. The placement
of materials, garbage, yard trash, or any other material not approved in the
definition of recyclable materials shall be strictly prohibited. This service
is provided as a part of the garbage collection fee.



      (6)   Commercial, institutional, and any other type activity
requiring containerized garbage collection, except for multifamily collection
service, are encouraged to access the garbage and trash stream, to determine
the benefits of recycling. The City will provide dumpsters, designated for
cardboard and paper recycling. The service will be provided for a fee.



(Ord. No. 82-29, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04; Ord. No.
14-022, § 2, 9-16-14)



Sec. 10-26.  Roll-off services.



   (a)   Construction sites. All construction, renovation, remodeling,
and repair sites, requiring a permit from the City for work being conducted,
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. Each
construction site shall be provided with solid waste containers adequate in
size and sufficient in number to accommodate the accumulation of solid waste
during the interval between scheduled removals of solid waste from the
project site. The number and type of refuse containers shall be subject to
the approval of the Public Works Department. The owner of the property, or
the contractor conducting the operations, shall have the right to provide the
material removal service with his own containers and equipment. In all other
cases, the owner or contractor shall be required to obtain such removal
services from the City. The Public Works Department shall determine
exclusively whether this service would require the use of roll-off
containers, or the service could be adequately provided by some other means.



   (b)   Stop work. During the construction of any site project the
Building Official may at his/her discretion, issue a written order to stop
work on a construction project for failure to maintain the construction site
in a clean and sanitary condition, or for failing to adhere to the
requirement of this chapter.



   (c)   Final cleanup. Solid waste shall be removed from the
construction, renovation, remodeling, or repair site, and the area properly
cleaned to thesatisfaction of the Director of Public Works within five (5)
workdays following the completion and final inspections of the work performed
under a permit, and in all instances prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy by the Building Department.



   (d)   Roll-off location. All roll-off containers shall be placed on
the customer's property in a location accessible for service. Roll-offs may
be placed in the public right-of-way only if a permit to do so is issued by
the Engineering Department. Roll-off containers not serviced within thirty
(30) days of issuance may be removed from the property by the City at the
Public Works Director’s discretion.



(Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04; Ord. No. 14-022, § 2, 9-16-14)



Sec. 10-27.  General regulations.



   (a)   Predetermination of refuse storage sites required. Prior to
the issuance of a building permit by the City Building Department for the
renovation, modification or erection of a new structure, provisions must be
made for the storage and handling of refuse. Such arrangements shall provide
free access to containers by mechanized equipment at all times. Acting
jointly, the Public Works Department and the City Building Department and the
builder-owner- occupant, as applicable, shall mutually arrive at a
satisfactory arrangement to meet collection requirements.



   (b)   Refuse from containerized residential units will be collected
twice a week or as necessary.  Such frequency of service shall be determined
exclusively by the Director of Public Works to ensure public safety, health,
cleanliness and appearance.  In the case of the commercial establishment,
the customer will be billed for the amount of service required to meet the
solid waste standards.



   (c)   Duty to record and bill users of City system. The Director of
Public Works shall cause to be kept, an accurate record of all persons using
the services and facilities of the said municipal refuse collection and
disposal system and make charges in accordance with the rates and charges
herein established. The City may choose to not provide solid waste services
because of non-payment.



   (d)   [Unlawful deposits.] It shall be unlawful for any person to
deposit on, or bury in, or cause to be deposited on or buried in, upon any
land, vacant or unoccupied premises in the City or upon any occupied property
public square, or upon any street, alley, park, parkway, or in any canal,
waterway, bridge, easement, or other public passageway, or right-of-way, or
any storm drain, rock pit and sand pit, pool or lake within the City any
noxious, filthy, malodorous or offensive liquid or solid materials, garbage,
refuse, or rubbish anywhere within the limits of the City in any vessel or
receptacle other than in an approved refuse container which is collected
regularly.  Nothing in this provision shall prohibit private, backyard,
nuisance-free composting practices for home gardening purposes.  No person
shall burn or cause to be burned any refuse or waste anywhere within the City
limits, except as otherwise provided by law.



   Cross references-Depositing litter in bodies of water, § 15-30;
polluting park waters, § 16-26.



   (e)   Mulch or compost piles permitted. Horticultural trash and
refuse containing no combustible matter, or which will not, during decay,
give off offensive odors, may be accumulated by the owner as a mulch or
compost pile in the rear of the residential premises upon which the material
is accumulated.  Bringing material from offsite onto the property for the
sake of composting will be prohibited. Composting for commercial purpose, or
composting to develop a marketable product shall be prohibited except for
those cases allowed by commercial enterprise, and properly licensed to
conduct such operations.



   (f)   Ownership of collection refuse and waste.



      (1)   Ownership of refuse and waste material shall be vested
in the City at the time of collection.



      (2)   Recycling material to be collected, such as newspaper,
newspaper/grade papers, and/or other materials, shall become the property of
the City from the time of placement at the curb by the customer, and it shall
be a violation of this Article for any person, firm, corporation, or
partnership other than the City, to tamper with or to take or remove, or to
convert to its own use in any way, such material.  Each such collection in
violation hereof from one (1) or more residences or businesses during such
period shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



   (g)   Dead animals. It shall be unlawful to place any dead animal or
parts thereof in any solid waste container for collection; however, this
section shall not apply to animal parts from food preparation for human
consumption.



   (h)   Incinerators.  No private incineration units shall be erected
or operated within the City from the date of this Article except upon
approval of the City Commission, and the issuance of the proper permits and
licenses from any and all regulating agencies.



   (i)   Landfills. It shall be unlawful for any person to create, use,
own, or operate any landfill or dump within the corporate limits of the City.



   (j)   Littering.  It shall be unlawful to place, or allow to be
placed, any solid waste upon the roads, streets, storm drains, canals, lakes,
other bodies of water, of any public or private property within the City
except as provided herein.



   (k)   Non-interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with any employee of the City while in the performance of their
duties as authorized by this chapter.



(Ord. No. 82-29, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04; Ord. No.
14-022, § 2, 9-16-14)



   Editor's note-Subsection 10-26(h), relative to the disposal of
construction or industrial wastes, had been deleted as being duplicative of
§ 10-30.



Sec. 10-28.  Reserved.



   Editor's note-Provisions designated § 10-28, and enumerating certain
violations, have been deleted by the editor as being duplicative of § 10-31.



Sec. 10-29.  Purpose of rates and charges.



   The rates and charges herein set forth are imposed to provide revenue
for the purpose of paying the costs of the operation and maintenance of the
refuse collection and disposal system of the City and extensions thereof and
replacements thereto and for any other lawful purpose as so determined by the
City Commission.



(Ord. No. 82-29, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 94-28, § 3, 9-9-94; Ord. No.
04-030, § 2, 5-18-04; Ord. No. 14-022, § 2, 9-16-14)



Sec. 10-30.  Rates and charges for City service.



   The rates and charges for refuse collection service provided by the
City shall be as follows:



   (a)   Commercial containerized, excluding multifamily residential
units:



      (1)   Monthly commercial charges shall consist of a total of
the following three (3) items:



         a.   Rental charge - The charge assessed to account for
expenses related to the provision of commercial refuse containers. The Public
Works Director shall annually adjust the container rental fee based upon
changing market prices of new containers.



         b.   Disposal charge-A fixed disposal charge as set and
modified from time to time by the Palm Beach County Solid Waste Authority.
This price shall be passed on to the customer directly.



         c.   Operating charge-A fixed charge per cubic yard to
cover all other labor and equipment hauling expenses and charges of the Solid
Waste Department. The rate in 2014 - 2015 will be fixed at  four dollars
($4.00) per cubic yard and shall be increased annually thereafter, based upon
changes to operating expenses at the discretion of the Public Works Director
at the beginning of each fiscal year, or as otherwise provided by the City
Commission.



      (2)   Partial monthly service will be charged on a prorated
basis, based on the rates in subsection (1)a. above.



      (3)   Mechanical compressed or compactor refuse shall have the
disposal rate computed at a three-to-one (3:1) ratio of the disposal rates
set forth in subsection (1)b. above. Containers with compactors shall be
furnished by the owner, therefore, no rental cost shall be charged.



   (b)   Noncontainerized commercial service: Refuse picked up from
residential-type cans at commercial establishments shall have their level of
service negotiated by the Public Works Department.



   (c)   Collection rates:



 


Fiscal Year

 

Single-Family

 

Multi-Family



2017-18
 
$16.00
 
$12.75


2018-19
 
$17.00
 
$13.75


2019-20
 
$17.50
 
$14.25


2020-21
 
$18.00
 
$14.75



 



   (d)   Roll-off rates.  Rates for roll-off dumpsters for
construction and demolition debris shall be established and modified from
time to time by the Director of Public Works based upon private markets
conditions.



(Ord. No. 82-29, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 83-36, § 1, 10-18-83; Ord. No.
85-55, § 1, 11-15-85; Ord. No. 86-36, § 2, 10-21-86; Ord. No. 90-36, § 1,
9-18-90; Ord. No. 91-63, § 1, 9-19-91; Ord. No. 92-49, § 1, 10-8-92; Ord.
No. 93-33, §§ 1, 2, 9-21-93; Ord. No. 94-28, § 4, 9-9-94; Ord. No. 04-030,
§ 2, 5-18-04; Ord. No. 04-072, § 2, 8-17-04; Ord. No. 05-055, § 2,
9-20-05; Ord. No. 06-077, § 2, 9-6-06; Ord. No. 08-012, § 2, 6-3-08; Ord.
No. 08-032, § 2, 11-18-08; Ord. No. 14-022, § 2, 9-16-14; Ord. No. 18-021,
§ 2, passed 9-6-18)



Sec. 10-31.  Violations and enforcement.



   It is hereby declared unlawful and a violation of this Article for any
person to do or permit to be done any of the following acts or practices:



      (1)   To deposit or place in or cause to be deposited or
placed in a trash container any materials other than those defined in this
Article as refuse.



      (2)   To fail or neglect to keep or cause to be kept clean and
sanitary, tightly covered and in good state of repair, all refuse containers.



      (3)   To use or supply garbage cans and refuse containers
other than those defined and provided for in this Article.



      (4)   To collect or permit to be collected by anyone, the
garbage from any garbage container other than by persons regularly employed
by the City for that purpose unless specifically authorized by the City
Commission.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect, or refuse to
comply with and abide by each provision of this Article.  The performance on
each day of any prohibited act or practice shall constitute a separate
offense, and shall be punishable as such.



(Ord. No. 82-29, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04; Ord. No.
14-022, § 2, 9-16-14)



Sec. 10-32.   Disaster-generated debris removal management plan;
authority, priorities and limitations.



   The City Manager, or designee, shall have the authority, to remove
disaster-generated debris located within the City of Boynton Beach on
city-owned property, county/state-owned roads, and private roads after the
declaration of any state of emergency pursuant to this article. The removal
of such disaster-generated debris is authorized only after a major disaster
or a catastrophic disaster and upon the determination by the City Manager, or
designee, that such removal is reasonable necessary to (i) eliminate
immediate threats to life, public health, and safety; (ii) eliminate
immediate threats of significant damage to city property or facilities; or
(iii) ensure economic recovery of the affected community to the benefit of
the community-at-large.



   (1)   An immediate threat to life, public health, and safety shall
be deemed to exist if any one of the following conditions is satisfied:



      a.   There is a significant likelihood that rescue vehicles
will be significantly hindered from rendering emergency services if the
disaster-generated debris is allowed to remain in place;



      b.   The type of disaster-generated debris is such that it may
reasonably cause disease, illness, or sickness which could injure or
adversely affect the health, safety, or general welfare of those residing and
working in the area if it is allowed to remain;



      c.   The removal of the disaster-generated debris is necessary
to effectuate orderly and expeditious restoration of city-wide utility
services including, but not limited to, power, water, sewer, telephone and
solid waste collection;



      d.   The disaster-generated debris is determined by the City
of Boynton Beach Building Official or Public Health Official to be dangerous
or hazardous;



      e.   The disaster-generated debris prevents garbage
collection, thereby creating a public health and safety hazard;



      f.   The disaster-generated debris contains contaminants which
have a reasonable likelihood of leeching into the soil and/or aquifer of the
city;



      g.   The disaster-generated debris has a substantial negative
impact upon public health and safety by preventing or adversely affecting
emergency repairs to buildings and/or property;



      h.   The disaster-generated debris presents a reasonable
danger of being transported by wind and/or water to neighboring properties,
thereby increasing the cost of recovery and removal;



      i.   The disaster-generated debris is significantly likely to
produce mold or may otherwise cause disease, illness, or sickness which could
injure or adversely affect the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public;



      j.   The presence of the disaster-generated debris
significantly adversely impacts the city’s recovery efforts;



      k.   The disaster-generated debris significantly interferes
with drainage or water runoff, so as to be a significant hazard in the event
of significant rainfall;



      l.   The sheer volume of the disaster-generated debris is such
that it is impractical and unreasonable to remove in an orderly and efficient
manner absent action by the city; or



      m.   The type, extent and nature of the disaster-generated
debris is such that it would cause much greater damage if not removed
immediately.



   (2)   An immediate threat of significant damage to city property or
facilities shall be deemed to exist if the cost to remove the disaster-
generated debris is less than the cost of potential damage to the city
property or facility, thereby being a cost effective removal.



   (3)   In removing disaster-generated debris from county-owned or
state owned property and rights-of-way, the highest priority shall initially
be given to responding to immediate threats to life, public health, and
safety; eliminating immediate threat of significant damage to county and
state property or facilities; and pushing or removing disaster-generated
debris from county/state rights-of-way to permit safe passage.



   (4)   The removal of disaster-generated debris shall begin as soon
as functionally feasible after the occurrence of a major disaster or
catastrophic disaster.  The primary operation of the city work forces will
be to cut and toss disaster-generated debris depositing it along county or
state rights-of-way, thereby creating access to the major arterial roadways
to allow for expedited search and rescue efforts as well as recovery
efforts.  Upon completion of the cut and toss operation, city work forces
will begin the removal of other disaster-generated debris.  The owners of
private property, or those individuals otherwise in possession of private
property, adjoining county/state rights-of-way may place disaster-generated
debris in the county and/or state right-of-way. The community-at-large will
be notified via press releases, city web-page, local media of the initial
start date for removal of disaster-generated debris by city work forces and
will subsequently be notified prior to the last removal pass by city work
forces.  After the last such removal pass, city residents will be
responsible for the removal of any remaining disaster-generated debris in
compliance with pre-disaster collection requirements whether they be
self-provided, provided through a private contractor, or provided through
regular waste disposable services.



   (5)   The city shall, subject to the restrictions and requirements
of F.S. Section 768.28, indemnify and hold the federal government, its
agencies and employees, harmless from any claims arising from or based upon
the exercise or performance of, or the failure to exercise or perform, a
discretionary function or duty on the part of any federal agency or any
employee of the federal government in carrying out the provisions of the
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (Stafford
Act).



   (6)   The owners of private property, or those individuals otherwise
in possession of private property, shall be responsible for assuring that the
placement of any disaster-generated debris in city/county/state rights-of-way
or on private roads for removal by city work forces satisfies the following
conditions:



      a.   The disaster-generated debris shall be neatly stacked,
piled, or placed with its leading edge lying within the three-foot roadside
shoulder area on either side of the travel lanes of the road.



      b.   The disaster-generated debris shall be separated into
stacks or piles of the following types of debris as defined in this article:



         1.   Putrescent debris and mixed common household items.



         2.   Vegetative debris.



         3.   Construction and demolition debris.



         4.   White goods.



         5.   Hazardous household waste and electronic waste.



      c.   The disaster-generated debris shall be placed so that it
is not under any power lines, not on top of any water meters, or not within
three feet of any power poles, fire hydrants, vehicles, mailboxes, or fences.



   (7)   Any damage to personal property by city work forces resulting
from the placement of disaster-generated debris in a manner inconsistent with
this section shall be the responsibility of the private property owner, or
individual otherwise in possession of private property, who misplaced such
debris.



   (8)   Any owners of private property, or any individuals otherwise
in possession of private property, who stack, pile, or otherwise place
anything for removal on city/county/state rights-of-way or on private roads
which is deemed not to be disaster-generated debris, shall be responsible for
removing such unauthorized debris no later than 24 hours after notification
of such removal requirement by a member of the city work forces.  Any such
owner or other individual who fails to timely comply with such removal
requirement shall thereafter be responsible for any costs associated with the
removal of such unauthorized debris by city work forces.



   (9)   Removal of hazardous trees or hazardous limbs.  The removal
of disaster-generated debris consisting of either hazardous trees or
hazardous limbs overhanging or otherwise endangering a private road shall be
deemed to be the responsibility of the adjacent private property owners and,
as such, the city work forces shall not be authorized to remove or to
otherwise act upon such disaster-generated debris unless it is necessary to
eliminate an immediate threat to the safety of city work forces.



(Ord. No. 13-021, § 2, 7-2-13; Ord. No. 14-022, § 2, 9-16-14)



Sec. 10-33.   Lien for unpaid charge; liability for charges.



   (a)   Lien when customer is owner of property.  In addition to any
other remedy provided in this chapter, when the customer is the owner of the
property, the city shall have a lien against the property serviced for any
and all unpaid fees and charges authorized for the city's refuse collection
system.  The city may record the lien in the public records of Palm Beach
County, Florida.  The lien shall be coequal with the lien of all county and
municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and claims,
until paid.  Such lien when delinquent for more than 30 days may be
foreclosed by the city in the manner provided by the laws of Florida for the
foreclosure of mortgages on real property.  The city shall be entitled to
recover costs and a reasonable attorney's fee incurred in foreclosing any
such lien.  No change of occupancy or ownership shall affect the lien.



   (b)   Lien when customer is tenant.  When the customer is a tenant,
the city shall have a lien against the leasehold interest and the tenant's
personal property on the premises for all unpaid fees and charges.  The city
may record the lien in the public records of Palm Beach County, Florida. 
The lien shall be coequal with the lien of all county and municipal taxes,
superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and claims, until paid.  The
city shall be entitled to recover costs and a reasonable attorney's fee
incurred in foreclosing any such lien.  The city shall not impose a lien
against the rental property for any unpaid utility charges incurred by a
former occupant except to the extent that the present tenant or owner
directly benefited from the services provided to the former occupant.  It is
presumed that a property owner benefit from the city providing utilities to
the former occupant unless the property owner following the city's notice of
intent to file a lien, submits an affidavit and supporting documents to the
city establishing the following, when applicable:



      (1)   The lease agreement, in effect during the time period
the delinquency accrued, contained a provision or addendum which required the
tenant/former occupant to pay the utilities; and



      (2)   The property owner had no knowledge that utility
payments were in arrears;



      (3)   The property owner received no rent payment during the
time period the delinquency accrued; and



      (4)   The property owner did not have a security deposit or
the security deposit was applied to delinquent rent; and



      (5)   Prior to the time period the delinquency accrued, the
property owner legally conveyed all of his/her/its interest in the respective
property to an unassociated individual or entity.



   The owner of a rental unit shall be responsible for all fees and
charges for the rental property until such time as the tenant applies for
service and tenders the required deposit.  Any charges prior to the current
tenant's application and deposit and subsequent to the former tenant's
termination shall be the responsibility of the owner.  The city shall have a
lien against the property serviced for all unpaid fees and charges during the
period of the owner's responsibility as stated in subsection (a) of this
section.



   (c)   Liability for charges: civil actions.  The customer applying
for utility service shall be personally liable to the city for the payment of
all fees and charges. In addition to all other remedies, including the lien
and foreclosure remedies set forth in (a) and (b) above, the city shall have
the authority to recover from the customer in a civil legal action all unpaid
fees, charges and penalties and the costs and a reasonable attorney's fee
incurred in any such action, including those incurred while on appeal. 
Additionally, the customer shall be liable for any administrative costs the
city incurs in collection of the account.



   (d)   An administrative fee of $125.00 shall be charged to the
customer whenever the city records a lien against the property serviced for
unpaid refuse collection rates, fees and charges.



(Ord. No. 16-005, § 4, 3-1-16)



Secs. 10-34—10-49. Reserved.



ARTICLE III. ABANDONED PROPERTY*



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 87-2, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 3, 1987, repealed
former Art. III, Abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles, being §§
10-50—10-56, as derived from the 1959 Code, §§ 29-5—29-8, and enacted
in lieu thereof new provisions designated herein as Art. III, §§
10-50—10-54.



Sec. 10-50.  Definitions.



   For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall
have the meaning set forth herein. According to context, words used in the
present tense include the future, singular words include the plural, plural
words include the singular, and masculine words shall include the feminine
gender.



   Abandoned property means all tangible personal property which does not
have an identifiable owner and which has been disposed on public property in
a wrecked, inoperative, or partially dismantled condition or which has no
apparent intrinsic value to the rightful owner. However, vessels determined
to be derelict by the Department of Natural Resources in accordance with the
provisions of Section 823.11, Florida Statutes, shall not be included in this
definition.



   Antique motor vehicle is any motor vehicle of thirty-five (35) years or
more which is registered with the State of Florida, pursuant to Florida
Statutes, Section 320.086.



   City is the City of Boynton Beach, Florida.



   Enforcement officer means those employees or other agents of the City
designated by ordinance, or duly authorized and appointed by the City
Manager, whose duty it is to enforce City Codes. This definition shall
include, but not be limited to,  law enforcement and code compliance
officers.



   Inoperable motor vehicles. A motor vehicle shall be deemed inoperable
and/or abandoned if a valid and current motor vehicle license is not affixed
thereto; provided however, that this shall not apply to motor vehicles
located on private property owned or leased by automobile dealers, new or
used, possessing a current, valid, occupation license; nor shall this
definition apply to any antique or collector vehicle which is registered with
the State of Florida, pursuant to Florida Statutes, Section 320.086.



   Law enforcement officer means any full-time police officer employed by
the City.



   Lost property means all tangible personal property which does not have
an identifiable owner and which has been mislaid on public property, upon a
public conveyance, on premises used at the time for business purposes, or in
parks, places of amusement, public recreation areas, or other places open to
the public in a substantially operable, functioning condition or which has an
apparent intrinsic value to the rightful owner.



   Motor vehicle is a vehicle or conveyance which is self-propelled and
designed to travel along the ground, and includes, but is not limited to,
automobiles, buses, mopeds, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf
carts, campers, motorhomes and trailers.



   Private property is any real property within the City which is
privately owned and which is not defined as public property herein.



   Public property means lands and improvements owned by the federal
government, the State of Florida, a county or a municipality and includes
sovereignty submerged lands located adjacent to the county or municipality,
buildings, grounds, parks, playgrounds, streets, sidewalks, parkways,
rights-of-way, and other similar property.



   Wrecked motor vehicle is any motor vehicle the condition of which is
wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, incapable of operation by its own
power on a public street, or from which the wheels, engine, transmission or
any substantial part thereof has been removed.



(Ord. No. 87-2, § 2, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 87-29, § 1, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 04-030,
§ 2, 5-18-04; Ord. No. 14-001, § 2, 2-4-14)



Sec. 10-51.  Abandoned or lost property on public property, procedure.



   (a)   Whenever a law enforcement officer of the City ascertains that
an article of lost or abandoned property is present on public property and is
of such nature that it can be easily removed, the officer shall take such
article into custody and shall make a reasonable attempt to ascertain the
rightful owner or lienholder pursuant to the provisions of this section.



   (b)   Whenever a law enforcement officer ascertains that an article
of lost or abandoned property is present on public property and is of such
nature that it cannot be easily removed, the officer shall cause a notice to
be placed upon such article in substantially the following form:



   NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED
PROPERTY. This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) is
unlawfully upon public property known as (setting forth brief description of
location) and must be removed within 5 days, otherwise, it will be removed
and disposed of pursuant to Chapter 705, Florida Statutes. The owner will be
liable for the costs of removal, storage, and publication of notice. Dated
this: (setting forth the date of posting of notice), signed: (setting forth
name, title, address and telephone number of law enforcement officer).



Such notice shall be not less than seven (7) inches by ten (10) inches and
shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the
elements. In addition to posting, the law enforcement officer shall make a
reasonable effort to ascertain the name and address of the owner. If such is
reasonably available to the officer, he shall mail a copy of such notice to
the owner on or before the date of posting. If the property is a motor
vehicle as defined in Section 320.01(1), Florida Statutes, or a vessel as
defined in Section 327.02(27), Florida Statutes, the law enforcement agency
shall contact the Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles or the
Department of Natural Resources, respectively, in order to determine the name
and address of the owner and any person who has filed a lien on the vehicle
or vessel as provided in Section 319.27(2) or (3) or Section 328.15(1),
Florida Statutes.  On receipt of this information, the law enforcement
agency shall mail a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner and to the lienholder, if any.  If, at the end of
five (5) days after posting the notice and mailing such notice, if required,
the owner or any person interested in the lost or abandoned article or
articles described has not removed the article or articles from public
property or shown reasonable cause for failure to do so, the following shall
apply:



      (1)   For abandoned property, the City may retain any or all
of the property for its own use or for use by the state or unit of local
government, trade such property to another unit of local government or state
agency, donate the property to a charitable organization, sell the property,
or notify the appropriate refuse removal service.



      (2)   For lost property, the officer shall take custody and
the City shall retain the property for ninety (90) days and publish notice of
the City's intended disposition of the property.



         a.   If the City elects to retain the property for its
own use, donate the property to a charitable organization, surrender such
property to the finder, sell the property or trade the property to another
unit of local government of state agency, notice of such election shall be
given by an advertisement published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in Palm Beach County.



         b.   If the City elects to sell the property, it must do
so at public sale by competitive bidding. Notice of the time and place of the
sale shall be given by an advertisement of the sale published once a week for
two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in Palm Beach
County.  The notice shall include a statement that the sale shall be subject
to any and all liens. The sale must be held at the nearest suitable place to
that where the lost or abandoned property is held or stored. The
advertisement must include a description of the goods and the time and place
of the sale. The sale may take place no earlier than ten (10) days after the
final publication. Notice of the City's intended disposition shall describe
the property in a manner reasonably adequate to permit the rightful owner of
the property to identify it.



   (c)   If the property is sold at public sale pursuant to
subparagraph 10-51(b)(2)b, the City shall deduct from the proceeds the cost
of transportation, storage, and publication of notice, and any balance of
proceeds shall be deposited into an interest-bearing account not later than
thirty (30) days after the date of the sale and held there for one (1) year.
The City shall provide a bill of sale clearly stating that the sale is
subject to any and all liens. The rightful owner of the property may claim
the balance of the proceeds within one (1) yearfrom the date of the above
stated deposit by making application to the City. If no rightful owner comes
forward with a claim to the property within the designated year, the balance
of the proceeds shall be deposited into the state school fund.



   (d)   The owner of any abandoned or lost property who, after notice
as provided in this section, does not remove such property within the
specified period shall be liable to the City for all costs of removal,
storage, and destruction of such property, less any salvage value obtained by
disposal of the property. Upon final disposition of the property, the law
enforcement officer shall notify the owner, if known, of the amount owed. In
the case of an abandoned boat or motor vehicle, any person who neglects or
refuses to pay such amount is not entitled to be issued a certificate of
registration for such boat or motor vehicle, or any other boat or motor
vehicle, until such costs have been paid. The City shall supply the
Department of Natural Resources with a list of persons whose boat
registration privileges have been revoked under this subsection and the
Department of Motor Vehicles with a list of persons whose motor vehicle
privileges have been revoked. Neither department nor any other person acting
as agent thereof shall issue a certificate of registration to a person whose
boat or motor vehicle registration privileges have been revoked, as provided
by this subsection, until such costs have been paid.



   (e)   Whoever opposes, obstructs, or resists any law enforcement
officer or any person authorized by the law enforcement officer in the
discharge of his duties as provided in this section upon conviction is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in Section
755.083, Florida Statutes, as may be amended from time to time.



   (f)   Any law enforcement officer or any person authorized by  the
law enforcement officer is immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for
reasonable, good faith trespass upon real property while in the discharge of
duties imposed by this section.



   (g)   The rightful owner shall be liable for the City's costs for
transportation and storage of lost or abandoned property and the City's cost
for publication of notice of disposition of lost property. If the rightful
owner does not pay such costs within thirty (30) days of making claim to the
property, title to the property shall vest in the City.



(Ord. No. 87-2, § 2, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 87-29, §§ 2, 3, 9-15-87; Ord. No.
04-030, § 2, 5-18-04)



Sec. 10-51.5.   Abandoned personal and real property.



   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this
section to establish a process to address the amount of abandoned personal
and real property located within the City. This section is further intended
to specifically establish an abandoned residential property program as a
mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of
adequate maintenance and  security of abandoned properties.



   (b)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:



      Abandoned personal property: Property that has been left
abandoned and unprotected from the elements and shall include, but not be
limited to, wrecked, inoperative or partially dismantled trailers, boats,
machinery, refrigerators, washing machines, plumbing fixtures, furniture and
any other similar article that has been left abandoned and unprotected from
the elements.



      Abandoned real property: Any real property that is encumbered by
a mortgage in default, is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action, has been
the subject of a foreclosure action and a judgement has been entered, or has
been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the
beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties
transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.



      Accessible property: A property that is accessible through a
compromised/breached gate,  fence, wall, and the like.



      Accessible structure: A structure/building that is unsecured
and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by
unauthorized persons.



      Default: The mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the
mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of the
debt, referred to in the mortgage.



      Enforcement officer: Any full-time law enforcement officer,
building official, code enforcement officer, fire inspector or building
inspector employed within the City.



      Evidence of vacancy: Any condition that, on its own or combined
with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that
the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to,
overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past-due utility notices and/or
disconnected utilities; accumulation of abandoned personal property, as
defined herein; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent
with habitation or occupancy; the presence of an unsanitary, stagnant
swimming pool; the accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or
mail;  statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government
agents; and/or the presence of boards over doors, windows, or other openings
in violation of applicable code, or any other evidence that the property is
vacant.



      Foreclosure: A process, proceeding, or action to enforce a
mortgage by terminating a property owner’s interest in mortgaged property
or by obtaining possession of mortgaged property.



      Mortgagee: The creditor, including, but not limited to: trustees;
mortgage servicing companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent,
servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any
assignee of the creditor’s rights, interests or obligations under the
mortgage agreement; or any other person or entity with the legal right to
foreclose on the real property.



      Nominal salvage value: The value of an article of abandoned or
derelict property that a reasonably prudent person would believe is the fair
market value of the property, taking into consideration its useful life,
earning capacity or replacement cost, less depreciation. Items of general or
special depreciation would be nominally greater than the costs of salvage,
including the removal, transportation, storage and sale of same.



      Property management company: A local property manager, property
maintenance company or similar entity responsible for inspecting,
maintaining, and securing the abandoned real property.



      Public property: Canals, all waterways, lands and improvements
owned by a governmental body or any governmental agency, including, but not
limited to, easements and rights-of-way, but excluding the campus of any
institution of the state university system.



      Real property: Any residential or commercial land and/or
buildings, leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or
portion thereof identified by a property parcel identification number,
located in the limits of the City of Boynton Beach.



      Vacant: Any parcel of land, building, or structure that is not
legally occupied.



   (c)   Applicability. This section shall be considered cumulative and
not superseding or subject to any other law or provision for same, but shall
rather be an additional remedy available to the City above and beyond any
other state, county and/or local provisions for same.



   (d)   Penalties. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section 1-6 of the
City’s Code of Ordinances Code as applicable. In addition, any violation of
this section may be enforced through the City's Code Compliance Board, as
provided in Chapter 2, Article V, of the City's Code of Ordinances.



   (e)   Placement of abandoned personal property on private property
prohibited.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon personal
property upon private property:



         a.   Without such receiving the property owner's
consent; or



         b.   In violation of this or any other applicable law,
ordinance or regulation.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to
abandoned personal property authorized to be left on private business
property properly operated, licensed and zoned in the City for the purpose of
accepting abandoned property.



   (f)   Public nuisance. All abandoned personal property and abandoned
real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the abatement of
which, pursuant to the police power, is hereby declared to be necessary for
the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the City.



   (g)   Notification procedure. When an enforcement officer ascertains
that an article of personal property having nominal salvage value lies
abandoned or derelict upon private property, that officer shall:



      (1)   Cause a notice to be placed upon such abandoned property
in the substantially following form:



         NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE
FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PROPERTY:



         (setting forth brief description)



         LOCATED AT:



         (setting forth brief description of location)



         is:



         IMPROPERLY STORED AND IS IN VIOLATION OF



         (setting forth ordinance or resolution violated)



         AND MUST BE REMOVED WITHIN FIVE (5) DAYS FROM THE DATE OF
THIS NOTICE; OTHERWISE IT SHALL BE PRESUMED TO BE ABANDONED PROPERTY, AND MAY
BE REMOVED AND SOLD OR DESTROYED BY ORDER OF THE CITY OF BOYNTON BEACH,
FLORIDA, DATED THIS:



         (setting forth the date of posting of notice)



         SIGNED



         (setting forth name, title, address and telephone number of
enforcement officer)



      (2)   Such notice shall be not less than eight (8) inches by
ten (10) inches, and be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal
exposure to the elements.



      (3)   The enforcement officer shall make reasonable effort to
ascertain the name and address of the owner of the abandoned property and, if
such address is reasonably available, the officer shall mail, by certified
mail, a copy of the notice to the owner, on or before the date of posting the
above-described notice on the abandoned personal property.



      (4)   The enforcement officer shall mail, by certified mail, a
copy of the above-described notice to the owner of the real property upon
which the abandoned personal property is located, as shown by the real estate
tax records as provided by the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser's Office,
or any other address provided to the local government by such owner, on or
before the date of posting such notice.



   (h)   Removal of abandoned personal property.



      (1)   If at the end of five (5) days after posting notice
under this section, the owner or any person interested in such abandoned
personal property described in the notice has not removed same, the City may
seek an appropriate order from the special magistrate or code enforcement
board, and may subsequently cause the article of abandoned personal property
to be removed and destroyed, and the salvage value, if any, of such article
shall be retained by the City, to be applied against the cost of removal and
destruction thereof.



      (2)   Before destruction, for abandoned property on private
lands, at the end of the five (5) day period of posting of such notice, if
the owner or person having interest in the property has not removed the
abandoned property from private property, or shown reasonable cause for
failure to do so, the City may cause the property so described to be removed
by a towing or salvage company, which shall cause the article or articles of
abandoned property to be removed and placed in storage, if applicable with
the local, state and federal regulations. At the conclusion of the required
storage, if the article is not claimed, and if the salvage value is above one
hundred dollars ($100.00), the towing company shall pay the City the sum of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or ten percent (10%) of such value, whichever is
greater, for the administrative costs in handling with the article. If the
article is claimed, the City shall receive  twenty-five dollars ($25.00) as
an administrative fee.



      (3)   It is unlawful to remove abandoned personal property,
including inoperative vehicles, from private property to public property
after the posting of the property by an enforcement officer.



      (4)   In the event that the abandoned property is deemed to be
an imminent public health and safety hazard, an enforcement officer is
authorized to remove the property immediately. Subsequent to the removal of
the abandoned property, the City shall make reasonable and diligent efforts
to ascertain the owner and take the applicable action. If the abandoned
property is on private property, the private property owner shall be provided
notice and assessed the cost of removal of the abandoned property and any
required clean-up of the private property.



   (i)   Registration of abandoned real property.



      (1)   Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property
located within the City shall perform an inspection of the property that is
the security for the mortgage, upon default by the mortgagor, or issuance of
a notice of default.



      (2)   Within ten (10) days of the date any mortgagee declares
its mortgage to be in default, the mortgagee shall register the real property
with the City’s foreclosure registry, and, at the time of registration,
indicate whether the property is vacant, and if so shall designate in writing
a property manager to inspect, maintain and secure the real property subject
to the mortgage in default or defaulted. A separate registration is required
for each defaulted property.



      (3)   Property inspected pursuant to subsection (1) above that
remains in default shall be inspected every thirty (30) days by the mortgagee
or mortgagee’s designee. If an inspection shows a change in the
property’s occupancy status, the mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days of
that inspection, update the occupancy status of the property registration.



      (4)   Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the
name of the mortgagee, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee, a direct
contact name and telephone number of mortgagee, facsimile number and e-mail
address, and the local property management company responsible for the
security and maintenance of the property, and the direct contact name and
telephone number of the manager, facsimile number and email address, and
mobile number for direct contact.



      (5)   An annual registration fee in an amount set by the City
Commission, per property, shall accompany the registration.



      (6)   This section shall also apply to properties that have
been the subject of a foreclosure sale, where the title was transferred to
the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties
transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.



      (7)   Properties subject to this section shall remain under
the annual registration requirements, security and maintenance standards of
this section as long as the mortgage is under foreclosure or in default or
defaulted.



      (8)   Any person or corporation that has registered a property
under this section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within ten (10) days of the change.



      (9)   If any property is in violation of this chapter, the
City may take any necessary actions permitted by law to ensure compliance,
and the City may place a lien on the property for the cost of the outstanding
obligation and any additional costs incurred to bring the property into
compliance.



   (j)   Maintenance requirements.



      (1)   In addition to the complying with the City's Property
Maintenance Code, properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of
weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building
materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except
those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items
included, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small
appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that
the property is abandoned.



      (2)   The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or
similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint
that matches the color of the exterior structure.



      (3)   Front, side and rear yard landscaping shall be
maintained in accordance with the City's Code of Ordinances at the time
registration was required.



      (4)   Landscape shall include, but not be limited to, grass,
ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock
or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential
installation. Landscape shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete,
asphalt or similar material.



      (5)   Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
watering, irrigation, cutting and mowing of required landscape and removal of
all trimmings.



      (6)   Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains
free and clear of pollutants and debris. Pools and spas shall comply with the
enclosure requirements of this code and the Florida Building Code, as amended
from time to time.



      (7)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record
to properly maintain the property may result in a violation of this code and
issuance of a citation or notice of violation/notice of hearing by a City
Code Compliance Officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the
City's Code Compliance Board, the City may take the necessary action to
ensure compliance with this section.



   (k)   Security requirements.



      (1)   Properties subject to this section shall be maintained
in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.



      (2)   A secure manner shall include, but not be limited to,
the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such
size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property and/or
structure. Broken windows shall be secured by re-glazing.



      (3)   A local property management company shall be contracted
to perform bi-weekly inspections to verify compliance with the requirements
of this section, and any other applicable laws.



      (4)   The property shall be posted with the name and
twenty-four (24) hour contact phone number of the local property management
company. The posting shall be no less than an eight-inch-by-ten-inch sign.
The posting shall contain the following language:



      THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY:



      (Name of property management company)



      TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL:



      (Telephone number of property management company)



      The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing
the street to the front of the property so it is visible, or secured to the
exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the
property so it is visible, or if no such area exists, on a stake of
sufficient size to support the posting in a location as close as possible to
the main door entrance of the property. Exterior posting shall be constructed
of and printed with weather-resistant materials.



      (5)   The local property management company shall inspect the
property on a bi-weekly basis to ensure that the property is in compliance
with this section. Upon the request of the City or its authorized
representative, the local property management company shall provide a copy of
the inspection reports to the Code Compliance Department.



      (6)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record
to properly maintain the property may result in a violation of this code and
issuance of a citation or notice of violation/notice of hearing by a City
Code Compliance Officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the
City's Code Compliance Board, the City may take the necessary action to
ensure compliance with this section.



   (l)   Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty. Whoever
opposes, obstructs or resists any City officer or any person authorized by
the City in the discharge of duties as provided in this section, shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided  herein.



   (m)   Immunity of Code Compliance Officer. Any Code Compliance
Officer, or any person authorized by the City to act pursuant to the City's
Code of Ordinances or state law, shall be immune from prosecution, civil or
criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon real property while in the
discharge of duties imposed by this section.



   (n)   Additional authority. The City's Code Compliance
Administrator, his/her designee, or the City's authorized representative
shall have authority to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any
property affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or
security measures, including but not limited to, securing any and all doors,
windows or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard, or other
measures as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the
property.



   (o)   Adoption of rules; expenditure of funds; declaration of
municipal purpose. The City Manager, consistent with his/her duties and
authorities under the City Charter, including those duties and authorities
relating to emergency situations, is authorized and empowered to adopt rules
and regulations  and expend City funds as may be reasonably necessary and
available to carry out the terms of this section, the expenditure of such
funds being declared a proper municipal purpose.



(Ord. No. 09-040, § 2, 9-14-09; Ord. No. 15-001, § 2, 2-3-15; Ord. No.
18-007, § 2, 6-5-18)



Sec. 10-52.  Storing, parking, or leaving wrecked or inoperable motor
vehicles on private property prohibited and declared a nuisance; exceptions.



   (a)   No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking,
storing or leaving of any abandoned property or wrecked or inoperable motor
vehicle of any kind, whether attended or not, upon any private property
within the City, except that, with respect to an inoperable motor vehicle,
such vehicle may be parked, stored, or left on said property for a period of
time not to exceed ten (10) days, as set forth in subparagraph (c) of this
section. The presence of such vehicles, or parts thereof, on private property
is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with
provisions of this Article.



   (b)   This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Any motor vehicle which is completely enclosed within a
building, or unless it is held in connection with a business enterprise
lawfully licensed by the City for the servicing and repair of such vehicles
and properly operated in an appropriate business zone pursuant to the zoning
ordinances of the City;



      (2)   Nor shall this section apply to any antique or collector
vehicle which is registered with the State of Florida, pursuant to Florida
Statutes, Section 320.086. However, no more than two (2) antique motor
vehicles may be retained by the same owner for collection purposes unless
they are appropriately stored.



   (c)   Whenever the enforcement officer of the City shall ascertain
that an article or articles of abandoned property are present on private
property within the limits of the City of Boynton Beach in violation of the
provisions of this article, the enforcement officer shall cause a notice to
be placed upon such article in substantially the following form:



   NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED
PROPERTY. This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) located at
(setting forth brief description of location) is improperly stored and is in
violation of (setting forth ordinance or regulation violated) and must be
removed within ten (10) days from the date of this notice unless a hearing
has been demanded in accordance with the terms of Chapter 10, Article I,
Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances within ten (10) days of the date of this
notice; otherwise, it shall be presumed to be abandoned property and will be
removed and destroyed by order of the City of Boynton Beach and the owner
will be liable for the costs of removal and destruction. Dated this: (setting
forth date of posting of notice). Signed: (setting forth name, title,
address, telephone number of enforcement officer).



Such notice shall be not less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches and
shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the
elements for a period of ten (10) days. In addition to posting the notice, on
or before the date of posting the enforcement officer shall mail a copy of
the Notice to the Owner of the real property upon which the abandoned
articles are located, as shown by the real estate tax records used by the
City of Boynton Beach, and if the abandoned property is a motor vehicle or
boat, shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain the name and address of the
owner and shall mail a copy of a notice to such owner. The notice shall also
advise the person to whom the notices are applicable that they have seven (7)
days from the date of posting and/or mailing of the notice to correct the
condition or file a written petition with the City Manager or the designee
for a hearing as provided in Section 10-7 of the City's Code of Ordinances,
which hearing shall be held no later than ten (10) days after the date the
petition is received by the City Manager.



   (d)   Procedures:



      (1)   Hearing. The issues to be determined at the said hearing
are whether the conditions creating a nuisance, do in fact exist; why the
conditions should not be abated by the City at the expense of the owner; the
time limits for such abatement. The source of the condition shall not be a
defense against the requirement that the condition shall be abated by the
owner. If after a hearing the board determines that the conditions which
exist on the property constitute a public nuisance, the owner or owners of
the property shall have no more than seven (7) days from the date of the
hearing to correct or remove the conditions, after such time, the City shall
have the right to have the conditions abated at the expense of the property
owner.



      (2)   Removal. If the owner or other interested person has not
requested a hearing within seven (7) days, the City shall have the right to
have the objectionable condition corrected or removed at the expense of the
owner. If the City has the condition abated and payment for the City's
abatement costs is not received within thirty (30) days after the filing of a
notice of assessment for the cost of such work together with all costs of
inspection and administration, the City shall have a lien placed against the
property for the cost of the work, including inspection and administration
cost, plus interest at the rate of eight per cent (8%) per annum, plus
reasonable attorney fees and other costs of collecting said sums without
further hearing. If, at the end of seven (7) days after posting or mailing
such notice, the owner or any person interested in the abandoned article or
articles describing such notice has not removed the article or articles and
complied with the ordinance or regulations cited in the Notice, the
enforcement officer may cause the article or articles of abandoned property
to be removed or destroyed. The salvage value, if any, of such article or
articles shall be retained by the local government to be applied against the
cost of removal and destruction thereof, unless the cost of removal and
destruction are paid by the owner.



The owner of any abandoned motor vehicle or the owner of the real property
upon which the vehicles or other abandoned property is located, who after
notice is provided in this Article, does not remove the vehicle or other
property within the specified period then they shall be liable to the City of
Boynton Beach for all costs of removal and destruction of such property, less
any salvage value received by the local government. Upon such removal and
destruction, the local government officer shall notify the owner of the
amount owed and of the penalty provision of the section.



      (3)   Notification of removal to owner and other interested
parties. The enforcement officer, after taking possession of any motor
vehicle pursuant to this Article, shall furnish notice in accordance with
this section by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the last known
registered owner of the motor vehicle at his last known address within
fifteen (15) days of the date of which possession of the motor vehicle is
taken, with a copy of the notice to the owner or occupant of the property
from which the vehicle is taken.



      The enforcement officer shall also contact the Department of
Motor Vehicles, State of Florida, and such other agencies and departments of
government in this and other states as are reasonably necessary to ascertain
the names and addresses of other persons with record interests in the motor
vehicle, including lien holders. Such other persons shall be given notice in
the same manner as stated in the previous section.



      Notice under this section shall contain the following information:



         a.   Year, make, model, and serial number of the motor
vehicle.



         b.   The name and address of the last known registered
owner of the motor vehicle, if available.



         c.   The vehicle registration number and the title
registration number of the motor vehicle if available.



         d.   The date on which the motor vehicle was removed.



         e.   The location from which the motor vehicle was
removed.



         f.   The location in which the motor vehicle is being
stored or in the alternative a number to contact.



   The notice shall also advise the persons to whom it is given that the
person who is entitled to possession of the motor vehicle may reclaim it upon
payment to the City of all charges incurred by the City and the removal and
storage of the motor vehicle, except that if such reclamation is not made
within twenty (20) days after date of the notice, the right to reclaim the
motor vehicle as well as all right, title and interest of said person in the
vehicle, shall be deemed to be waived and that such person shall be deemed to
have consented to the disposition of the motor vehicle by the City.



   If the City is unable to identify properly the last registered owner of
any motor vehicle or if unable to obtain with reasonable certainty the names
and addresses of the owner or other interested parties, including
lienholders, it shall be sufficient notice under this section to publish the
notice once in one newspaper of general circulation in the City of Boynton
Beach. Such notice by publication may contain multiple listings of motor
vehicles.



   A copy of any notice required in this section, as well as a copy of any
certificate of sale issuehereunder by the City or its designee shall be
forwarded to the Division of Motor Vehicles, State of Florida.



(Ord. No. 87-2, § 2, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 02-033, § 1, 8-20-02; Ord. No.
04-030, § 2, 5-18-04; Ord. No. 14-001, § 2, 2-4-14)



Sec. 10-53.  Nuisance abatement bid procedure.



   The services entailed in carrying out the abatement of nuisances under
this Article may be performed by the City or be performed by an independent
contractor retained by the City pursuant to the City's procurement policies
and procedures.



(Ord. No. 87-2, § 2, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 04-030, § 2, 5-18-04)



ARTICLE IV. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS



Sec. 10-54.  Rules.



   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of this code have the meanings shown in this section.



      (1)   Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense
include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine
and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the
singular.



      (2)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through
the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily
accepted meanings such as the context implies.



      (3)   Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit,”
“dwelling,” “premises,” “building,” “rooming house,”
“rooming unit” “housekeeping unit” or “story” are stated in this
code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or
any part thereof.”



(Ord. No. 08-031, § 3, 11-18-08)



Sec. 10-55.  Definitions.



   As used in this article:



   Approved: Approved by the City Manager or designee.



   Basement: That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade.



   Bathroom: A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or
shower.



   Bedroom: Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping
purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.



   Condemn: To adjudge unfit for occupancy.



   Dwelling unit: A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.



   Easement: That portion of land or property reserved for present or
future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the
property.  The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on, or above
a said lot or lots.



   Exterior property: The open space of the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.



   Extermination: The control and elimination of insects, rats or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that serves as their food; by poison spraying,
fumigating, and trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods.



   Garbage: The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.



   Guard: A building component or a system of building components located
at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the
possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.



   Habitable space: Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or
cooking.  Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility
spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.



   Housekeeping unit: A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and
eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and
bathtub or shower.



   Imminent danger: A condition which could cause serious or
life-threatening injury or death at any time.



   Infestation: The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.



   Inoperable motor vehicle: A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the
public streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed,
wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved
under its own power.



   Labeled: Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been
affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the  manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.



   Let for occupancy or let: To permit, provide, or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant
to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.



   Occupancy: The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.



   Occupant: Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.



   Openable area: That part of a window, skylight or door which is
available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.



   Operator: Any person who has charge, care, or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.



   Owner: Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of
the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of
such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.



   Person: An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.



   Premises: A lot, plot, or parcel of land, easement, or public way,
including any structures thereon.



   Public way:  Any street, alley, or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated, or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.



   Rooming house: A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family
dwelling.



   Rooming unit: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for
cooking purposes.



   Rubbish: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.



   Sleeping unit: A room or space in which people sleep, which can also
include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or
kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of
a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.



   Structure: That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.



   Tenant: A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.



   Toilet room: A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a
bathtub or shower.



   Ventilation: The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned
or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.



   Workmanlike: Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.



   Yard: An open space on the same lot with a structure.



(Ord. No. 08-031, § 3, 11-18-08)



Sec. 10-56.  General requirements.



   (a)   General.



      (1)   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall
govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for
maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property located within the
city.



      (2)   Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain
the structures  and exterior property in compliance with these requirements.
A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to
occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do
not comply with the  requirements of this section. Occupants of a dwelling
unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a
clean, sanitary and safe  condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming
unit, housekeeping unit or premises, which they occupy and control.



      (3)   Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and
premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure
and sanitary condition as  provided herein so as not to cause a blighting
problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.



   (b)   Exterior property areas.



      (1)   Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep
that part of the exterior property, which such occupant occupies or controls
in a clean and sanitary condition.



      (2)   Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and
maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water thereon.



      Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs, or within any
structure located thereon.



      (3)   Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways,
stairs, driveways, parking spaces, and similar areas shall be kept in a
proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.



      (4)   Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 12 inches. All
noxious weeds shall  be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses,
plants, and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided: however, this
term shall not include cultivated  flowers, gardens, and yards certified by
the Florida Yards and Neighborhoods program.



      (5)   Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property
shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are
found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will
not be injurious to  human health. After extermination, proper precautions
shall be taken to eliminate  rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation.



      (6)   Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans, or
blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke,
odors, or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or
adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant.



      (7)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures,
including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good  repair.



      (8)   Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or
wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or
building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking,
carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore
said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.



   (c)   Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs.



      (1)   Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair.



      (2)   Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas,
containing water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely
surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches (1219 mm) in height above
the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the
pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and
self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than 54 inches (1372
mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on
the poolside of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be
maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released
from an open position of 6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing
pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced, or changed in a manner that
reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.



      Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies
with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.



   (d)   Exterior structure.



      (1)   General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained
in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to
the public health, safety, or welfare.



      (2)   Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including
but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim,
balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior
wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment.
Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces
repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be
maintained weather resistant and watertight. All metal surfaces subject to
rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all
surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit
future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior
surfaces.  Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from
this requirement.



      (3)   Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved
address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from
the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with
their background.  Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet
letters. Numbers shall  have a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm)
and shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high for single family units, 4
inches (102 mm) high at front and rear entrances for multi-family units, and
6 inches (153 mm) for commercial units.



      (4)   Structural members. All structural members shall be
maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting
the imposed dead and live loads.



      (5)   Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be
maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in
such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.



      (6)   Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from
holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials, and maintained weatherproof
and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.



      (7)   Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be
sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be
adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior
portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters, and downspouts shall be
maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.



      (8)   Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses,
corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings, and similar decorative features
shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe
condition.



      (9)   Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including,
but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes,
standpipes, and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be
properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall  be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials,
such as paint or similar surface treatment.



      (10)   Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior
stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appearances attached thereto,
shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage
and capable of supporting the imposed loads.



      (11)   Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers,
smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe
and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application
of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.



      (12)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be
firmly fastened  and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall
be maintained in  good condition.



      (13)   Window, skylight and door frames. Every window,
skylight, door, and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair, and
weather tight.



         a.   Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained
free from cracks and holes.



         b.   Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed
window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by
window hardware.



      (14)   Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside
opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas,
food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in
food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored
shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16
mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect
control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.



      Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved 
means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.



      (15)   Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies, and
hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to
dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on
means of egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 10-60(b)(3).



      (16)   Basement and crawl space hatchways. Every basement
hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain, and
surface drainage water.



      (17)   Guards for basement and crawl space windows and vents.
Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields,
storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents.



      (18)   Building security. Doors, windows, or hatchways for
dwelling units, room units, or housekeeping units shall be provided with
devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within.



         a.   Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit,
rooming unit, or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased, or let shall be
equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side
from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge,
or effort and shall have a lock throw of not less than 1 inch (25 mm). Such
deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer's
specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this
section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.



         b.   Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in
part within six feet (1828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below
that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit
that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking
device.



   (e)   Interior structure.



      (1)   General. The interior of a structure and equipment
therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, and in a
sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which
they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a
structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping unit, a hotel, a
dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential
occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or
public areas of the structure and exterior property.



      (2)   Structural members. All structural members shall be
maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed
loads. 



      (3)   Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including
windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean, and sanitary
condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking, or abraded paint shall be repaired,
removed, or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, and other
defective surface conditions shall be corrected.



      (4)   Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing,
balcony, porch, deck, or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound
condition and good repair.



      (5)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be
firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.



      (6)   Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably
well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by
being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers, or tracks as intended
by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.



   (f)   Handrails and guardrails.



      (1)   General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs
having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair
and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or
other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor
or grade below shall have guards.  Handrails shall not be less than 30
inches (762 mm) high or more than 42 inches (1067 mm) high measured
vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the
landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm)
high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other
walking surface.



      Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the
Florida Building code.



   (g)   Rubbish and garbage.



      (1)   Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior
property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free
from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.



      (2)   Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall
dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish
in approved containers.



         a.   Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment
not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned, or stored on premises
without first removing the doors.



      (3)   Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall
dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in
an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.



         a.   Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling
shall supply one of the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder
in each dwelling unit; an approved incinerator unit in the structure
available to the occupants in each dwelling unit; or an approved leak-proof,
covered, outside garbage container.



         b.   Containers. The operator of every establishment
producing garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized,
approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the
storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal.



   (h)   Extermination.



      (1)   Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from
insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are
found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be
injurious to human health.  After extermination, proper precautions shall be
taken to prevent re-infestation.



      (2)   Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible
for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the
structure.



      (3)   Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling
or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for
extermination on the premises.



      (4)   Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing
two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public
or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is
caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area
occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination.



      (5)   Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be
responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure.



      Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the
structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination.



(Ord. No. 08-031, § 3, 11-18-08)



Sec. 10-57.  Light, ventilation and occupancy limitations.



   (a)   General.



      (1)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the
minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation, and space for
occupying a structure.



      (2)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide
and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another
person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of
this section.



      (3)   Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural
light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical
ventilation complying with the Florida Building Code shall be permitted.



   (b)   Light.



      (1)   Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at
least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a
court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8% of
the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure
face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three
feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling
of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors
nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required
minimum total window area for the room.



      Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without
exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the
unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor
area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33
mm).  The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being
served.



      (2)   Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and
stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family
dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard
incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or
equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not
be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). In other than residential occupancies,
means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways shall be
illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is
occupied with a minimum of one footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and
treads.



      (3)   Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with
natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary
conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the
appliances, equipment, and fixtures.



   (c)   Ventilation.



      (1)   Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at
least one openable window. The total openable area of the window in every
room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum glazed area required in
Section 10-57(b)(1).



      Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the
outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening
to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior
room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 mm). The ventilation
openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being
ventilated.



      (2)   Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet
room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as
required above, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces
equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical
ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the
outdoors and shall not be recirculated.



      (3)   Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the
certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit
or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted
to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit.



      Exceptions:



         (a)   Cooking facilities may be located in a room
otherwise prohibited by this section where the Building Official specifically
approves such a location in writing.



         (b)   Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens
shall not be considered cooking appliances.



      (4)   Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating,
or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust
ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the
source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be re-circulated to
any space.



      (5)   Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems
shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.



   (d)   Occupancy limitations.



      (1)   Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping
units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy
and be separate from other adjoining spaces.



      (2)   Size of dwelling unit. The total square footage of all
habitable rooms in a dwelling unit shall be no less than 150 square feet of
floor area for the first occupant, and 100 square feet of floor area for each
additional occupant.



      Exception: Dwelling units shall contain a greater floor area if
required by the applicable building or zoning code provisions.



      (3)   Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a
kitchen, shall not be less than seven feet (2134 mm) in any plan dimension.
Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet (914 mm)
between counter-fronts and appliances or counter-fronts and walls.



      (4)   Every sleeping room for one occupant shall have no less
than 70 square feet of floor space, or 50 square feet of floor space per
occupant, whichever is greater.



      (5)   Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways,
corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement
areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet (2134 mm).



      Exceptions:



         a.   In one and two-family dwellings, beams, or girders
spaced not less than four feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting not more
than six inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height.



         b.   Basement rooms in one and two-family dwellings
occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a
ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches (2033 mm) with not less
than six feet four inches (1932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders,
ducts and similar obstructions.



         c.   Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or
similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room,
with a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet (2134 mm) over not less
than one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor
area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear
ceiling height of five feet (1524 mm) or more shall be included.



      (6)   Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and
living room shall comply with the following requirements:



         a.   Room area. Every living room shall contain at least
120 square feet (1 1.2 m2) and every bedroom shall contain at least 70 square
feet (6.5 m2).



         b.   Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute
the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not
serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces.



         Exception: This provision shall not apply to units that
contain fewer than two bedrooms.



         c.   Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall
have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing
through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access
to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the
bedroom or an adjacent story.



         d.   Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and non-habitable
spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes.



         e.   Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the
applicable provisions of this code including, but not limited to, the light,
ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this
section; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of
Section 4, the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of
Section 5; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of
Section 6.



      (7)   Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit
an efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements:



         a.   A unit occupied by not more than two occupants
shall have a clear floor area of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 m2). A
unit occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less
than 320 square feet (29.7 m2). These required areas shall be exclusive of
the areas required by Items (d)(2) and (d)(3) above.



         b.   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink,
cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working
space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation
conforming to this code shall be provided.



         c.   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom
containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower.



         d.   The maximum number of occupants shall be three.



      (8)   Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food
preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store,
prepare, and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate
facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse,
including facilities for temporary storage.



(Ord. No. 08-031, § 3, 11-18-08)



Sec. 10-58.  Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements.



   (a)   General.



      (1)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the
minimum plumbing systems, facilities, and plumbing fixtures to be provided.



      (2)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide
and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance
with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not
comply with the requirements of this section.



   (b)   Required facilities.



      (1)   Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its
own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet, and kitchen sink which shall
be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be
placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to
the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is
located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required
lavatory.



      (2)   Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and
bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.



      (3)   Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and
baths are not provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or
shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten
occupants.



      (4)   Employees' facilities. A minimum of one water closet,
one lavatory, and one drinking facility shall be available to employees.



         a.   Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a
drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next
to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in
toilet rooms or bathrooms.



   (c)   Toilet rooms.



      (1)   Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide
privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other
space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be
provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple
dwelling.



      (2)   Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel
units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have
access by traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access
from a common hall or passageway.



      (3)   Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet
facilities shall have access from within the employees' working area. The
required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above or
below the employees' working area and the path of travel to such facilities
shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m).  Employee facilities shall
either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities.



      Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage
structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same
ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet
(152 m) from the employees' regular working area to the facilities.



      (4)   Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every
toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth hard, nonabsorbent
surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.



   (d)   Plumbing systems and fixtures.



      (1)   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly
installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from
obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for
which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be
maintained in a safe, sanitary, and functional condition.



      (2)   Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have
adequate clearances for usage and cleaning.



      (3)   Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a
plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the
structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross
connection, back-siphonage, improper installation, deterioration, or damage
or for similar reasons, the Building Official shall require the defects to be
corrected to eliminate the hazard.



   (e)   Water system.



      (1)   General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower,
drinking fountain, water closet, or other plumbing fixture shall be properly
connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water
system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and
showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in
accordance with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.



      (2)   Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free
from contamination and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be
located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets,
janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are
attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved
atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose
connection vacuum breaker.



      (3)   Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and
maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices, and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the
fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.



      (4)   Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall
be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount
of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, and
laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C). A
gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room,
bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate
combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and
pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained on water heaters.



   (f)   Sanitary drainage system.



      (1)   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly
connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage
disposal system.



      (2)   Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer
line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and
defects.



   (g)   Storm drainage.



      (1)   General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and
courts and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a
manner that creates a public nuisance.



(Ord. No. 08-031, § 3, 11-18-08)



Sec. 10-59.  Mechanical and electrical requirements.



   (a)   General.



      (1)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the
minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.



      (2)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide
and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance
with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the
requirements of this section.



   (b)   Reserved.



   (c)   Mechanical equipment.



      (1)   Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances,
fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water
heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe
working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.



      (2)   Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning
equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.



      Exception: This provision shall not apply to fuel-burning
equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation.



      (3)   Clearances. All required clearances to combustible
materials shall be maintained.



      (4)   Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning
equipment shall be maintained in effective operation.



      (5)   Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion
of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning
equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.



      (6)   Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce
fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel
supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall
not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is
specifically approved.



   (d)   Electrical facilities.



      (1)   Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be
provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of
this section.



      (2)   Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment
shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in
accordance with the NFPA 70 National Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be
served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having
a rating of not less than 60 amperes.



      (3)   Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the
electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the
structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient
receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation,
deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the Building Official shall
require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.



   (e)   Electrical equipment.



      (1)   Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring, and
appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved
manner.



      (2)   Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall
contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry
area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with
a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one
receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault
circuit interrupter protection.



      (3)   Luminaries. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet
room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room, and furnace room shall
contain at least one electric luminaire.



   (f)   Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters.



      (1)   General. Elevators, dumbwaiters, and escalators shall be
maintained in compliance with Florida statutes and ASME A17.1. The most
current certification of inspection shall be on display at all times within
the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, or the certificate
shall be available for public inspection in the office of the building
operator. The inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the
periodical intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N, except where otherwise
specified by the authority having jurisdiction.



      (2)   Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger
elevators, at least one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all
times when the building is occupied.



      Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be
permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or
servicing.



   (g)   Duct systems.



      (1)   General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of
obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function.



(Ord. No. 08-031, § 3, 11-18-08)



Sec. 10-60   Fire safety requirements.



   (a)   General.



      (1)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the
minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and
exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be
provided.



      (2)   Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide
and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the
requirements of this section.



   (b)   Means of egress.



      (1)   General. A safe, continuous, and unobstructed path of
travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the
public way. Means of egress shall comply with the Florida Fire Prevention
Code.



      (2)   Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with
the Florida Fire Prevention Code shall be unobstructed.



      (3)   Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily
openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for
keys, special knowledge, or effort, except where the door hardware conforms
to that permitted by the Florida Building Code.



      (4)   Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape
openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the
time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue
openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of
keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be
placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net
clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of
construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the
inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is
required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.



   (c)   Fire-resistance ratings.



      (1)   Fire-resistance rated assemblies. The required
fire-resistance rating, of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft
enclosures, partitions, and floors shall be maintained.



      (2)   Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall
be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smoke-stop doors shall
be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall
not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.



   (d)   Fire protection systems.



      (1)   General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a
fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination
thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in
accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.



      (2)   Smoke alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms
shall be installed and maintained in all multi-unit dwellings regardless of
occupant load at all of the following, locations:



         a.   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate
sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.



         b.   In each room used for sleeping purposes.



         c.   In each story within a dwelling unit, including
basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable
attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split-levels and without an
intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the
upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the
lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.



   Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other
groups in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.



      (3)   Power source. In all multi-unit dwellings,
single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the
building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source
and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal
when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than as required for over-current protection.



      Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery
operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that
are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of
buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal
of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is
an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
building wiring without the removal of interior finishes.



      (4)   Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is
required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2,
R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke
alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one
alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall
be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all
intervening doors closed.



      Exceptions: Interconnection is not required in buildings which
are not undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind. Smoke
alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where
alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or
ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl
space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection
without the removal of interior finishes.



(Ord. No. 08-031, § 3, 11-18-08)



Sec. 10-61.  Penalties.



   Any person convicted of the violation of any of the terms or provisions
of this article or any code, requirements, or standards adopted hereby shall
be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Section 1-6 of the City of
Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances. In addition, the city may use any equitable
or legal remedy available at law to enforce any violation of the terms or
provisions of the City's Code of Ordinances. If any person commences any work
on a building, structure, plumbing, mechanical, or gas system before
obtaining the necessary permit, he or she shall be subject to a penalty of
four times the established permit fee. The Director of Development may allow
a waiver of the penalty fee, in whole or in part, when such waiver is
supported by the circumstances that apply to the specific instance of
imposing a penalty fee, and does not violate the best interests of the city.



(Ord. No. 08-031, § 3, 11-18-08)



Sec. 10-62.  Referenced standards.



   This section lists the standards that are referenced in various section
of this article. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency
of the standard, the standard identification, the effective date, title, and
the section(s) of this document that reference the standards.



 



ASME
 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers
Three Park Avenue
New York, NY 10016-5990


Standard Reference
 
Title


A17.1-2000
 
Safety Code of Elevators and Escalators with A17.1a 200d Addend


ASTM
 
ASTM International
100 Barr Harbour Drive
West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959


Standard Reference
 
Title


F1346-91 (2003)
 
Performance Specification for Safety Covers and Labeling Requirements for all
Covers for Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs


Florida Codes
 
Florida Building Commission
c/o Florida Department of Community Affairs
Building Codes and Standards
2555 Shumard Oak Boulevard
Tallahassee, Florida 32399-2100


Standard Reference
 
Title


Florida Building Code, Building

Florida Building Code, Residential

Florida Building Code, Plumbing

Florida Building Code, Mechanical

Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas

Florida Building Code, Existing Building

Florida Fire Prevention Code


NFPA
 
National Fire Protection Association
Batterymarch Park
Quincy, MA  02269




 



(Ord. No. 08-031, § 3, 11-18-08)



Chapter 11
JUNK AND JUNKYARDS*



   *Cross references-Abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles, § 10-50 et
seq.; secondhand or junk dealers dealing with minors, § 15-7; zoning
generally, App. A.



Sec. 11-1.  Definitions.



   As used in this chapter:



   Automobile graveyard means an establishment or place of business which
is maintained or operated for the use of storing, keeping, buying or selling
wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle
parts.



   Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
lumber, trash, rubber, debris, oddments, wastements, litter, leavings, ruins,
castoffs, rummage, waste or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or
parts thereof, iron, steel and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.



   Junkyard means an establishment or place of business which is
maintained or operated for the use of storing, keeping, buying or selling
junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard and
shall be construed to include garbage dumps and sanitary fills.



(Code 1958, § 14B-1)



Sec. 11-2.  Requirements for existing junkyards or automobile graveyards.



   Since it is the intent of this chapter to minimize the extension of
nonconforming uses and to look to their possible eventual elimination, any
junkyard or automobile graveyard existing and operating as a nonconforming
use in any district on September 15, 1965, shall be allowed to continue its
operation subject to the following provisions, and all other applicable
provisions of the city code and city Charter:



   (a)   Area. The actual area used for the operation of such junkyard
or automobile graveyard as date of the enactment of the zoning ordinance
rendering such operation a nonconforming use, shall not be increased at any
time or under any circumstances.



   (b)   Buildings. No additional permanent buildings shall be erected
and no presently existing permanent buildings shall be structurally altered
to increase their bulk or square footage area.



   (c)   Setback lines. No automobile not in running order or any other
junk or scrap of whatsoever character shall at any time be located for
storage, dismantling or any other purpose within seventy-five (75) feet of
any boundary of any residential district, within fifty (50) feet of the front
street line, within thirty (30) feet of any side street line, nor within
thirty (30) feet of any other property line of the lot being so used. It is
the intent of this chapter that where such autos, junk or scrap are presently
so located the owner or operator of the junkyard or automobile junkyard shall
be required to conform to the provisions of this subsection.



   (d)   Screening required. The area occupied by the junkyard or
automobile graveyard shall be entirely surrounded by a substantial,
continuous masonry fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height, or by
vegetative screening of similar height.



(Code 1958, § 14B-3)



Sec. 11-3.  Specifications for, approval of screening.



   (a)   The fence or wall required by section 11-2 shall be of similar
composition, construction and color throughout and shall be constructed
without openings except for one entrance and one exit, such entrance and exit
to be equipped with unpierced gates. Such gates shall be closed and securely
locked at all times, except during business hours. Plans for such fence or
wall shall be submitted to the city council who shall determine whether or
not the proposed fence will meet the requirements of this chapter. No
building permit shall be issued for the construction of such fence or wall
until the approval of the city council has been secured. Such fence shall be
maintained in good order and shall not be allowed to deteriorate.



   (b)   If a vegetative screen is to be substituted for such fence or
wall, plans for such screening shall be submitted to the city council for
approval. Such vegetative screen shall consist of a greenbelt strip not less
than twenty (20) feet wide where it adjoins another lot line, nor less than
ten (10) feet wide where it adjoins a street line. The greenbelt shall be
composed of at least one row of deciduous or evergreen trees and one or two
(2) rows of shrubs. The city council shall approve or disapprove such request
for vegetative screening. The vegetative screening shall be cared for and
maintained in a husbandman-like manner by the operator of the junkyard or
automobile graveyard.



(Code 1958, § 14B-2)



 


Notes

App. A. 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor



Chapter 12
LIBRARIES



Sec. 12-1.  Board created; membership; terms; vacancies.



   There is hereby established a library board, hereinafter referred to as
the “board”. The board shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be
appointed by the city council. Two (2) members of the board shall serve for a
term of one (1) year from the date of appointment; three (3) members shall
serve for a term of two (2) years from the date of appointment; and two (2)
members shall serve for a term of three (3) years from the date of
appointment. Vacancies created after expiration of these terms shall be
filled by appointments for three-year terms.



   In the case of a vacancy by resignation, removal or otherwise, the city
council shall fill such vacancy by appointment for the remainder of the
original board member's term.



(Code 1958, § 2-31; Ord. No. 85-23, § 1, 4-2-85)



Sec. 12-2.  Qualifications of board; compensation; organization.



   Members of the board shall be residents of the city; however, neither
the mayor nor any member of the city council shall be eligible to be a member
of the hoard. No member of the board shall receive any pay or compensation
for any services rendered as a member of such board. The members of the board
shall, immediately after their appointment, meet and organize by electing one
of their members as chairman and such other officers as the board may deem
necessary.



(Code 1958, § 2-32)



Sec. 12-3.  Board quorum; by-laws, rules and regulations authorized.



   Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum.  The board
may make and adopt such by-laws, rules and regulations for their own guidance
and for the government and operation of any municipal library and reading
room in the city as they may deem expedient, subject to the approval,
supervision and control of the city council and not inconsistent with law.



(Code 1958, § 2-33)



Sec. 12-4.  Powers and duties of board.



   Subject to the control and direction of the city council, the board:



   (a)   Shall act in an advisory capacity (nonadministrative) to the
city council, to assure representation of the ideas of citizens and taxpayers
of the city relative to the function and operation of municipal libraries and
reading rooms in the city, and such advisory assistance shall include, but
not be limited to, recommendations relative to control of expenditures of
moneys collected or donated to the credit of any municipal library in this
city, and the supervision, care and custody of the grounds, rooms, property
and buildings constructed, leased or set aside for municipal library purposes.



   (b)   Shall make recommendations for the appointment of a suitable
librarian and assistants and their respective rates of compensation;
establish regulations for the government and control of any municipal library
as may be deemed necessary for its preservation and to maintain its
usefulness and efficiency; fix and impose by general rules, penalties and
forfeitures for failure to return any book or for violation of any by-laws or
regulations of the board.



   (c)   Shall annually in an advisory capacity assist the city manager
in preparing a budget for the maintenance and expansion of municipal library
facilities.



   (d)   Shall keep records, inventories and accounts, budgetary or
otherwise, of all of the activities of the board and the municipal library
system and make reports to the city manager and the city council relative
thereto annually or whenever requested to do so by the council.



(Code 1958, § 2-34)



Sec. 12-5.  Board meetings.



   In the performance of their duties set forth in this article, the board
shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. Special meetings may be
called by the board chairman upon prior notification. Minutes shall be kept
during all meetings and a copy given to the city manager and the city council.



(Code 1958, § 2-35)



Sec. 12-6.  Removal of board members.



   Members of the board may be removed by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the total members of the city council.



(Code 1958, § 2-36)



Sec. 12-7.  Acts prohibited; penalty.



   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to trespass, cause injury
to, or to destroy any library grounds, rooms, books or other property
constituting a part of the municipal library system of the city or to violate
any of the by-laws or regulations adopted by the library board and approved
by the city council relative to operation of said municipal library system.
Any person or persons found guilty of violating this section shall be
punished as for a violation of this Code of Ordinances.



(Code 1958, § 2-37)



Chapter 13
LICENSES*



Art. I.   Business Tax Receipts and Certificate of Use and Occupancy, §§
13-1—13-51



Art. II.   Garage Sales, §§ 13-52—13-58



Art. III.   Adult Entertainment Establishments, §§ 13-59—13-79



Art. IV.   Live Entertainment Permits, § 13-80



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, adopted June 21, 1994, provided
for the deletion of Art. I, In general, and Art. II, Contractors, substantive
sections thereof being §§ 13-1—13-22 and 13-33—13.41, as derived from
Ch. 15 of the 1958 Code and numerous ordinances (see the Code Comparative
Table, beginning on page 2701). Ord. No. 94-15 also enacted new provisions
designated as Art. I, §§ 13-1—13-25, herein set out and adopted a fee
schedule, Appendix A, which has been designated as § 13-30 pursuant to the
city's instruction. Former Art. III, Garage sales, §§ 13-52—13-58, was
redesignated as Art. II by Ord. No. 94-15.



   Cross references-Code compliance board generally, § 2-72 et seq.;
enforcement of this chapter by board, § 2-75; county dog license required,
§ 4-36; regulation of peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 17; taxation generally,
Ch. 23; regulation of taxicabs, Ch. 24.



ARTICLE I. BUSINESS TAX RECEIPTS AND CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY



Sec. 13-1.  Purpose; imposition and levy of tax.



   The governing body of Boynton Beach hereby establishes the City of
Boynton Beach Business Tax Receipt Code and levies a Business Tax Receipt tax
for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession or
occupation within its jurisdiction, pursuant to F.S. Ch. 205, as amended from
time to time.  The Business Tax Receipt tax is levied on:



      (1)   Any person who maintains a permanent business location
or branch office within the municipality, for the privilege of engaging in or
managing any business within its jurisdiction.



      (2)   Any person who maintains a permanent business location
or branch office within the municipality, for the privilege of engaging in or
managing any profession or occupation within its jurisdiction.



      (3)   Any person who does not qualify under subsection (1) or
subsection (2) and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or
profession in interstate com-merce, if the Business Tax is not prohibited by
Sec. 8 of Article 1 of the United States Constitution.



      (4)   Any person applying for or renewing a local business tax
receipt for a business tax to practice any profession regulated by the
Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation, or any board or
commission thereof, must exhibit an active state certificate, registration,
or license, or proof of copy of the same, and a current use and occupancy
certificate for the location associated with the business activity before a
local business tax receipt may be issued.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2,
9-3-14)



Sec. 13-2.  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context requires
otherwise:



   Business Tax Receipt Administrator.  The employee of the city
designated by the City Manager as the person responsible for the operations
of the division of the city which processes the issuance of Business Tax
Receipts.



   Certificate of Use and Occupancy. An inspection method by which the
city documents the existing conditions of a property; identifies any non-
conformities to be addressed by occupant/owner; establishes current land use
and zoning; and grants approval to occupy a given location for specified uses.



   City.  The City of Boynton Beach Florida, its City Manager, or such
officers, employees or departments designated by the City Manager to act on
behalf of the city.



   City Manager.  The term City Manager shall mean that person holding
the position of City Manager of the City of Boynton Beach, Florida or his/her
designee.



   Classification.  Classification means the method by which a business
or group of businesses is identified by size or type, or both.



   Contractor.  A contractor shall mean any person whose work is defined
in F.S. 489.105(a) through (p), plus those exceptions as specified in Chapter
13, Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances.



   Fiscal year.  Fiscal year means October 1 of a calendar year to
September 30 of the following calendar year.



   Inventory.  Inventory shall mean those items commonly referred to as
goods, wares and merchandise which are held for sale, rental, or lease to
others in the ordinary course of business.



   Local responsible party. The property owner of any property being
offered for rent or rented shall be the local responsible party. The property
owner may designate a licensed property management company or other
individual to act on the property owner’s behalf, but the property owner
shall remain responsible for the actions or omissions of its designee. The
local responsible party, if an individual, shall reside in Miami-Dade,
Broward, Palm Beach, Martin or Indian River County.



   Number of workers.  The number of workers shall  be determined by the
total number of paychecks issued for all full time and part time workers,
nonprofessionals, subcontractors, contract workers, consultants, principals,
and partners who worked for the business, occupation or profession during the
previous calendar year.  A new business shall be based on the number of
workers as of opening day who are entitled to receive paychecks.  All
principals and partners in the business shall be deemed as workers and be
included in the calculations.



   Person.  Person shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, joint
adventure, syndicate, or other group or combination acting as a unit,
association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, trustee, executor,
administrator, receiver, or other fiduciary, and includes the plural as well
as the singular.



   Professional.  A professional shall mean any person engaged in any
business, occupation or profession who is required to maintain an active and
valid State of Florida license, permit, or certificate from any of the state
agencies or the Florida Bar.



   Special Magistrate. Special Magistrate shall mean any of the city’s
Special Magistrates appointed by the City Commission to conduct hearings
pursuant to the City Code and Florida Statutes. Except for Board voting
requirements, any reference in the City Code to “Code Enforcement Board”
shall include Special Magistrate(s).



   Specialty contractor.  A specialty contractor shall mean any person
whose work is limited to a particular phase of construction, and whose scope
is limited to a subset of the activities in F.S. 489.105(a) through (p), plus
those exceptions as specified in Chapter 13, Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances.



   Used car lot.  Any business location within the municipal limits of
the city engaged in the wholesale or retail sale of secondhand or used
automobiles or other type of used motor vehicles.



   Vending or other coin-operated machines.  Vending machines shall be
classified as follows:



      (1)   Amusement vending machines: Machines such as pinball and
video games, pool tables, amusement rides, and the like.



      (2)   Product vending machines: Machines vending merchandise
of any kind including, but not limited to, soft drinks, journals, food
products, and the like.



      (3)   Service vending machines: Devices such as lockers,
copiers, heart and/or blood pressure machines, laundry washers/dryers, and
the like.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2,
9-3-14)



Sec. 13-3.  Conflict with statute.



   The regulation of Business Tax Receipts shall be administered in
accordance with this chapter and with F.S. Chapter 205, as amended from time
to time.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2,
9-3-14)



Sec. 13-4   Classification and fee schedule.



   The City Commission establishes classifications for businesses or
groups of business and Business Tax Receipt taxes therefor as set forth below.



(Ord. No. 94-15, Appendix A, 6- 21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5- 95; Ord.
No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 13-022, §
2, 7-2-13; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2, 9-3-14)



   Business Tax Receipt Tax Rate Structure



   Standard Industrial Classification



   Businesses, Professions, Occupations



   (*–See note, end of schedule; NEC–See note, end of schedule)



   The businesses, professions and occupations subject to the provisions
of Chapter 13, the Business Tax Receipt taxes imposed and levied, the
Standard Industrial Classifications assigned, and other requirements
pertaining thereto are as follows:



 

SIC
 
Description
 
Fee




0742
 
Veterinarian*
 
216.48


0752
 
Animal Specialty Service
 
97.24


0781
 
Landscape Architect*
 
216.48


0782
 
Lawn & Garden Service
 
162.07


0783
 
Tree Trimming
 
162.07


1520
 
Contractor - Residential
 
269.72


1530
 
Contractor - Building
 
269.72


1540
 
Contractor - General
 
269.72


1611
 
Contractor - Paving
 
269.72


1620
 
Contractor - Heavy Construction
 
269.72


1623
 
Contractor - TV Antenna & Tower
 
269.72


1624
 
Contractor - Underground Utilities (Ref. 1623)
 
269.72


1625
 
Contractor - Concrete (Ref. 1771)
 
269.72


1626
 
Contractor - Marine (Ref. 1629)
 
269.72


1629
 
Contractor - Tennis Court
 
269.72


1700
 
Miscellaneous Specialty
 
97.24


1701
 
Asphalt Sealing & Coating (Ref. 1799)
 
97.24


1702
 
Landscaping (Ref. 0782)
 
97.24


1703
 
Lathing (Ref. 1742)
 
97.24


1704
 
Residential Gutter & Downspout Installation (Ref. 1761)
 
97.24


1705
 
Striping (Ref. 1721)
 
97.24


1706
 
Vinyl Clad Metal Shelving (Ref. 1799)
 
97.24


1707
 
Mirror/Shower Door Installation (Ref. 1799)
 
97.24


1710
 
Contractor - Irrigation Sprinkler (Ref. 1711)
 
269.72


1711
 
Contractor - Plumbing
 
269.72


1712
 
Contractor - Air Conditioning (Ref. 1711)
 
269.72


1713
 
Contractor - Mechanical (Ref. 1711)
 
269.72


1714
 
Contractor - Fire Sprinkler (Ref. 1711)
 
269.72


1715
 
Contractor - Refrigeration (Ref. 1711)
 
269.72


1716
 
Contractor - Room Air Conditioning (Ref. 1711)
 
269.72


1717
 
Contractor - Septic Tank (Ref. 1711).
 
269.72


1718
 
Contractor - Solar Water Heating (Ref. 1711)
 
269.72


1721
 
Contractor - Painting
 
269.72


1731
 
Contractor - Electrical
 
269.72


1732
 
Contractor - Communication & Sound (Ref. 1731)
 
269.72


1733
 
Contractor - Burglar & Fire Alarm (Ref. 1731)
 
269.72


1734
 
Contractor - Sign - Electrical (Ref. 1731)
 
269.72


1741
 
Contractor - Masonry
 
269.72


1742
 
Contractor - Plastering
 
269.72


1743
 
Contractor - Tile, Terrazzo, & Marble
 
269.72


1744
 
Contractor - Drywall (Ref. 1742)
 
269.72


1745
 
Contractor - Insulation (Ref. 1742)
 
269.72


1746
 
Contractor - Acoustical Tile (Ref. 1742)
 
269.72


1750
 
Contractor - Window (Ref. 1751)
 
269.72


1751
 
Carpentry & Cabinet Installation
 
97.24


1752
 
Contractor - Flooring, NEC
 
97.24


1753
 
Contractor - Door (Ref. 1751)
 
269.72


1754
 
Contractor - Garage Door (Ref. 1751)
 
269.72


1761
 
Contractor - Roofing
 
269.72


1762
 
Contractor - Roof Deck (Ref. 1761)
 
269.72


1763
 
Contractor - Sheet Metal (Ref. 1761)
 
269.72


1772
 
Contractor - Gunite (Ref. 1771)
 
269.72


1781
 
Contractor - Well Driller
 
269.72


1791
 
Contractor - Reinforcing, Iron & Steel
 
269.72


1793
 
Contractor - Glass & Glazing
 
269.72


1794
 
Excavation/Grading
 
97.24


1795
 
Contractor - Demolition
 
269.72


1796
 
Contractor - Elevator
 
269.72


1797
 
Contractor - Sign - Nonelectrical (Ref. 1799)
 
269.72


1799
 
Contractor - Miscellaneous Special Trade
 
269.72


1800
 
Contractor - Aluminum Specialty (Ref. 1799)
 
269.72


1801
 
Contractor - Awnings (Ref. 1799)
 
269.72


1802
 
Contractor - Boilers and Pressure Piping (Ref. 1799)
 
269.72


1803
 
Contractor - Fence Erection (Ref. 1799)
 
269.72


1804
 
Contractor - Liquified Petroleum Gas (Ref. 1799)
 
269.72


1805
 
Contractor - Ornamental Iron (Ref. 1799)
 
269.72


1806
 
Contractor - Pollutant Storage Systems (Ref. 1799)
 
269.72


1807
 
Contractor - Pool/Spa (Ref. 1799)
 
269.72


1808
 
Contractor - Pool/Spa Service (Ref. 1799)
 
269.72


1809
 
Miscellaneous Contractor (Ref. 1799)
 
269.72


2024
 
Manufacturer - Frozen Desserts
 
 


 
 
Number of workers fee schedule:
 
 


 
 
  Not exceeding 2 persons
 
119.24


 
 
  Not exceeding 4 persons
 
200.27


 
 
  Not exceeding 6 persons
 
269.72


 
 
  More than 6, not exceeding 10 persons
 
324.14


 
 
  More than 10, not exceeding 20 persons
 
405.17


 
 
  More than 20 persons
 
607.75


2099
 
Manufacturer - Food Preparation
 
See 2024


2299
 
Manufacturer - Textile Goods
 
See 2024


2389
 
Manufacturer - Apparel and Accessories
 
See 2024


2392
 
Manufacturer - Slipcovers
 
97.24


2396
 
Manufacturer - Fabricated Trimmings
 
See 2024


2399
 
Manufacturer - Fabricated Textile Products
 
See 2024


2431
 
Manufacturer - Millwork
 
See 2024


2434
 
Manufacturer - Cabinetry
 
See 2024


2439
 
Manufacturer - Structural Members
 
See 2024


2511
 
Manufacturer - Wood Furniture
 
See 2024


2512
 
Manufactured - Wood Furniture, Upholstered
 
See 2024


2515
 
Manufacturer - Mattresses
 
See 2024


2591
 
Manufacturer - Window Coverings
 
See 2024


2671
 
Manufacturer - Plastic Packaging
 
See 2024


2711
 
Manufacturer - Newspaper Publishing/Printing
 
See 2024


2759
 
Manufacturer - Commercial Printing
 
See 2024


2834
 
Manufacturer - Pharmaceutical Preparations
 
See 2024


2842
 
Manufacturer - Cleaning Preparations
 
See 2024


2844
 
Manufacturer - Cosmetic Preparations
 
See 2024


2899
 
Manufacturer - Chemical Preparations
 
See 2024


3083
 
Manufacturer - Plastic Sheets/Rods
 
See 2024


3089
 
Manufacturer - Plastic Products, NEC
 
See 2024


3231
 
Manufacturer - Glass Products
 
See 2024


3271
 
Manufacturer - Concrete Block/Brick
 
See 2024


3272
 
Manufacturer - Concrete Products
 
See 2024


3281
 
Manufacturer - Stone Products
 
See 2024


3354
 
Manufacturer - Aluminum Extruded Products
 
See 2024


3442
 
Manufacturer - Metal Products
 
See 2024


3446
 
Manufacturer - Ornamental Metal Products
 
See 2024


3479
 
Manufacturer - Coating Application
 
See 2024


3499
 
Manufacturer - Fabricated Metal Accessories
 
See 2024


3542
 
Manufacturer - Machinery/Equipment
 
See 2024


3559
 
Manufacturer - Special Industry Machinery
 
See 2024


3569
 
Manufacturer - General Industrial Machinery
 
See 2024


3571
 
Manufacturer - Computers
 
See 2024


3599
 
Manufacturer - Machine Shop
 
See 2024


3629
 
Manufacturer - Electrical Industrial Products
 
See 2024


3663
 
Manufacturer - Communications Equipment
 
See 2024


3679
 
Manufacturer - Electronic Components
 
See 2024


3728
 
Manufacturer - Aircraft Parts
 
See 2024


3861
 
Manufacturer - Photographic Equipment Processing
 
See 2024


3911
 
Manufacturer - Jewelry
 
See 2024


3942
 
Manufacturer - Dolls
 
See 2024


3949
 
Manufacturer - Sporting Goods
 
See 2024


3993
 
Manufacturer - Advertising Specialties
 
See 2024


3999
 
Manufacturer - Miscellaneous, NEC
 
See 2024


4013
 
Railroad Company
 
216.48


4118
 
Ambulance Service (Ref. 4119)
 
107.66 plus 37.04 per vehicle


4119
 
Transportation Service, NEC
 
107.66 plus 37.04 per vehicle


4121
 
Taxi/Limousine Service
 
107.66 plus 37.04 per vehicle


4131
 
Bus Service
 
107.66 plus 37.04 per vehicle


4173
 
Bus Service/Depot
 
107.66


4210
 
Trucking Service
 
81.04 per vehicle


4222
 
Cold Storage, per square foot
 
 


 
 
Warehouse, per square footage  fee schedule:
 
 


 
 
  5,000 square feet or fraction thereof
 
33.11


 
 
  Each additional 5,000 square feet
 
23.63


4225
 
Warehouse - Storage, per square foot
 
See 4222


4493
 
Marina
 
97.24


4498
 
Marine Detailing (Ref. 4499)
 
97.24


4522
 
Air Transportation, Nonscheduled
 
97.24


4724
 
Travel Bureau*
 
162.07


4725
 
Tour Operator
 
97.24


4731
 
Freight Forwarding Service
 
162.07


4780
 
Packing & Crating
 
162.07


4783
 
Express Company
 
324.14


4813
 
Telephone Communications
 
324.14


4822
 
Telegraph & Other Communications
 
97.24


4841
 
Television Services
 
162.07


4899
 
Communication Services, NEC
 
97.24


4924
 
Natural Gas Distribution
 
324.14


4925
 
Liquified Petroleum Gas Distribution
 
324.14


5099
 
Merchant - Wholesale, per inventory
 
 


 
 
Wholesale, per inventory fee schedule:
 
 


 
 
  Not exceeding $5,000
 
269.72


 
 
  More than $5,000, not exceeding $25,000
 
377.39


 
 
  More than $25,000, not exceeding $100,000
 
539.46


 
 
  More than $100,000, not exceeding $500,000
 
810.34


 
 
  More than $500,000
 
971.25


5197
 
Advertising Specialties Sales (Ref. 5199)
 
97.24


5211
 
Lumber Company, per inventory
 
See 5399


5261
 
Nursery: Trees/Plants, per inventory
 
See 5399


5399
 
Merchant - Retail, per inventory
 
 


 
 
Retail, per inventory fee schedule:
 
 


 
 
  Not exceeding $5,000
 
107.66


 
 
  More than $5,000, for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof
 
5.68


5411
 
Grocery, per inventory
 
See 5399


5421
 
Market - Meat/Fish/Poultry, per inventory
 
See 5399


5461
 
Bakery
 
162.07


5511
 
Automobile Dealer*
 
216.48


5531
 
Auto Parts, per inventory
 
See 5399


5541
 
Gas Station
 
162.07


5699
 
Dressmaking Shop
 
64.83


5719
 
Blinds, Shades, Drapery
 
162.07


5810
 
Ice Cream Parlor
 
64.83


5811
 
Caterer
 
162.07


5812
 
Restaurant
 
3.76 per seat, 107.66 minimum


5813
 
Drinking Places
 
539.46


5912
 
Pharmacy, per inventory
 
See 5399


5930
 
Antique Shop
 
162.07


 
 
Antique stores and auction houses, selling only objects of value such as
quality restored antiques, art objects, jewelry, and the like, but not used
merchandise generally.


5932
 
Used Merchandise Stores
 
162.07


5933
 
Pawnbroker
 
723.51


5944
 
Jewelry Shop, per inventory
 
See 5399


5945
 
Handicraft Shop, per inventory
 
See 5399


5961
 
Mail Order/Catalog
 
97.24


5962
 
Vending Machine - Coin- Operated
 
 




 



      (a)   Amusement Vending Machines:



         Each operator   217.07



         In addition, for each machine   28.94



      (b)   Service Vending Machines:



         Each operator   72.36



         In addition, for each machine   28.94



      (c)   Merchandise Vending Machines:



         Each operator   72.36



         In addition, for each machine as follows:



           Requiring deposit under .35   28.94



           Requiring deposit over .35   43.42



      (Coin-operated Auto Wash and Laundry Machines are addressed
separately, under SIC 7543 and SIC 7215, respectively.)



      The following coin-operated machines are exempt from Business Tax
Receipt requirements:



         Cigarette vending machines (F.S. 210.03)



         Federal postage stamp machines, Parcel checking lockers,
and Toilets (F.S. 205.63)



         Unadulterated Florida-produced citrus juice vending
machines (F.S. 205.632)



      Furthermore, no Business Tax Receipt shall be required for
coin-operated machines where the vending machines are owned and operated by
charitable or benevolent nonprofit organizations and where the entire
proceeds of such machines are used solely for recognized charitable or
benevolent purposes.  No Business Tax Receipt shall be required for the
operation of any machines where such machines are owned by a person who is
otherwise issued a Certificate of Use and Occupancy by the city, and such
machines are located and operated at the owner's regular place of business.



 

SIC
 
Description
 
Fee




5963
 
Vending - Mobile
 
97.24


5964
 
Ice Cream Truck (Ref. 5963)
 
107.66 plus 37.04 per vehicle


5965
 
Lunch Wagon (Ref. 5963)
 
107.66 plus 37.04 per vehicle


5992
 
Florist, per inventory
 
See 5399


5995
 
Optician*
 
216.48


5998
 
Auction Company (Ref. 5999)
 
1,591.74


6020
 
Bank - Commercial
 
405.17


6030
 
Bank - Savings
 
405.17


6098
 
Check Cashing Agency
 
324.14


6099
 
Financial Services, NEC
 
324.14


6141
 
Investment & Trading
 
324.14


6162
 
Mortgage Company*
 
324.14


6163
 
Mortgage Broker*
 
162.07


6211
 
Broker - Securities*
 
324.14


6282
 
Investment Advice
 
97.24


6410
 
Insurance Agent
 
54.41


6411
 
Insurance Company
 
97.24


6412
 
Medical Claims Processing Service (Ref. 6411)
 
97.24


6513
 
Apartment Building
 
4.05 per room, 37.04 minimum


6514
 
Rental property four (4) units or less, including single family residential
rentals
 
4.05 per room 37.04 minimum




 



      Business Tax Receipts Procedure:



      Every rental unit used for residential living purposes in the
city must have a Certificate of Use and Occupancy and unless otherwise
exempt, must be issued a Business Tax Receipt.  This includes rental
property four units or less, including single family residential rentals,
condominiums, and mobile homes.



      Business Tax Receipts are issued for a period of twelve months,
from October 1st to the following September 30th.  They must be renewed
annually.  To avoid renewal late fees, rental Business Tax Receipt fees are
payable by October 1st.  After January 30th, late renewals require a Code
Compliance (interior and exterior) inspection of the property.



      Whenever a rental property is sold or otherwise changes
ownership, the new owner must do the following:



      (1)   Apply for a new Certificate of Use and Occupancy and
rental Business Tax Receipt;



      (2)   Schedule an inspection of the rental with the Code
Compliance Division.



      If the inspection process should reveal Zoning, Building, Housing
or Fire Code violations, they must be corrected and a re-inspection made by
the appropriate department.  The owner is given adequate time to correct any
violations.  All violations must be corrected before occupancy will be
approved.



      Any property that has been found in violation by a code
compliance board of the city shall be required to be inspected after six (6)
months from the date of the hearing, and again at twelve (12) months after
the date of the hearing in which the property was found to be in violation.



      The owner of a property that has been found to be in violation by
a code compliance board of the city shall be required to pay an inspection
fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each of the inspections required.
The required inspection fees shall be included as part of the administrative
costs assessed by the city and shall be included in any liens filed by the
city.



      NOTE:  Fees may change from time to time by Ordinance of the
City Commission.  The application for Certificate of Use and Occupancy and
information forms for rental Business Tax Receipts are available on line at
the city's website and at the Development Services Division of City Hall, 100
East Boynton Beach Boulevard.  It should be noted that post office boxes are
not acceptable addresses for mailing purposes, and actual street addresses
are required on the application.



      Designation of resident agent:  No Certificate of Use and
Occupancy and Business Tax Receipt shall be issued by the city for a rental
dwelling located on a rental premises unless the applicant therefor
designates in writing to the city the name, address, and local telephone
number of the owner or resident agent to receive service of notice of
violation of this Code. The owner may designate as his or her resident agent
any natural person eighteen (18) years of age or older who is customarily
present at a business location within the city for the purposes of
transacting business, or who actually resides within the city.  An owner may
change his or her designation of a resident by notifying the city in writing
of the name, address, and local telephone number of the person designated by
the owner to replace the previous resident agent.  Any notice of violation
or legal process which has been delivered or served upon the previous
resident agent prior to the receipt of the city of notice of change of the
resident agent shall be deemed effective service.  It shall be the sole
responsibility of the owner to appoint a reliable resident agent and to
inform the resident agent of his correct mailing address.  Failure to do so
shall be no defense to a violation of this Code.  No owner shall designate
as a resident agent any person who does not expressly comply with the
provisions of this section. 



      The owner or the resident agent shall be deemed to be the
“violator” as the term is used in F. S. § 162.06(2). Service of notice
of the resident agent shall be deemed service of notice of the owner, tenant
and violator.



 

SIC
 
Description
 
Fee




6530
 
Property Management*
 
97.24


6531
 
Real Estate Broker*
 
97.24


6541
 
Title Abstract Office
 
324.14


6552
 
Subdividers & Developers, NEC
 
162.07


7011
 
Hotels & Motels
 
4.05 room, 37.04 minimum


7033
 
Trailer Parks & Campsites
 
107.66 plus 3.76 per lot or site


7212
 
Laundry/Dryclean - Drop Only
 
107.66


7214
 
Carpet Cleaning, Mobile (Ref. 7217)
 
97.24


7215
 
Laundry Machines, Coin-Operated
 
72.36 plus 1.45 per machine


7216
 
Dry Cleaning Establishments
 
216.48


7217
 
Carpet/Upholstery Cleaning, Commercial
 
216.48


7219
 
Laundry & Garment Services, NEC
 
64.83


7221
 
Photography
 
162.07


7230
 
Beauty school
 
216.48


7231
 
Beauty Parlor, Etc.*
 
 


 
 
   One chair
 
81.04


 
 
   Each additional chair or manicurist
 
22.00


7232
 
Nail Salon* (Ref. 7231)
 
 


 
 
   One manicurist table
 
81.04


 
 
   Each additional manicurist
 
22.00


7241
 
Barber Shops*
 
 


 
 
   One chair
 
81.04


 
 
   Each additional chair
 
22.00


7251
 
Shoe Repair & Shoe Shine Parlor
 
64.83


7261
 
Funeral Director*
 
216.48


7290
 
Debt Counseling Service (Ref. 7299)
 
97.24


7291
 
Income Tax Service
 
162.07


7292
 
Valet Parking (Ref. 7299)
 
97.24


7293
 
Tanning Salon (Ref. 7299)
 
97.24


7294
 
Weight Loss Center (Ref. 7299)
 
97.24


7295
 
Family - Home Child Care (Ref. 7299)
 
97.24


7296
 
Dating Service (Ref. 7299)
 
97.24


7297
 
Electrolysis* (Ref. 7299)
 
97.24


7298
 
Massage Therapist*
 
107.66


7299
 
Miscellaneous Personal Services, NEC
 
97.24


7311
 
Publication Service, NEC
 
162.07


7319
 
Advertising
 
269.72


7322
 
Collection Agency*
 
162.07


7323
 
Credit Association
 
162.07


7334
 
Photocopying/Duplic ating Service
 
97.24


7336
 
Commercial Art/Graphic Design
 
97.24


7337
 
Typing Service
 
97.24


7338
 
Secretarial Services
 
162.07


7342
 
Exterminator
 
162.07


7348
 
Miscellaneous Commercial Services, NEC
 
97.24


7349
 
Janitorial Service
 
162.07


7359
 
Rental Service
 
162.07


7361
 
Employment Agency
 
97.24


7362
 
Nursing Registry
 
97.24


7370
 
Data Processing Service
 
97.24


7371
 
Computer Programming Service
 
162.07


7376
 
Computer Services
 
97.24


7378
 
Computer Maintenance & Repair
 
97.24


7379
 
Computer Related Services
 
97.24


7380
 
Private Detective*
 
97.24


7381
 
Security Service*
 
97.24


7384
 
Photofinishing Laboratories
 
162.07


7385
 
Books, Periodicals, News Bureaus (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7386
 
Auto Broker (Ref. 7389)
 
162.07


7387
 
Messenger Service (Ref. 7389)
 
64.83


7388
 
Appraiser* (Ref. 7389)
 
216.48


7389
 
Business Services, NEC
 
97.24


7390
 
Handyman (No new licenses only renewals)
 
162.07


7391
 
Interior Designer* (Ref. 7389)
 
216.48


7392
 
Manufacturer's Representative (Ref. 7389)
 
162.07


7393
 
Telemarketing/Solicit ing* (Ref. 7389)
 
162.07


7394
 
Auctioneer* (Ref. 7389)
 
269.72


7395
 
Interior Decorator (Ref. 7389)
 
162.07


7396
 
Agent or Agency (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7397
 
Answering Service (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7398
 
Arts & Crafts - Handmade (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7399
 
Asbestos Consultant (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7400
 
Boat Broker (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7401
 
Draftsman (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7402
 
Executive Office (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7403
 
Furniture Installation (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7404
 
Home Demonstrator (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7405
 
Import-Export (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7406
 
Interpretation & Translation (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7407
 
Mail Depot (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7408
 
Music Recording Studio (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7409
 
Paralegal (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7410
 
Pool Cleaning - NO chemicals (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7411
 
Pressure Cleaning (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7412
 
Sign Painting & Lettering (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7413
 
Water Softening Service (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7414
 
Yacht Broker* (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7415
 
Merchandise Broker (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7416
 
Financial Consultant (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7417
 
Showroom (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7418
 
Courier Service (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7419
 
Aquarium Service (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7420
 
Religious/Charitable Organization (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7421
 
Pet Sitting (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7422
 
Housesitting (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7423
 
Embroidery Service (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7424
 
Diver - Commercial (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7425
 
Inspection Service - No Appraisal (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7426
 
Consultant (Ref. 7389)
 
97.24


7427
 
Mediation Counselor
 
97.24


7513
 
Truck Rental & Leasing
 
269.72


7514
 
Passenger Car Rental
 
269.72


7530
 
Auto Pinstriping (Ref. 7532)
 
97.24


7532
 
Auto Body Shop, per number of workers*
 
See 2024


7536
 
Auto Glass Installation*
 
97.24


7538
 
Auto Mechanical Repair*, per number of workers
 
See 2024


7542
 
Car Wash
 
97.24


7543
 
Car Wash - coin-operated
 
107.66 plus 22.00 per machine


7544
 
Auto Detailing
 
64.83


7549
 
Automotive Services, NEC*
 
97.24


7550
 
Wrecker/Towing Service (Ref. 7549)
 
81.04 per vehicle


7551
 
Window Tinting (Ref. 7549)
 
97.24


7629
 
Appliance Repair
 
97.24


7631
 
Jewelry Repair
 
31.26


7641
 
Reupholstery, per number of workers
 
See 2024


7692
 
Welding, per number of workers
 
See 2024


7697
 
Locksmith, per number of workers (Ref. 7699)
 
See 2024


7698
 
Repair Shops, per number of workers (Ref. 7699)
 
See 2024


7699
 
Miscellaneous Repair Services, NEC
 
97.24


7700
 
Mobile Repair (Ref. 7699)
 
97.24


7701
 
Bicycle Repair
 
97.24


7702
 
Screen Repair
 
97.24


7832
 
Motion Picture Theatre
 
0.51 per seat, 107.66 minimum


7910
 
Carnival or Circus (Ref. 7999)
 
539.46


7911
 
Dance Studio/School
 
162.07


7922
 
Miscellaneous Theatrical Services
 
97.24


7928
 
Adult Entertainment (Ref. 7929)
 
1,157.63


 
 
A floor plan showing square footage of building, indicate portion to be
allotted for this use and seating chart if applicable, plus a site plan to
show the off-street parking, shall be submitted for review with the
Certificate of Use and Occupancy application and filing fee.


7929
 
Entertainers & Entertainment Groups
 
97.24


7933
 
Bowling Alley
 
54.41 per alley


7987
 
Martial Arts Instruction (Ref. 7999)
 
97.24


7988
 
Fishing Guide (Ref. 7999)
 
97.24


7989
 
Boat Captain Service (Ref. 7999)
 
97.24


7990
 
Athletic Clubs (Ref. 7991)
 
162.07


7991
 
Fitness Trainer
 
97.24


7993
 
Amusement Arcade, per machine
 
See 5962


7994
 
Billiards (Ref. 7993)
 
54.41 per table


7995
 
Special Events (Ref. 7996)
 
162.07


7997
 
Bankruptcy Sale (Ref. 7389)
 
162.07


7998
 
Miscellaneous Recreation Services, NEC
 
97.24


7999
 
Boats - Recreation
 
 


 
 
   Small motor crafts, each
 
23.63


 
 
   1 - 5 passenger capacity
 
81.04


 
 
   6 - 10 passenger capacity
 
107.66


 
 
   10 - 50 passenger capacity
 
162.07


 
 
   Over 50 passenger capacity
 
269.72


8011
 
Physician*
 
217.07


8012
 
Psychiatrist*
 
217.07


8013
 
Ophthalmologist
 
217.07


8021
 
Dentist*
 
217.07


8031
 
Osteopath*
 
217.07


8034
 
Relaxation Therapist (Ref. 8049)
 
217.07


8035
 
Psychotherapist (Ref. 8049)
 
217.07


8036
 
Psychologist (Ref. 8049)
 
217.07


8037
 
Physical Therapist (Ref. 8049)
 
217.07


8038
 
Occupational Therapist (Ref. 8049)
 
217.07


8039
 
Midwife (Ref. 8049)
 
217.07


8040
 
Mental Health Counselor (Ref. 8049)
 
217.07


8041
 
Chiropractor*
 
217.07


8042
 
Optometrist*
 
217.07


8043
 
Podiatrist*
 
217.07


8044
 
Hypnotist (Ref. 8049)
 
217.07


8045
 
Dietitian (Ref. 8049)
 
217.07


8046
 
Clinical Social Worker (Ref. 8049)
 
217.07


8047
 
Audiologist (Ref. 8049)
 
217.07


8048
 
Acupuncturist (Ref. 8049)
 
217.07


8049
 
Health Practitioners, NEC*
 
217.07


8051
 
Skilled Nursing Care Facilities
 
162.07


8059
 
Nursing Care Facility, NEC
 
3.76 per room, 37.04 minimum


8062
 
General Medical/Surgical Centers*
 
217.07


8069
 
Hospital
 
162.07


8070
 
Diagnostic Lab (Ref. 8071)
 
97.24


8072
 
Dental Laboratory
 
217.07


8096
 
Nursing (Ref. 8099)
 
107.66


8097
 
Surgical Technician (Ref. 8099)
 
107.66


8098
 
Hearing Aid Specialist (Ref. 8099)
 
216.48


8099
 
Health & Allied Services, NEC
 
107.66


8111
 
Attorney*
 
216.48


8243
 
Computer Assembly/Setup
 
97.24


8244
 
Business School
 
162.07


8249
 
Art School
 
162.07


8296
 
Ceramic Studio (Ref. 8299)
 
162.07


8297
 
Auto Driving School (Ref. 8299)
 
162.07


8298
 
Piano/Instrument Instruction
 
97.24


8299
 
Schools & Education Services, NEC
 
162.07


8322
 
Individual & Family Social Services
 
227.30


8323
 
Counselor
 
97.24


8324
 
Marriage/Family Therapist* (Ref. 8322)
 
227.30


8351
 
Day Care - Children
 
162.07


8361
 
Adult Congregate Living Facility*
 
3.76 per room, 37.04 minimum


8399
 
Social Work Consultant*
 
97.24


8422
 
Aquarium
 
97.24


8610
 
Business Associations (Ref. 8611)
 
97.24


8611
 
Real Estate Board
 
97.24


8711
 
Engineer*
 
216.48


8712
 
Architect*
 
216.48


8713
 
Surveyor*
 
216.48


8721
 
Certified Public Accountant*
 
216.48


8722
 
Bookkeeper (Ref. 8721)
 
97.24


8733
 
Research Organization
 
97.24


8742
 
Business/Managemen t Consultant
 
97.24


8748
 
Traffic Manager
 
97.24


8900
 
Construction Inspector (Ref. 8999)
 
97.24


8998
 
Geologist* (Ref. 8999)
 
216.48


8999
 
Services, NEC
 
97.24


9991
 
Merchant - temp./regional mall concourse
 
 


 
 
For four (4) or less temporary (less than a week), and portable, regional
mall promotion activities with sales and located within any or all of the
mall concourse areas, mall owners shall pay a Business Tax Receipt fee of
$144.70.


9992
 
Temporary retail/mall carts
 
 


 
 
Activities which would otherwise be subject to retail Business Tax Receipt
fees, but which are temporary and portable and located in mall concourse
areas, shall be charged a Business Tax Receipt fee of $43.42 for each
three-month period or portion thereof.  Fees will be paid quarterly in
advance by the mall operator.  Fees shall be paid based upon the maximum
projected number of spaces the mall allocates for temporary and portable
retail locations within the mall for the twelve-month period commencing
October the first of each year.  Fees paid shall be subject to adjustment to
reflect actual operating locations.  Adjustment shall be made yearly during
the month of August for the preceding twelve- month period and on written
request from the mall operator.  The mall operator shall submit sufficient
records to support its request for adjustment.


9993
 
Itinerant or Transient Merchant
 
 


 
 
Covers persons who travel from city to city and sell and deliver goods,
merchandise or services to business establishments; or who sell, demonstrate
or deliver goods, merchandise or services to the general public, and do not
have a permanent place of business in the city.


 
 
Each person, per day
 
10.42


 
 
Each person, per week
 
54.41


 
 
Each person, per month
 
216.48


 
 
(I.D. registration required for each person.)
 
 




 



Notes:



   *Businesses that required a license and/or certification from a state
or other agency. This includes but may not be limited to one or more of the
following:



      Department of Business and Professional Regulation and the
Division of Hotels & Restaurants, Department of Agriculture & Consumer
Services, Department of Highway Safety & Motor Vehicles, Florida Bar
Association, Florida Department of Financial Services, Florida Agency for
Health Care Administration, Florida Office of Financial Regulation, Palm
Beach County Contractors Certification Division, Palm Beach County Health
Department, and the Department of Health. Housing limited to, or intended for
persons in any stage of alcohol and drug treatment may be certified by the
Florida Association of Recovery Residences (FARR); a like entity as
designated by the State of Florida for monitoring and oversight purposes; or
may apply for consideration through the City’s Reasonable Accommodation
process, as set forth in Part III, Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4 of the
City’s Code of Ordinances.



   “NEC” - Not Elsewhere Classified



(Ord. No. 94-15, App. A, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, Appendix A, 7-5- 95; Ord.
No. 98-38, § 1, 9-15-98; Ord. No. 06-049, § 2, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 06-096, §
2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 13-022, § 2, 7-2-13; Ord.
No. 14-018, § 2, 9-3-14; Ord. No. 15-015, § 2, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 16-016, §
2, 7-19-16; Ord. No. 17-014, § 2, 7-18-17)



Sec. 13-5.  Provision for unlisted businesses or occupations.



   All businesses must obtain a Certificate of Use and Occupancy prior to
operating within the city. The city may hereinafter classify and issue
Business Tax Receipts for businesses or occupations not specifically listed
herein. The city shall establish a classification for new businesses or
occupations in accordance with the United States Standard Industrial
Classification of Establishments (SIC).  The Business Tax Receipt tax
established by the city for any business not specifically listed herein shall
be commensurate with the rate structure and classifications set forth in Sec.
13-4, and shall be established by resolution of the City Commission following
application but prior to issuance of a Business Tax Receipt for the
unclassified business.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2,
9-3-14)



Sec. 13-6   Administrative remedy to challenge classification or fee.



   (a)   Any person may protest the classification or fee applicable to
that person provided:



      (1)   The person has made and filed an application for the
issuance of a Certificate of Use and Occupancy and a Business Tax Receipt in
accordance with the procedures set forth herein, and



      (2)   The person has paid the application fee, inspection fee
or re-inspection fee, when applicable, and



      (3)   The person has received a Certificate of Use and
Occupancy and paid the Business Tax Receipt fee requested by the city, and



      (4)   The Business Tax Receipt has been issued.



   (b)   A protest to a classification or fee shall be made in writing
to the City Clerk within 30 calendar days following issuance of the Business
Tax Receipt.  Failure to timely file a protest constitutes a waiver of
protest and no further challenge may be made by that person until renewal of
the Business Tax Receipt, in which case the right to protest shall be revived
for an additional 30 days following issuance of a renewal Business Tax
Receipt.



   (c)   A protest, when timely filed, shall be processed as follows:



      (1)   The City Clerk shall forward the protest to the City
Manager.



      (2)   The City Manager shall conduct a review of the protest
and render a written report within 45 days of the filing of the protest. 
The City Manager shall consider any information submitted by the person
filing the protest and any information submitted by the Development Services
Division.  The City Manager shall limit her report to an evaluation of
whether the tax which is being protested is based on a reasonable
classification and is uniform throughout the class.



      (3)   The City Manager's report shall be filed with the City
Clerk and submitted to the City Commission at the second meeting following
filing of the report with the Clerk.  A copy of the report shall be
forwarded to person who filed the protest, along with a notice of the date on
which the report is to be submitted to the City Commission.



      (4)   The City Commission shall review the protest and the
City Managers report and shall either grant or deny the protest. If the
protest is granted the City Commission shall adjust the classification or fee
in accordance with their findings and any tax previously paid by the
protesting person, in excess of the adjusted tax, shall be refunded by the
city.



      (5)   A decision of the City Commission may be appealed to the
Circuit Court of Palm Beach County, Florida. The Circuit Court review shall
be de novo, and the burden of proof shall be on the person initiating the
action.



(Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No.
12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2, 9-3-14)



Sec. 13-7.   Application and reapplication fees for Certificate of Use and
Occupancy, inspections, and Business Tax Receipt; required for use of any
property for commercial or industrial purposes or for residential dwelling
rental.



   (a)   Prior to the issuance of a Business Tax Receipt, a person
shall file an application for Certificate of Use and Occupancy with the
city.  The application shall be on a form prescribed by the city, and shall
be filed together with such other documentation as hereinafter set or as
required by state law.  The Business Tax Receipt portion of the form shall
require disclosure of the Federal Identification Number or Social Security
number of the person to be licensed.



   (b)   Each application for a Certificate of Use and Occupancy shall
be accompanied by an application filing fee set by the City Commission by
resolution, which shall cover the Certificate of Use and Occupancy review to
be undertaken by city zoning, and building division staff. Inspections for
environmental, Utilities, Code, Fire, and other departments, shall be
determined by the proposed use, the applicant shall pay for such inspections
at a rate set by the City Commission by resolution. In the event an
application is denied due to failed inspections, the application may, upon
payment of a re-inspection fee set by the City Commission by resolution, be
reconsidered.



   (c)   Certificate of Use and Occupancy is renewable each year
expiring on September 30 with an annual renewal fee set by the City
Commission by resolution.



   (d)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the City Code for any
person or entity, either directly or indirectly, to conduct or enter into a
business, profession, or occupation, including the rental of real property,
within the city without first obtaining a Certificate of Use and Occupancy
and being issued a local business tax receipt by the city.



   (e)   If the real property that is to be used for the operation of a
business is subject to unpaid city fines, fees or Code violation liens, the
city shall not issue a Certificate of Use and Occupancy or conduct a use and
occupancy inspection until such time as all liens, fines or fees on the
property are fully paid, including interest due and any assessable costs and
until all Code violations are brought into compliance.



   (f)   Local responsible party required.



      (1)   Whenever any property is required to have a Certificate
Use and Occupancy under this article, the owner shall designate in writing,
on a form provided by the city, a local responsible party for contact by city
officials relating to the property. The owner shall also provide a valid
address and phone number for the local responsible party.



      (2)   The local responsible party under this section must
reside within Miami-Dade, Broward, Palm Beach, Martin or Indian River County.
Any owner who resides outside of Florida either at the time of applying for a
Certificate Use and Occupancy or after having secured such certificate, shall
designate a local responsible party that complies with the City Code.



      (3)   A local responsible party shall have the authority to
adequately and timely respond to any Code compliance issues that may arise on
the subject property and shall be responsible for the care, custody, control
and compliance of the rental property. The Local Responsible Party may apply
for a Certificate Use and Occupancy, Business Tax Receipt, and inspections on
behalf of the owner.



      (4)   An owner shall notify the Director of Development in
writing of any change in the designation of the local responsible party
within ten (10) business days of such change.



      (5)   Failure to designate or engage a local responsible party
meeting the requirements of this section shall be a violation of the City
Code punishable under Chapter 2, Article V of this Code.



   (g)   It is unlawful for a property owner to allow by lease,
license, grant or other written or oral agreement, the use of any real
property for the operation of a business without a valid and current
Certificate Use and Occupancy including required inspection and Local
Business Tax Receipt. Violation of this section is violation of the City Code
punishable under Chapter 2, Article V of this Code.



   (h)   Only one (1) Certificate Use and Occupancy shall be issued for
each parcel of real property as described by the Palm Beach County Property
Appraiser's Office through the provision of a property control number.
Certificate Use and Occupancy is not transferable.



   (i)   All Certificate Use and Occupancy applications are subject to
inspection of the real property being used for the operation of the business
by the city. The Certificate Use and Occupancy inspection charges shall be
set by resolution of the city commission. If the owner of a dwelling does not
reside at the dwelling, and the dwelling is occupied by anyone, including a
relative of the owner of the dwelling, there is a presumption that the
dwelling is being rented and must have a Certificate Use and Occupancy and a
business tax receipt. This presumption may be rebutted by the owner of the
dwelling applying for an exemption from the Certificate Use and Occupancy and
business tax receipt. The exemption application shall include an affidavit of
the owner that all persons residing at the dwelling are relatives of the
owner and that these relatives pay no rent or other consideration for the
privilege of living at the dwelling and that the relatives provide no
maintenance or other services in return for the right to live at the
dwelling. The application fee for the exemption application shall be set by
resolution of the city commission and must be obtained every year.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
04-026, § 1, 4-20-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2,
7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2, 9-3-14)



Sec. 13-8.  Declaration required where fee depends on variable factors
within the applicant's knowledge.



   Whenever the Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Business Tax Receipt
depends upon variable factors, the applicant shall be required by the city to
execute an affidavit containing information upon which the Business Tax
Receipt fee is calculated. The affidavit shall be completed, executed and
returned to the city as a condition precedent to the issuance of a
Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Business Tax Receipt or, on request by
the city, to the reissuance of an existing Business Tax Receipt.  Failure to
accurately disclose variable factors shall constitute grounds for the denial
of an application or the revocation of an issued Certificate of Use and
Occupancy and Business Tax Receipt.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2,
9-3-14)



Sec. 13-9.  Issuance of Certificate of Use and Occupancy and Business Tax
Receipt.



   (a)   The Director of Development shall issue the Business Tax
Receipt or Certificate of Use and Occupancy, only if:



      (1)   The Director of Development determines the proposed
business and location complies with all city zoning codes and ordinances, in
additional to all other applicable local, county, state, or federal
ordinances, codes, statutes, or other applicable regulation; and



      (2)   Proof of occupational or professional certification or
licensure is provided when such certifications or licenses are required under
state law.



   (b)   The mistaken issuance of a Certificate of Use and Occupancy or
Business Tax Receipt shall not be deemed to be a waiver of any provision of
the City Code nor shall the issuance of a Certificate of Use and Occupancy or
Business Tax Receipt be construed to be a judgment of the city as to the
competence of the applicant to transact business.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2,
9-3-14)



Sec. 13-10.  Due dates.



   Business Tax Receipts and Certificates of Use and Occupancy shall be
sold by the city beginning August 1st of each year and are due and payable on
or before September 30th of each year and expire on September 30th of the
succeeding year; upon transfer to a new owner; or following approval of a
Business Tax Receipts and Certificate of Use and Occupancy applications for a
new or relocating business.



(Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No.
12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2, 9-3-14)



Sec. 13-11.  Delinquency penalty.



   Business Tax Receipts that are not renewed when due and payable are
delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) for the
month of October, plus an additional five percent (5%) penalty for each
subsequent month of delinquency until paid, provided the total delinquency
penalty may not exceed twenty- five percent (25%) of the Business Tax Receipt
tax for the delinquent establishment.



   (a)   All Certificates of Use and Occupancy and local business tax
receipts issued hereunder may be renewed without penalty no later than
September 30 by application for the Certificates of Use and Occupancy and
local business tax receipt holder. Certificates of Use and Occupancy not
renewed by September 30 shall be considered delinquent and subject,
respectively, to a delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) of the full year
use and occupancy certificate and local business tax receipt fee for the
month of October, plus an additional five percent (5%) penalty for each month
of the delinquency thereafter until paid. The total delinquency penalty shall
never exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the full year local business tax
receipt fee for the applicant.



   (b)   For the required Certificates of Use and Occupancy inspection,
should a property owner fail to accommodate the city’s scheduled
appointment on two (2) occasions, the owner or local responsible party shall
submit a re-application for an inspection.



(Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No.
12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2, 9-3-14)



Sec. 13-12.  Transfer of a Business Tax Receipt.



   (a)   Transfer to new owner. Business Tax Receipts may be
transferred to a new owner when there is a bona fide sale and transfer of the
business and property used in the business.  A transferred Business Tax
Receipt shall be valid for the same time period and at the same location for
which it was originally issued.  The original Business Tax Receipt shall be
surrendered at the time application for transfer is made.  A transferred
Business Tax Receipt, after being approved, shall be of the same force and
effect as the original Business Tax Receipt.  A person applying for such
transfer shall pay to the city a transfer fee of ten percent (10%) of the
annual license tax, but not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and shall present evidence of the sale or
transfer of the business. A Certificate of Use and Occupancy shall be
required when originally approved equipment is removed or altered, or
alterations to floor plan or other building systems occurs. Certificate of
Use and Occupancy is not transferable.



   (b)   Transfer to new location.  Business tax receipts may be
transferred from one location to another, subject to receipt of a Certificate
of Use and Occupancy, provided no change of ownership has occurred and the
business classification in which the Business Tax Receipt was originally
issued remains unchanged.  A transferred Business Tax Receipt shall be valid
for the same time period for which it was originally issued at the new
location.  The original Business Tax Receipt shall be surrendered at the
time application for transfer is made.  A transferred Business Tax Receipt,
following receipt of a Certificate of Use and Occupancy, shall be of the same
force and effect as the original Business Tax Receipt.  A person applying
for such transfer shall pay to the city the Business Tax Receipt application
filing and inspection fees as listed in Sec. 13-7 and a transfer fee of ten
percent (10%) of the annual license tax, but not less than three dollars
($3.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00).



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2, 9-3-14)



Sec. 13-13.  Duplicate Business Tax Receipts.



   Duplicate Business Tax Receipts may be issued by the Development
Services Division.  A fee of five dollars ($5.00) will be assessed for each
duplicate Business Tax Receipt issued.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5- 95; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12)



Sec. 13-14.  Business Tax Receipts to be posted or carried.



   (a)   Business Tax Receipts issued to businesses that have a
permanent place of business within the city shall prominently display the
current Business Tax Receipt within the place of business.



   (b)   In those occupations requiring business to be conducted
outside of the permanent place of business, the Business Tax Receipt holder
shall be required to produce the Business Tax Receipt upon request.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5- 95; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12)



Sec. 13-15.  Doing business not covered by Business Tax Receipt; Certificate
of Use or Business Tax Receipt obtained by false statements void ab initio.



   No Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Business Tax Receipt issued
under the provisions of this chapter shall protect any person from
prosecution for transacting any business, trade or profession not covered by
the Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Business Tax Receipt, or protect any
person doing business with a Business Tax Receipt issued upon any false
statement of variable factors.  Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Business
Tax Receipts that are issued based on false statements shall be considered as
void ab initio and shall not protect the holder thereof from prosecution for
transacting business without a Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Business
Tax Receipt.  Falsification of information can constitute grounds for
revocation of the Certificate of Use and Occupancy and Business Tax Receipt,
and the city may impose a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00),
or imprisonment not exceeding sixty (60) days.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2,
9-3-14)



Sec. 13-16.  Engaging in business without a Business Tax Receipt; penalties;
prima facie evidence.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business,
profession or occupation required to be certificated and receipted hereunder
without the required inspections and local business tax receipt or under a
Certificate of Use and Occupancy and required inspection and local business
tax receipt, conducted and issued upon false statements made by such person,
or in his behalf. Any person engaged in any such business, profession or
occupation without first obtaining a Certificate of Use and Occupancy and
required inspection and local business tax receipt, if required herein, shall
pay a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the full year certificate and
receipt year for such a trade, in addition to obtaining a Certificate of Use
and Occupancy fees and business tax fee set forth herein. Such person may
also be charged with a criminal penalty as provided in section 1-6 of the
Code of Ordinances.



   (b)   Any person, corporation or partnership which owns real
property in the city and which by lease, license, grant or other written or
oral arrangement permits any person to operate a business without a valid and
current Certificate of Use and Occupancy and local business tax receipt shall
be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day and or sixty
(60) days in jail for each day that the business operates on the property
without a valid and current Certificate of Use and Occupancy and local
business tax receipt.



   (c)   Any person who engages in any business occupation or
profession covered by this chapter, who does not pay the required business
tax within one hundred and fifty (150) days after the initial notice of tax
due, and who does not obtain the required business tax receipt is subject to
civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys’
fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection
efforts, and a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).



   (d)   Any person, corporation or partnership who engages in any
business occupation or profession covered by this chapter, who does not pay
the required Certificate of Use and Occupancy fee within one hundred and
fifty (150) days after the initial notice of fee due, and who does not obtain
the required Certificate of Use and Occupancy, shall be subject to a fine of
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for each day that the business
operates on the property without a valid and current Certificate of Use and
Occupancy and required inspection beginning on the 151st day.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2,
9-3-14)



Sec. 13-17.  Methods of enforcement: injunction; code enforcement.



   (a)   The specific penalties and enforcement mechanisms contained
within this article are not exclusive remedies and shall not be construed as
prohibiting the city from seeking other fines and other remedies authorized
by city, state, or common law, either exclusively or simultaneously.



   (b)   Any person subject to and who fails to secure a Certificate of
Use and Occupancy and Business Tax Receipt required by this chapter or any
other ordinance of the city or law of the State of Florida, shall upon
petition by the city be enjoined by the circuit court from engaging in the
business in which he has failed to secure said Certificate of Use and
Occupancy and Business Tax Receipt, until such time as he shall secure same,
including all costs of such action.



   (c)   The city may bring any violation of this chapter as a City
Code violation pursuant to Section 2-91 of the City Code to the Code
Enforcement Board or Special Magistrate.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2,
9-3-14)



Sec. 13-18.  Right to deny issuance, renewal, transfer, revocation; right of
appeal.



   (a)   The city may revoke or refuse to issue, reissue, renew, or
transfer any Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Business Tax Receipt
provided for in this chapter due to:



      (1)   Any violation of applicable city, county or other local,
state, or federal law or regulation, or



      (2)   The Director of Development determines the subject
business and location does not comply with applicable city zoning codes and
ordinances, or is in violation of applicable provisions of any local, county,
or state or federal regulations, ordinances, law, or statute.



      (3)   The Director of Development determines that proof of
occupational or professional certification or licensure is required under
applicable law and inadequate documentation was provided or that the
applicable certification or licensure has been revoked, suspended,
terminated, or otherwise discontinued, either temporarily or permanently, by
the applicable regulating authority.



      (4)   When the city’s Code Enforcement Board or Special
Magistrate has issued an order finding a code violation and compliance, as
determined by applicable city staff, has not been achieved, or



      (5)   When the city’s Code Enforcement Board or Special
Magistrate has issued an order imposing a fine and the fine remains unpaid.



   (b)   In the case of refusal to issue, reissue or transfer any
Certificate of Use Business Use or Business Tax Receipt on one of the
foregoing grounds, the city shall notify the business applicant or Business
Tax Receipt holder in writing the basis for such refusal to issue, reissue or
transfer a Certificate of Use or Business Tax Receipt with specific reference
to the provisions of the City Code or Code Board Order which the city asserts
constitutes grounds for denial.



   (c)   The city shall provide fifteen (15) days written notice upon
the revocation of any Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Business Tax
Receipt granted under this chapter and issued to any person.



   (d)   An applicant who is denied issuance, reissuance or transfer of
a Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Business Tax Receipt or whose
Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Business Tax Receipt has been revoked
may, within ten (10) calendar days of the denial or revocation, file a
written appeal of the denial or revocation to the city’s Special
Magistrate. The Notice of Appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk.



   (e)   The city shall schedule a quasi-judicial evidentiary hearing
within thirty (30) days of the filing of the Notice of Appeal with the city
Special Magistrate. The hearing must be conducted no later than forty- five
(45) days from the filing of the Notice to Appeal. The initial burden of
proof shall be on the city to establish that the refusal or denial to issue,
reissue or transfer a Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Business Tax
Receipt is based on the grounds as set forth in division (a) above. The
burden then shifts to the applicant to prove that the applicant is exempt
from application of the city, county, federal or state law, that the Code
violation has been corrected, or that the Code Board fine has been paid. The
Board shall issue a final order with findings of fact.



   (f)   The decision of the Special Magistrate shall be final as of
the date of the order and shall only be subject to review by writ of
certiorari to Palm Beach County Circuit Court.



   (g)   A Notice of Appeal stays the denial or revocation of the
license until the appeal process is completed, unless enjoined by the circuit
court from engaging in the business in which he has failed to secure said
Certificate of Use and Occupancy and Business Tax Receipt.



   (h)   When denial of the issuance or reissuance of a license is
based on division (a)(5) above, the Notice of Appeal shall be accompanied by
payment of the outstanding Code violation fine.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
06-071, § 2, 7-18-06; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2,
7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2, 9-3-14)



Sec. 13-19.  Special permits for nonprofit enterprise.



   The city shall issue special permits, following issuance of a
Certificate of Use, without payment of any Business Tax Receipt fees, to any
person or organization for the conducting or operating of a nonprofit
enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when the applicant signs an
affidavit that the applicant operates without private profit, for a public,
charitable, educational, literary, fraternal or religious purpose.



   (a)   Special permittee must conform.  A person operating under a
special permit shall operate his nonprofit enterprise in compliance with this
section and all other rules and regulations.



   (b)   False affidavit.  Any person signing a false affidavit
pursuant to this section shall be subject to a five hundred dollar ($500.00)
fine and/or sixty (60) days in jail.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5- 95; Ord. No.
12-012, § 2, 7-3-12)



Sec. 13-20.  Special Events.



   (a)   Permits for Special Events. It shall be unlawful to organize,
conduct or participate in any Special Event on the streets of the City or any
public or private property unless a permit for such Special Event has been
issued by the City Manager or designee.



   (b)   Definition.



   Special Event.  Any meeting, activity, gathering, or group of persons,
animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, having a common purpose,
design or goal upon any public or private facility, street, sidewalk, alley,
park or other place or building where the Special Event substantially
inhibits the usual flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which occupies
any public area or building and preempts use by the general public.  A
Special Event shall include but not be limited to city co-sponsored events,
festivals, carnivals, concerts, parades, walks, races, fund raising sales and
similar gatherings, block parties, grand opening promotions, and other
similar events not specifically permitted by City Ordinance.  Merchandise
sales under a tent on private property which have no other related activity,
i.e. food sales or entertainment, are exempt from obtaining a Special Event
permit; however, applicant must still obtain the proper Special Sales Event
Approval (ref. Part III LDR Ch. 2, V. 4) and Building Permit, if applicable.
City events, and events produced in partnership with the City, may receive a
permit waiver by the City Manager or designee.



   Special Event Handbook.  A publication issued by the City of Boynton
Beach entitled “Special Event Handbook” sets forth procedures for the
application process and City requirements for Special Events.  This booklet
may be amended from time to time by the City Manager or designee; however
Special Event Permit Fees shall be established and amended by resolution of
the City Commission.



   (c)   Application for a special event permit.



      (1)   Any person, business, or organization seeking to conduct
a Special Event in the City shall file an application with appropriate fee on
forms provided by the city. A fee will be charged for events which are
canceled.



      (2)   All information solicited on the Special Event permit
application form must be provided by the applicant.  Incomplete information
may result in denial of the permit application.



      (3)   The City Manager or designee reserves the right to waive
application filing deadlines on a case by case basis.



   (d)   Standards for issuance of permit.  A Special Event permit
shall be issued unless:



      (1)   The application is not complete in all material respects
and all information contained therein accurate within the knowledge of the
Applicant;



      (2)   All of the conditions set forth herein, and all
contractual requirements imposed by the City, if any, have not been or will
not be met;



      (3)   The Special Event will interfere with or unduly burden
the City’s provision of municipal services to the community including, but
not limited to, police, fire and emergency medical protection, water and
sanitary sewer service, risk, and solid waste removal;



      (4)   The appropriate fees have not been paid.



   (e)   Conditions for permit.  All Special Event permit applications
approved pursuant to this article shall be subject to the following
conditions:



      (1)   The public area utilized shall be cleaned up following
any Special Event and in all respects restored to its former condition.  A
refundable security bond, or similar financial pledge, may be required in
amount to be determined by the City Manager or designee, to ensure that any
damage is repaired and the premises returned to its previous condition.



      (2)   The use or construction of platforms, chairs or other
equipment may be prohibited or restricted by the City Manager or designee, if
such would result in permanent damage to City property or constitute a hazard
to public safety.



      (3)   A detailed site plan shall be submitted showing the
locations of any tents, port-o- lets, parking lots, stages, booths, and the
like, and the time periods for set up and break down of the event.  This
plan shall be subject to review and approval by city staff.



      (4)   Indemnification and insurance, listing the City as an
additional insured, shall be provided as required by the City.



      (5)   Unless extended by the City Manager or designee, all
permits necessary to conduct the Special Event shall be obtained and copies
thereof provided to the City not less than 5 business days prior to the first
day of the event.



      (6)   The need for a City employee at the Special Event will
be determined by the City Manager or designee.



   (f)   Enforcement/penalty.  It shall be unlawful to operate or hold
any Special Event in the City without compliance with this section.  Failure
to comply with this section shall be deemed a violation of the city code
punishable by up to a $500 fine and/or 60 days in the county jail.



   (g)   Right to deny issuance, revocation; right of appeal. The City
may refuse to issue, reissue or revoke any Special Event permit which
violates any portion Section 13-20. An applicant whose Special Event permit
has been denied or revoked may, within ten (10) calendar days of the denial
or revocation, file a written appeal of the denial or revocation to the City
Manager for review.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 98-37,
§ 1, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 01-19, § 1, 4-17-01; Ord. No. 03-025, § 1,
6-17-03; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 15- 015, § 3, 6-16-15)



Sec. 13-21.  Registration and regulation of contractors.



   Contractors and specialty contractors, unless exempt as described in
Florida Statutes, Section 205.065, who do not maintain a location or branch
office in the city but who conduct business within the city shall be required
to register with the city before conducting business within the city. 
Contractors who are holders of a valid countywide municipal contractor's
license, in addition to a Palm Beach County Business Tax Receipt, shall be
required to register, show proof of the countywide municipal license and pay
a registration fee of two dollars ($2.00).  Contractors who are not holders
of a valid countywide municipal contractor's license shall be allowed to
register and the fee schedule shall be set by ordinance.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5- 95; Ord. No.
12-012, § 2, 7-3-12)



Sec. 13-22.  Professionals, Business Tax Receipt.



   Each professional, engaged in the practice of any profession, shall be
required to obtain an individual Business Tax Receipt.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5- 95; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12)



Sec. 13-23.  Home occupational Business Tax Receipt fees.



   Business Tax Receipts for home occupations, when otherwise permitted,
shall pay the same fee for such business, profession or occupation as would
otherwise be payable if the occupation were conducted in a non-home location.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5- 95; Ord. No.
12-012, § 2, 7-3-12)



Sec. 13-24.  Coin-operated vending machines.



   (a)   A Business Tax Receipt is required for all vending machines,
except that the following coin-operated machines are and shall be exempt from
Business Tax Receipt hereunder:



      (1)   No Business Tax Receipt shall be required for
coin-operated machines where the vending machines are owned and operated by
charitable or benevolent nonprofit organizations and where the entire
proceeds of such machines are used solely for recognized charitable or
benevolent purposes.



      (2)   No Business Tax Receipt shall be required for the
operation of any machines where such machines are owned by a person who is
otherwise a holder of a Business Tax Receipt by the city, and such machines
are located and operated at the owner's regular place of business as listed
on the Business Tax Receipt.



   (b)   Proprietors of places of business and/or owners of record of
the premises in or on which vending machines are placed shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the vending machine Business Tax Receipt if not
otherwise paid.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5- 95; Ord. No.
12-012, § 2, 7-3-12)



Sec. 13-25.  Businesses that handle hazardous materials or waste.



   All businesses which would be located within the city shall state, as
part of the Certificate of Use and Occupancy application, whether the
business would use, handle, store, generate, or display hazardous materials,
hazardous waste, or a toxic substance, as the same are defined by 40 Code of
Federal Regulations, Part 261, or the Florida Substance List as set forth in
Rule 4A-62.004, Florida Administrative Code, in which case a City Fire
Department Hazardous Material Disclosure Form shall be required in accordance
with Part II, Section 9-71 of this code.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No.
04-026, § 2, 4-20-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2,
7-3-12; Ord. No. 14-018, § 2, 9-3-14)



Sec. 13-26.  Businesses that tow vehicles.



   (a)   Any person or firm that tows or removes vehicles and proposes
to require an owner, operator, or person in control of a vehicle to pay the
costs of towing and storage prior to redemption of the vehicle must file and
keep on record with the City Police Department a complete copy of the current
rates to be charged for such services, post at the storage site an identical
rate schedule, and provide the current rate schedule with any written
contracts with property owners, lessors, or persons in control of property
which authorize such person or firm to remove vehicles.



   (b)   Any person or firm towing or removing any vehicles from
private property without the consent of the owner or other legally authorized
person in control of the vehicles shall, on any trucks or other vehicles used
in the towing or removal, have clearly indicated, in at least two-inch
letters such person's or firm's name, address and telephone number on the
driver and passenger side doors.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5- 95; Ord. No.
12-012, § 2, 7-3-12)



Sec. 13-27.  Identification of vehicles used in business or occupation.



   Any and all trucks or other vehicles operated or used in connection
with any contracting, building, delivery, maintenance, repair service,
manufacturing business or occupation conducted within the municipal limits of
the City of Boynton Beach, Florida, shall have painted or otherwise
prominently displayed in a visible and legible manner upon such truck or
other vehicle, the name and address of the business in which such truck or
other vehicle is used.  Such information shall be displayed on both sides of
the vehicle, and the letters included in such sign shall each be a minimum
height of two inches.



(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 7-5- 95; Ord. No.
12-012, § 2, 7-3-12)



Sec. 13-28.   Certificate of Use and Occupancy and inspections.



   (a)   Purpose. The operation of businesses within the city without
the safeguards associated with the filing of an application for a use and
occupancy certificate and inspection constitutes a danger to the health,
safety and welfare of the community. The city commission has determined that
more effective enforcement procedures are necessary to prevent the operation
of a business in the city without first obtaining a use and occupancy
certificate and inspection and a local business tax receipt or paying a local
business tax. Owners of real property who permit businesses to operate from
their property without verification of a valid and current use and occupancy
certificate and inspection and local business tax receipt contribute to the
proliferation of illegal business. An increase in the penalty for operating a
business without obtaining a use and occupancy certificate and inspection and
a local business tax receipt or without paying a local business tax will have
a greater deterrent effect on businesses operating illegally within the city.
This enforcement procedure was adopted to maximize the city’s ability to
enforce the city’s prohibition against conducting a business without proper
application for a use and occupancy certificate and inspection and a local
business tax receipt and to encourage swift compliance with these
requirements.



   (b)   Use and occupancy certificates must be obtained by the local
responsible party prior to:



      (1)   A dwelling unit being rented for residential purposes;



      (2)   A building or portion thereof of a commercial or
industrial space being occupied by either a new owner or business tenant; and



      (3)   Any other parcel of land being used by an owner or
business tenant for commercial or industrial purposes.



   (c)   Use and occupancy of a property with inspection is the method
by which the city documents the existing conditions of a property and any
non-conformities, establishes the current land use and zoning, and grants
approval to occupy at a given location for specified uses.



   (d)   All property owners of either commercial or industrial space
must apply for a Certificate of Use and Occupancy on an annual basis and the
properties will be inspected on an annual basis.



   (e)   All property owners of residential space to be rented as a
dwelling unit must apply for a Certificate of Use and Occupancy and must
schedule an inspection for the properties to be rented. Inspections of
residential rental dwelling units shall occur on a biennial (every other
year) basis at a minimum.



(Ord. No. 14-018, § 2, 9-3-14)



Sec. 13-29.   Reserved.



Sec. 13-30.   Group homes, certification requirements.



   (a)   For applicable terms and definitions see the Land Development
Regulations Chapter 1, Article II, Definitions.



   (b)   To ensure the proper care and treatment of individuals
residing within a group home, many who need special care or structured living
environments for preservation or advancement within a treatment process, all
such homes and/or operators must be licensed and/or certified by an entity
operated by or affiliated with the State of Florida. This includes any group
home used for the purpose of housing residents in any stage of alcohol or
drug treatment which must be certified by the Florida Association of Recovery
Residences (FARR). If a group home is not certified by FARR, the group home
may apply for consideration through the City's Reasonable Accommodation
process, as set forth in Part III, Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4 of the
City's Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. No. 17-014, § 2, 7-18-17)



Secs. 13-31 — 13-51.  Reserved.



ARTICLE II. GARAGE SALES*



   *Note-See the editor's footnote to Ch. 13.



Sec. 13-52.  Defined.



   A “garage sale,” as used in this article, is hereby defined to mean
any sale or offering for sale of personal property by a member of a family or
other household unit, said personal property having been acquired, possessed
and used by the family or household for personal as opposed to business or
commercial use, when such sale is to be or is conducted at the present
residence of such family or household. “Garage sale” shall include sales
commonly referred to as patio sales, driveway sales, yard sales, and other
such sales. “Garage sales” shall not include the sale or offering for
sale of any goods on consignment. It shall include the sale or offering for
sale of goods of more than one family or household.



(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1, 5-17-83; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No.
14-010, § 2, 7-1-14)



Sec. 13-53.  Exception to article provisions.



   The provisions of this article shall not apply to sales of personal
property made pursuant to a valid order of a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1, 5-17-83; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No.
14-010, § 2, 7-1-14)



Sec. 13-54.  Reserved.



   Editor’s note—Ord. No. 14-010, § 2, adopted 7-1-14, repealed Sec.
13-54 requiring garage sale permits, which derived from Ord. No. 83-10, § 1,
adopted 5-17-83, as amended by Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, adopted 7-3-12.



Sec. 13-55.  Reserved.



   Editor’s note—Ord. No. 14-010, § 2, adopted 7-1-14, repealed Sec.
13-55 regarding written statements required for garage sale permits, which
derived from Ord. No. 83-10, § 1, adopted 5-17-83, as amended by Ord. No.
12-012, § 2, adopted 7-3-12.



Sec. 13-56.  Reserved.



   Editor’s note—Ord. No. 14-010, § 2, adopted 7-1-14, repealed Sec.
13-56 regarding garage sale permit fees, which derived from Ord. No. 83-10,
§ 1, adopted 5-17-83, as amended by Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, adopted 7-3-12.



Sec. 13-57.  Limitation on number of garage sale occurrences.



   Only two (2) garage sale occurrences shall be allowed to one residence,
family or household during any calendar year.



(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1, 5-17-83; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No.
14-010, § 2, 7-1-14)



Sec. 13-58.  Penalties; prima facie evidence.



   In addition, a person operating a business in violation of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) a day
and/or sixty (60) days in jail for each day business is operated in violation
of this chapter.



   In any original prosecution under this section, the fact that such
person is open for business shall be prima facie evidence of engaging in such
trade, business, profession or occupation, and the burden shall be upon the
defendant to rebut the same.



(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1, 5-17-83; Ord. No. 12-012, § 2, 7-3-12; Ord. No.
14-010, § 2, 7-1-14)



ARTICLE III.  ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS



Sec. 13-59.  Operation of adult entertainment establishments.



   All adult entertainment establishments as defined in Sec. 13-60 shall
operate in accordance with this section, as well as in accordance with
Chapter 3, Alcoholic Beverages and Part III, Land Development Regulations,
Chapter 3, Zoning, Article IV, Sec. 3.D.



(Ord. No. 10-030, § 4, 12-7-10)



Sec. 13-60.  Defined.



   An adult entertainment establishment is a commercial enterprise which
predominately limits admission to adults only owing to the sexual nature of
its merchandise or entertainment. Such establishments may include, but not be
limited to, adult bookstores, adult theaters, adult lounges, adult health
studios, adult motels or hotels with nude, bottomless or topless
entertainment or employees.



   (a)   Nude or partially nude performers/entertainers or employees
shall not approach within six (6) feet of patrons, customers, or other
employees or other performers/entertainers.



   (b)   Nude or partially nude performers/entertainers or employees
shall only entertain from a designated stage raised from the floor a minimum
of eighteen (18) inches.



   (c)   The minimum floor area per room or partitioned area within an
adult entertainment establishment shall be 2,000 square feet exclusive of
kitchen space, restrooms, storage areas and any other non-public/customer
area of the establishment.



(Ord. No. 10-030, § 4, 12-7-10)



Secs. 13-61—13-79.  Reserved.



ARTICLE IV.  LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERMITS



Sec. 13-80.  Live entertainment permit.



   (a)   Definition.



      (1)   Live entertainment defined.Live entertainment means a
use in connection with a restaurant, bar/nightclub, or indoor/outdoor
entertainment establishment, wherein floorshows or other forms of
entertainment consisting of one (1) or more persons, amplified or
non-amplified music or other related sounds or noise, are provided indoors or
outdoors, including but not limited to entertainment provided by musicians,
disc jockey (DJ), master of ceremonies (MC), or karaoke.



   (b)   Time limits. Any live entertainment permit (herein referred to
as “permit”) granted by the city shall expire twelve (12) months after
the date of approval of such permit and must be renewed in accordance with
subsection (h) of this section.



   (c)   Method of approval. A permit may be approved by the city after
an application, as provided herein, has been processed by city staff.



   (d)   Review and approval procedure.



      (1)   Permit applications shall be obtained from and filed
with the Development Department, and may be initiated by the owner of the
subject property or the owner's designated representative. All applications
must be signed by the property owner. A complete application will be
processed by the Development Department, which also consists of the required
fee and necessary supportive materials, including the following:



         a.   A site and/or floor plan, indicating the location
of the live entertainment.



         b.   A summary of facts concerning the location and
orientation of the live entertainment, including proposed days and hours of
operation, description of proposed entertainment, description of premises
where entertainment is proposed, number of entertainers, etc.



         c.   A valid Business Tax Receipt. All businesses
wishing to secure an entertainment permit must conform with all local zoning
requirements.



         d.   A signed affidavit affirming the business will not
violate the Noise Control Ordinance.



   (e)   Non-transferable permit. A permit is valid only for a specific
establishment at a specific location and is nontransferable to another
establishment. If an establishment with a valid live entertainment permit
ceases operation at a specific location and another establishment begins
operation at this location, the live entertainment permit is nontransferable
to the new establishment at the same location. In addition, if an
establishment with a valid permit relocates, the permit is nontransferable to
the new location. In both instances, a new permit application must be
submitted for City Commission consideration.



   (f)   Standard conditions of approval for all permits. The following
are standard conditions for approval of all permits which are incorporated
into the City Commission's approval of a permit application and made a part
of the terms under which the live entertainment permit is granted:



      (1)   For indoor entertainment, all doors and windows shall
remain closed during performances, with the exception of momentary use for
ingress and egress. If doors and/or windows are opened during the
performance, subsection (f)(2) of this section is applicable.



      (2)   Section 15-8 of the City's Code of Ordinances, Noise
control-Short title; through section 15-10.7, Enforcement and Penalty,
inclusive, pertaining to noise, shall apply to live entertainment, and all
live entertainment shall be subject to enforcement of the City's Noise
Control Ordinance.



      (3)   Hours of outdoor amplified live entertainment at
establishments with a residential unit or units within 100 feet of the site
shall not extend beyond 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday evenings and 12:00
a.m. on legal holidays as defined in the City's Noise Control Ordinance,
Friday and Saturday evenings.



   (g)   Standards for review. In its deliberations concerning the
granting of a live entertainment permit, the city shall carefully consider
the following guidelines and standards:



      (1)   Ingress and egress to the subject property and use, with
particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience,
traffic generation flow and control, and access in case of fire or
catastrophe, shall be on substantially improved property and generally
conform to current city regulations and not potentially detrimental to
existing or anticipated uses in the vicinity and particularly not detrimental
to property immediately adjacent to the subject site.



      (2)   Off-street parking areas for the principal use shall be
in conformance with applicable (e.g. parking space requirements) standards
with respect to required parking, as well as be adequate and well-designed,
and relate well, in terms of proximity, access and the like, to the intended
entertainment to be serviced, with particular attention to the items listed
in subsection (g)(1) of this section. Further, the smoke, noise, glare, dust,
vibrations, fumes, pollution or odor effects related to the vehicular use
area or the live entertainment shall not be detrimental to the adjoining
properties in the general area.



      (3)   Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to
the items listed in subsections (g)(1) and (2) of this section, shall be
adequately screened so as not to be visible from adjacent properties or a
public right-of-way and shall be located in such a way as not to be a
nuisance, by virtue of smoke, noise, glare and the like, to adjacent
properties.



      (4)   Utilities, whether public or private, shall be adequate
and not detrimental with reference to location, availability, adequacy and
compatibility.



      (5)   Screening, buffering or separation of any nuisance or
hazardous feature, with reference to type, dimensions and character, shall be
fully and clearly represented on the submitted plans and shall be adequate to
protect adjacent properties. This shall include proposed strategies to
mitigate sound levels at adjacent property lines and distances from the noise
source(s) as enumerated in the city's Noise Control Ordinance.



      (6)   Proposed signs and exterior lighting shall be considered
with reference to glare, traffic safety and compatibility and harmony with
surrounding properties and shall be determined to be adequate, safe and not
detrimental or a nuisance to adjacent properties.



      (7)   The proposed live entertainment shall be compatible and
appropriate with respect to adjacent properties and other property in the
district and geographic area.



   (h)   Permit renewal procedure. Permits shall renew on an annual
basis in conjunction with the Business Tax Receipt renewal effective October
1 of each year. Establishments with complaints that have been the subject of
an Order issued by the City's Code Compliance Board finding the establishment
in violation of City Code, and/or findings by a civil or criminal court of a
violation of City Code or other applicable law(s) shall require annual City
Commission approval prior to the renewal of the permit. Permits not approved
for renewal by City Commission will be prohibited from re-applying for a
period of one (1) year.



   (i)   Revocation of permits. The City Commission may revoke a
previously approved permit upon finding, in a public hearing, that operation
of the live entertainment has resulted in the violation of a city ordinance,
or any of the conditions of approval outlined in the approving resolution,
including the standard conditions outlined in subsection (h) of this section,
and that the City's Code Compliance Board has found that a violation has
occurred, and entered an order finding that such a violation has occurred
pursuant to Chapter 2, Article V, of the City's Code of Ordinances.



         In the event the City Commission revokes a live
entertainment permit, the City Commission shall not issue a new permit for
the same location for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of
revocation. In order to submit an application for a new permit, the location
must not have been found in violation of any City Code provisions within the
twelve (12) month time period just prior to the date the application for a
live entertainment permit is submitted.



         After the time period specified above has elapsed, a new
permit application may be submitted to the Development Department.  This
renewal application shall also include submittal of an impact analysis which
demonstrates mitigating solutions intended to reduce or eliminate the
potential for violating the Noise Control Ordinance or otherwise creating
off-site nuisance conditions.



   (j)   The City Commission hereby establishes the following live
entertainment permit application fee, a live entertainment permit fee which
is computed based upon the date of the Commission's action approving the
application, and an annual live entertainment permit renewal fee:



      (1)   Live entertainment permit application fee   $150.00



      (2)   Annual permit renewal fee   $50.00



   (k)   Live entertainment without a permit is prohibited and
violations of these regulations may be enforced by the city as follows:



      (1)   The City Code Compliance Board shall have jurisdiction
to hear and decide cases in which violations of this chapter are alleged, or



      (2)   The City may enforce the provision of this Code by
supplemental Code or Ordinance enforcement procedures as provided by Part 2
of Chapter 162, Florida Statutes, or



      (3)   The city may prosecute violations of this section by
issuance of Notices to Appear for violation of a city ordinance, in which
case, the penalty for a violation shall be as follows:



         a.   First violation - $100.00



         b.   Second violation within twelve (12) months of
adjudication of first violation - $150.00



         c.   Third violation within eighteen (18) months of
adjudication of first violation - $250.00



         Each day on which a violation exists shall constitute a
separate violation for the purpose of determining the fine, or



      (4)   The City Attorney, with authorization from the City
Commission, may bring suit on behalf of the city to enjoin any violation of
this section.  (Ord. No. 11-004, § 2, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 12-016, § 2,
10-2-12)



Chapter 14
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC*



   *Cross references-Identification of vehicles used in business, §
13-21; unnecessary use of horns, § 15-8(b); noisy vehicles, § 15-8(f), (h);
parades, § 15-10; prevention of scattering of loads, § 15-33; traffic and
parking regulations in beaches and parks, § 16-69 et seq.; recreational
vehicles, Ch. 20; taxicabs, Ch. 24; trailers, Ch. 25; traffic control devices
in subdivisions, App. C, Art. IX, § 16 ; design specifications for traffic
control devices in subdivisions, App. C, Art. X, § 17 .



   State law references-State traffic control law generally, F.S. Ch. 316;
municipal legislation prohibited on matters covered by that law, F.S. §
316.007; powers of local authorities, F.S. § 316.008; municipal speed
limits, F.S. § 316.189.



Sec. 14-1.  Regulatory traffic control.



   (a)   All signs, striping, and traffic signals established by the
direction of the City Commission and/or city staff shall conform, to the
extent possible, to implement the relevant regulations to the current
national Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for streets and highways
in effect at the time of the establishment of said signs, striping, and
traffic signals.



   (b)   When authorized signs are replaced, the new sign shall conform
to the national Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for streets and
highways in effect at the time of replacement.



(Ord. No. 02-009, § 2, 2-19-02)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 85-45, Attach. (b), adopted Aug. 20, 1985,
repealed former § 14-1, careless driving, as derived from the 1958 Code, §
29-9.



Sec. 14-2.  Speed in construction areas.



   The speed of vehicular traffic over any portion of any street, avenue,
road, highway or other thoroughfare within the city used by vehicular
traffic, which area is under construction or repair and properly marked by
signs as such, shall not exceed twenty (20) miles per hour, and the speed
limits hereinabove established shall be altered accordingly when such
construction conditions exist, except in any area where a lower speed limit
has been established and in such event the lower speed limit shall govern.



(Code 1958, § 29-2)



Sec. 14-3.  Truck parking; regulated.



   (a)   The intent of this section is to limit and prohibit the
parking in residential areas of the city of trucks or other vehicles that are
primarily designed for commercial use and not primarily designed as passenger
vehicles and:



      (1)   To eliminate the visual blight created by large
commercial vehicles being parked in residential areas overnight (from dusk to
dawn) or for long periods of time;



      (2)   To minimize physical damage to publicly maintained
rights-of-way;



      (3)   To protect property values and character of property
within residential areas;



      (4)   To reduce traffic congestion; and



      (5)   To protect children from traffic injuries.



   (b)   It is hereby declared unlawful for any individual to park,
cause to be parked or allow to be parked any of the following vehicles for a
longer period than fifteen (15) minutes or to allow the vehicle motor or any
accessory refrigeration or cooling motor running in any area of the city
zoned for single- or two-family residential use as defined on the city’s
official zoning map or along any street that fronts such residential area
without regard to the zoning classification:



      (1)   Any truck, truck cab, truck trailer, farm, or
construction vehicle or heavy equipment, semi-tractor, bus, dump truck, or
wrecker/tow truck;



      (2)   Any motor vehicle with more than two (2) axles excluding
a recreational vehicle;



      (3)   Any motor vehicle having a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating
(GVWR) greater than 16,000 pounds excluding a recreational vehicle; and



      (4)   Any truck with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
between 14,000 pounds and 16,001 pounds that has been designed or modified
for commercial moving, shipping, or trucking purposes (i.e. “box” truck).



   (c)   Exceptions to the above standards, excluding the running of
motors, are limited to the following:



      (1)   When in connection with the actual loading or unloading
of such vehicle, delivering of goods or services, and/or construction
activity pursuant to permitted improvements to the property; and



      (2)   Recreational vehicles, which are regulated separately
from this section of the city code.



      (3)   The term truck does not include pick-up trucks that
would otherwise comply with the restrictions within divisions (b)(2), (b)(3),
and (b)(4) above.



   (d)   A violation of this section of the city code constitutes a
municipal ordinance violation and is subject to penalties as set forth in
this city code. The city may prosecute violations by issuance of notices to
appear for violation of a city ordinance, in which case, the penalty for a
violation shall be as follows:



      (1)   First violation - $100.00.



      (2)   Second violation - $200.00.



      (3)   Third or more violations - $500.00 per violation.



      (4)   Each calendar day on which a violation exists shall
constitute a separate violation for the purpose of determining the fine.



(Code 1958, § 29-4; Ord. No. 81-10, § 1, 4-7-81; Ord. No. 89-3, § 1,
2-21-89; Ord. No. 93-6, § 1, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 93-36, § 1, 9-21-93; Ord. No.
19-017, § 2, 5-21-19)



   Cross reference- Zoning ordinance, App. A.



Sec. 14-4.  Solicitation of rides or business.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand upon any
sidewalk, street, avenue, alley or public highway or grounds within the
limits of the city for the purpose of hitchhiking, “thumbing,”
requesting, asking, or soliciting a ride from the operator of any vehicle.
The provisions hereof shall not be construed to prevent a person from
soliciting upon a public highway, or a driver of a vehicle from giving a
ride, where an emergency actually exists, nor to prevent a person from
signaling or requesting transportation from a passenger carrier for the
purpose of becoming a passenger thereon for hire.



   (b)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of
soliciting employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.



(Code 1958, § 29-10)



   State law reference-Authority to prohibit hitchhiking, F.S. §
316.008(1)(u).



Sec. 14-5.  Stopping, standing, parking, or storage prohibited in specified
places.



   (a)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or
in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official
traffic control device, no person shall:



      (1)   Stopping, standing, parking, or storage of a vehicle:



         a.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge or curb of a street.



         b.   On a sidewalk.



         c.   Within an intersection.



         d.   On a crosswalk.



         e.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or
within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends
of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.



         f.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.



         g.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure.



         h.   On any railroad tracks.



         i.   On a bicycle path.



         j.   At any place where official traffic control devices
prohibit stopping.



      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:



         a.   In front of a public or private driveway.



         b.   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant.



         c.   Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an
intersection.



         d.   Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any
flashing signal, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of
a roadway.



         e.   Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to
any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any
fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance (when property
signposted).



         f.   On an exclusive bicycle lane.



         g.   At any place where official traffic control devices
prohibit standing.



      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers:



         a.   Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing, unless the city establishes a different distance due to
unusual circumstances.



         b.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.



      (4)   No vehicle can be stored on the public right-of-way. A
vehicle shall be considered stored, as opposed to parked, when the vehicle is
not operated and moved, for a minimum of one-half hour, at least once during
a 36-hour period.



      (5)   No vehicle can be parked or stored on the public
right-of-way for any period of time unless the front, rear, and side
reflectors and the license plate are visible.



      (6)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, in a
designated parking space on or along any street, roadway, or right-of-way
under the jurisdiction of the Florida Department of Transportation in
contravention to the parking restrictions set forth in any general use permit
issued to the city by the Florida Department of Transportation.  A general
use permit authorizes the city to restrict the hours of continuous parking
along a designated street, roadway or right-of-way, and to install and
maintain signage specifying the continuous parking restriction, the hours in
which the restriction is applicable, and the street, roadway, or right-of-way
on which the restriction is applicable.  Signage in accordance with this
section and general use permit shall be conspicuously posted identifying the
restricted parking zone and the hours in which the restricted parking is
applicable.



   (b)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is
unlawful. 



(Ord. No. 89-3, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 03-057, § 2, 11-5-03; Ord. No.
04-089, § 1, 11-3-04)



Sec. 14-6.  Traffic calming measures.



   (a)   The city shall consider placement of traffic calming measures
only upon completion of an initial traffic study. Traffic calming shall be
considered:



      (1)   Only on those local streets with average daily traffic
volumes greater than 500 vehicles per day; and



      (2)   Only when the 85th percentile speed is greater than 30
mph for those streets posted at 25 mph, or greater than 35 mph for those
streets posted at 30 mph.



   (b)   Signing, striping and other devices identifying traffic
calming measures shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.



(Ord. No. 02-009, § 2, 2-19-02)



   Editor's note-Former § 14-6, repealed by Ord. No. 85-45, Attach. (b),
adopted Aug. 20, 1985, had pertained to speed limits for trains and other
railroad vehicles as derived from the 1958 Code, §§ 29-3, 29-3.1.



Sec. 14-7.  Trains blocking or obstructing crossings.



   (a)   No two (2) or more consecutive street crossings, where the
streets of the city intersect a railroad track at grade level shall be
blocked by railroad traffic of any nature whatsoever, at the same time, for a
period of more than ten (10) minutes, and in no case shall any street
crossing within the city be blocked by railroad traffic for a period of more
than twenty (20) minutes. After a railroad crossing has been blocked by
railroad traffic for a period of more than twenty (20) minutes, said crossing
shall not again be blocked by railroad traffic until it has been cleared for
the use of vehicular or pedestrian traffic across or upon the intersecting
streets for a period of at least ten (10) minutes.



   (b)   It shall be the responsibility of all railroads operating
trains or other railway vehicles of any nature whatsoever within or through
the city to notify the city police and fire departments whenever any street
crossing is to be blocked by railroad traffic for a period of ten (10)
minutes or more.



(Code 1958, § 29-3.2)



   Cross reference-Obstructing streets generally, § 22-4.



Sec. 14-7.1   When sounding train whistle-horn prohibited; penalty.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person,
business or corporation operating a railroad train of a railroad company
wholly within the State of Florida to blow, activate, or in any way permit or
cause the blowing or activation of train whistles and/or horns from railroad
trains between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day, when such
train is traveling within the City of Boynton Beach, Florida.



   (b)   This section relates only to public railroad/highway grade
railroad train crossings having train activated automatic traffic-control
devices, which shall include flashing lights, bells and crossing gates on
both sides of the railroad tracks.



   (c)   Any person, business or corporation found to be in violation
of this section will be subject to the penalty provisions of section 1-6,
general penalties; continuing violations; adjudging fines and imprisonment of
the Code of Ordinances of the City of Boynton Beach, Florida.



(Ord. No. 84-33, §§ 1—3, 8-21-84; Ord. No. 86-38, § 1, 11-5-86)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 84-33, §§ 1—3, adopted Aug. 21, 1984, did
not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as § 14-7.1 has
been at the discretion of the editor.



   Cross reference-Locomotive whistles and bells disturbing peace and
quiet of neighborhoods, § 15-8(a) .



Sec. 14-8.  Supplemental provisions for impounding, sale, redemption of
abandoned vehicles; disposition of proceeds.



   (a)   The provisions of this section shall be in addition and
supplemental to any other provisions of law.



   (b)   Any abandoned vehicle, as defined in the Statutes of the State
of Florida, lawfully taken into possession of the city by any officer or
agent thereof may be sold by the city at public outcry to the highest bidder,
after notice of said sale shall have been in a news paper of general
circulation in the city once a week for a period of two (2) consecutive
weeks, with the first publication being at least fifteen (15) days prior to
the date of sale, and the purchaser at said sale shall take title to said
property free and clear of all prior claims against same. A diligent search
and inquiry shall be conducted by the city official conducting any such sale,
prior to said sale, to ascertain the name and residence address of the owner
and any lienholders against subject property, and an affidavit establishing
that such search has been made, together with the names and addresses of the
owner and lienholders, or that the same are unknown to affiant, shall be set
forth therein and filed in the sale proceedings. A copy of the notice of sale
shall be mailed to each owner and lienholder, if known, at least ten (10)
days prior to the date of sale. Failure of such owners and lien-holders to
receive such notice shall not invalidate the sale. Any owner or lienholder
shall have the right to redeem subject property prior to the time of sale by
paying the city all costs incurred in connection with the proceedings,
including moving and storage costs incurred.  Proceeds of such sales shall
be and become a part of the general fund of the city to be utilized pursuant
to directions of the city council for any lawful purpose.



(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1123, § 1)



   Cross reference-Alternative provisions for abandoned, wrecked or junked
vehicles, § 10-50 et seq.



   State law references-Vehicle defined for purposes of traffic law, F.S.
§ 317.003(64); supplemental procedure for removal and destruction of
abandoned property, including definition of “abandoned property,” F.S. §
705.16.



Sec. 14-9.  Disabled parking regulations.



   Enforcement of parking requirements for persons who have disabilities.



      (1)   (a)   Parking. Pursuant to F.S. § 316.1955, it is
unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle within, or to
obstruct, any such specially designated and marked parking space provided in
accordance with F.S. § 533.5041, unless the vehicle displays a disabled
parking permit issued under F.S. §§ 316.1958 or 320.0848, or a license
plate issued under F.S. §§ 320.084, 320.0842, 320.0843, or 320.0845, and
the vehicle is transporting the person to whom the displayed permit is
issued. The violation may not be dismissed for failure of the marking on the
parking space to comply with Florida law if the space is in general
compliance and is clearly distinguishable as a designated accessible parking
space for people who have disabilities. Only a warning may be issued for
unlawfully parking in a space designated for persons with disabilities if
there is no above- grade sign as provided by law.



         (b)   Whenever a law enforcement officer, a parking
enforcement specialist, or the owner or lessee of the space finds a vehicle
in violation of this subsection, that officer, owner, or lessor shall have
the vehicle in violation removed to any lawful parking space or facility or
require the operator or other person in charge of the vehicle immediately to
remove the unauthorized vehicle from the parking space. Whenever any vehicle
is removed under this section to a storage lot, garage, or other safe parking
space, the cost of the removal and parking constitutes a lien against the
vehicle.



         (c)   The officer or specialist shall charge the
operator or other person in charge of the vehicle in violation with a
noncriminal traffic infraction, punishable as provided in F.S. §§
316.008(4) or 318.18(6). The owner of a leased vehicle is not responsible for
a violation of this section if the vehicle is registered in the name of the
lessee.



         (d)   All convictions for violations of this section
must be reported to the Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles by
the clerk of the court.



         (e)   A law enforcement officer or a parking enforcement
specialist has the right to demand to be shown the person’s disabled
parking permit and driver license or state identification card when
investigating the possibility of a violation of this section. If such a
request is refused, the person in charge of the vehicle may be charged with
resisting an officer without violence, as provided in F.S. § 843.02.



         (f)   No person, vehicle, or object shall obstruct the
path of travel to an accessible parking space, curb cut, or access aisle by
standing or parking a vehicle within any such designated area. The violator
is subject to the same penalties as are imposed for illegally parking in a
space that is designated as an accessible parking space for persons who have
disabilities.



         (g)   Any person who is chauffeuring a person who has a
disability is allowed, without need for a disable parking permit or a special
license plate, to stand temporarily in any such parking space, for the
purpose of loading or unloading the person who has a disability. A penalty
may not be imposed upon the driver for such temporary standing.



         (h)   A vehicle that is transporting a person who has a
disability and that has been granted a permit under F.S. § 320.0848(1)(a)
may be parked for a maximum of 30 minutes in any parking space reserved for
persons who have disabilities.



      (2)   Placard placement and specification. Pursuant to F.S. §
320.0848, the disabled parking permit placard must be placed in a motor
vehicle so as to be visible from the front and rear of the vehicle. Each side
of the placard must have the international symbol of accessibility in a
contrasting color in the center so as to be visible. One side of the placard
must display the applicant’s driver’s license number or state
identification card number along with a warning that the applicant must have
such identification at all times while using the parking permit. A validation
sticker must also be issued with each disabled parking permit, showing the
month and year of expiration on each side of the placard. Validation stickers
must be of the size specified by the Department of Highway Safety and Motor
Vehicles and must be affixed to the disabled parking permits. The disabled
parking permits must use the same colors as license plate validations.



      (3)   Illegal use. Any person who fraudulently obtains of
unlawfully displays a disabled parking permit that belongs to another person
while occupying a disabled parking space or an access aisle while the owner
of the permit is not being transported in the vehicle or who uses an altered,
tampered or unauthorized replica of such a disabled parking permit with the
intent to deceive shall be issued a citation for illegal use and fined two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).



      (4)   Confiscation. A law enforcement officer or a parking
enforcement specialist is authorized to confiscate the disabled parking
permit from any person who fraudulently obtains or unlawfully uses such a
permit. A law enforcement officer or a parking enforcement specialist may
confiscate any disabled parking permit that is expired, reported as lost or
stolen, defaced, does not display a personal identification number.



      (5)   Out of state. Pursuant to F.S. § 316.1958, motor
vehicles displaying a special license plate or parking permit issued to a
person who has a disability by any other state or district subject to the
laws of the United States or by a foreign country that issues disabled
parking permits that display the international symbol of accessibility are
recognized as displaying a valid license plate or permit, if the other state
or district grants reciprocal recognition for residents of this state who
have disabilities. However, when an individual is required by law to have a
Florida driver license or a Florida vehicle registration, a special motor
vehicle license plate or parking permit issued  by another state, district,
or country to persons who have disabilities is not valid and the individual
whose vehicle displays such an invalid plate or permit is subject to the same
penalty as an individual whose vehicle does not display a valid plate or
permit. A law enforcement officer or parking enforcement specialist may not
ticket a vehicle for a violation without first determining whether the
vehicle is transporting a resident of another state who is the owner of the
out-of-state placard.



      (6)   Assessment of fines and use of funds. A violation of
F.S. § 316.1955 shall be deemed an infraction, the fine for which shall be
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Penalties for late payment of fines
shall be assessed pursuant to F.S. § 318.18. The sums collected pursuant to
this section shall be used in the following manner:



         (1)   One-third to be used to defray expenses for the
administration of this section and the provisions of the Florida Statutes
regarding disabled parking violations.



         (2)   Two-thirds to be used to provide funds to improve
accessibility and equal opportunity to qualified physically disabled persons
in the county and to provide funds to conduct public awareness programs in
the county concerning physically disabled persons.



The penalties set forth herein are nonexclusive and may be imposed in
addition to or in lieu of any other penalties set forth in F.S. Chapters 316,
318, and 320.



      (7)   This section hereby incorporates and adopts F.S. §§
316.1955, 320.0848, 316.1958, and 316.18, as may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. No. 85-44, § 1, 8-6-85; Ord. No. 89-3, § 3, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 05-003,
§ 1, 1- 4-05; Ord. No. 15-029, § 2, 11-3-15)



Sec. 14-10.  Liability for payment of parking ticket violations.



   (a)   The owner of a vehicle is responsible and liable for payment
of any parking ticket violation unless the owner can furnish evidence that
the vehicle was, at the time of the parking violation, in the care, custody,
or control of another person. In such instances, the owner of the vehicle is
required, within a reasonable time after notification of the parking
violation, to furnish to the appropriate law enforcement authorities the name
and address of the person or company who leased, rented, or otherwise had the
care, custody or control of the vehicle. The owner of a vehicle is not
responsible for a parking ticket violation if the vehicle involved was, at
the time, stolen or in the care, custody, or control of some person who did
not have permission of the owner to use the vehicle.



   (b)   Any person issued a parking ticket by a parking enforcement
specialist or officer shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal
violation and shall comply with the directions on the ticket. In the event
that payment is not received or a response to the ticket is not made within
the time period specified thereon, the county court or its traffic violations
bureau shall notify the registered owner of the vehicle which was cited, by
mail to the address given on the motor vehicle registration of the ticket.
Mailing of the notice to such address shall constitute notification. Upon
notification, the registered owner shall comply with the court's directive.



   (c)   Any person who fails to satisfy the court's directive shall be
deemed to waive his right to pay the applicable civil penalty.



   (d)   Any person who elects to appear before a designated official
to present evidence shall be deemed to have waived his right to pay the civil
penalty provisions of the ticket. The official, after a hearing, shall make a
determination as to whether a parking violation has been committed and may
impose a civil penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court
costs. Any person who fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed
by the court shall be deemed to have been convicted of a parking ticket
violation, and the court shall take appropriate measures to enforce
collection of the fine.



   (e)   The city police department as the city's traffic violations
bureau shall periodically supply the Florida Department of Highway Safety and
Motor Vehicles (“department”) with magnetically encoded computer tape
reels or cartridges which are machine readable by the installed computer
system at the department, listing persons who have any outstanding violation
for parking in a handicap/disabled parking space or three (3) or more unpaid
parking violations; with the intent that no license plate or revalidation
sticker shall be issued by the department or the tax collector to such
persons until the registered owner presents a receipt showing that such
parking fines have been paid, or the person is removed from the tape after
update.



(Ord. No. 89-3, § 4, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 91-69, § 2, 10-1-91)



Sec. 14-11.  Civil penalties.



   The following civil penalties shall be imposed upon the owner of any
motor vehicle found to be stopped, standing or parking in violation of an
ordinance or Florida law as follows:



Violation   Civil penalty



      (1)   Nonmoving traffic violations as prohibited by sections
14-3 and 14-5, excepting 14-5(2)(b) and 14-5(2)(e), Code of Ordinances:



         If paid within 10 days   $25.00



         After 10 days from date of issue   32.00



      (2)   Nonmoving traffic violations as prohibited by sections
14-5(2)(b) and 14-5(2)(e), Code of Ordinances:



         If paid within 10 days   $50.00



         After 10 days from date of issue   65.00



      (3)   Parking in a space or spaces provided for certain
disabled persons, as prohibited by section 14-9   250.00



(Ord. No. 89-3, § 5, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 90-44, § 1, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 90-52,
§ 1, 11-7-90)



Sec. 14-12.   Curbstoning.



   (a)   Definition. Curbstoning is a term given to the practice of
buying and selling automobiles without a motor vehicle dealer license and
legally established place of business. Curbstoners usually park and display
their vehicles for sale in high traffic locations. Often these locations are
on rights-of-ways, utility or pipeline easements, at gas stations,
convenience stores, supermarket parking lots, public parking lots, etc.



   (b)   It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle upon a
public street or highway, a public parking lot, or other public property, or
upon private property where the public has the right to travel by motor
vehicle, for the principal purpose and intent of displaying the motor vehicle
thereon for sale, hire, or rental unless the sale, hire, or rental of the
motor vehicle is specifically authorized on such property by municipal
regulation and the person is in compliance with all municipal licensing
regulations.



   (c)   As specified by F.S. § 316.1951, the provisions of subsection
(b) do not prohibit a person from parking his or her own motor vehicle or his
or her other personal property on any private real property which the person
owns or leases or on private real property which the person does not own or
lease, but for which he or she obtains the permission of the owner, or on the
public street immediately adjacent thereto, for the principal purpose and
intent of sale, hire, or rental.



   (d)   Subsection (b) does not prohibit a licensed motor vehicle
dealer from displaying for sale or offering for sale motor vehicles at
locations other than the dealer’s licensed location if the dealer has been
issued a supplemental license for off-premises sales and has complied with
the requirements in subsection (b). A vehicle displayed for sale by a
licensed dealer at any location other than the dealer’s licensed location
is subject to immediate removal without warning.



   (e)   A law enforcement officer, code compliance officer, or
supervisor of the department may issue a citation and cause to be immediately
removed at the owner’s expense any motor vehicle found in violation of
subsections (b), (f), (g), (h), or (i). Pursuant to F.S. § 318.18, the owner
shall be assessed a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) by the city and
the motor vehicle will be immediately removed. A motor vehicle removed under
this section shall not be released from an impound or towing and storage
facility until after the fine has been paid to the city and a release form
has been issued by the city verifying that the fine has been paid.



   (f)   It is unlawful to offer a vehicle for sale if the vehicle
identification number has been destroyed, removed, covered, altered, or
defaced. A vehicle found in violation of this subsection is subject to
immediate removal without warning.



   (g)   It is unlawful to knowingly attach to any motor vehicle a
registration/tag that was not assigned or lawfully transferred to the
vehicle. A vehicle found in violation of this subsection is subject to
immediate removal without warning.



   (h)   It is unlawful to display or offer for sale a vehicle that
does not have a valid registration. A vehicle found in violation of this
subsection is subject to immediate removal without warning. This subsection
does not apply to vehicles and recreational vehicles being offered for sale
through motor vehicle auctions.



   (i)   A vehicle is subject to immediate removal without warning if
it bears a telephone number that has been displayed on three (3) or more
vehicles offered for sale within a twelve (12)-month period.



   (j)   Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, a
violation of subsection (b), subsection (f), subsection (g), subsection (h),
or subsection (i) shall subject the owner of such motor vehicle to towing
fees reasonably necessitated by removal and daily storage of the motor
vehicle in addition to a fine as set forth in subsection (e). Such fees and
costs are set by the towing, storage, or impound company which removes the
vehicle from the unauthorized location.



   (k)   The city hereby incorporates F.S. §§ 316.1951, 318.18,
320.27, and 320.01 as if fully set forth herein. Further, this section shall
automatically incorporate any and all subsequent amendments to F.S. §§
316.1951, 318.18, 320.27, and 320.01, without further action by the City
Commission.



(Ord. No. 14-017, § 2, 9-3-14; Ord. No. 16-001, § 2, 2-2-16)



   State law references-Related provisions, F.S. §§ 316.1951, 320.27(5),
and 320.01.



Sec. 14-13.   Motorized scooters.



   (a)   Purpose and applicability.



      (1)   The purpose of this section is to prohibit the
commercial use, rental, and parking of motorized scooters in the city.



      (2)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the use
and parking of motorized scooters. For the purposes of this section, the user
shall be liable for complying with the applicable provisions of this section
and either can be issued citations and subject to fines for violation of the
provisions of this section.



      (3)   Law enforcement agencies and their personnel are
exempted from the provisions of this section while utilization is in the
course of police operations.



   (b)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
words shall have the meaning indicated:



      Motorized scooter or scooter shall mean a micromobility device
that is powered by a motor with or without having a seat or saddle which is
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels, and which is not
capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles
per hour on level ground.



      User means the person who operates a motorized scooter.



   (c)   General regulations. The commercial use and the parking of a
motorized scooter is prohibited within the jurisdictional limits of the city.
This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, renting a motorized scooter
outside the city limits and operating such motorized scooter within the city
limits.



   (d)   Penalty. Any violation of this section that is not prosecuted
as a violation of state traffic laws may be prosecuted as a municipal
ordinance and is punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
each occurrence of a violation.



(Ord. No. 19-010, § 2, 5-21-19)



 


Notes

App. C, Art. IX, § 16 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor

App. C, Art. X, § 17 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor

Zoning ordinance, App. A. 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor

§ 22-4. 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor

§ 15-8(a) 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor



Chapter 14.5
RED LIGHT INFRACTION ENFORCEMENT PURSUANT TO STATE LAW



Sec. 14.5-1.  Intent.



   The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the use of traffic
infraction detectors to promote compliance with red light signal directives
as defined and prescribed by Laws of Florida, Chapter 2010-80 (the “State
Act”). Consistent with state law, this chapter will also supplement law
enforcement personnel in the enforcement of red light signal violations and
shall not prohibit law enforcement officers from issuing a citation for a red
light signal violation in accordance with other statutory traffic enforcement
techniques.



(Ord. No. 08-034, § 2, 12-16-08; Ord. 10-015, § 2, 7-20-10)



Sec. 14.5-2.  Authorization for enforcement program.



   Effective July 1, 2010, the city shall enforce compliance with red
light signal directives pursuant to the State Act, to utilize image capture
technologies. The city shall comply with the requirements of the State Act,
including without limitation the enforcement of violations as defined herein
and in the State Act, authorized fines for violations, citation forms, review
of affidavits of non-responsibility, reporting obligations to state agencies,
payments to the state, and public notice. This chapter shall not supersede,
infringe, curtail, or impinge upon state laws related to red light signal
violations or conflict with such laws.



(Ord. No. 08-034, § 2, 12-16-08; Ord. 10-015, § 2, 7-20-10)



Sec. 14.5-3.  Definitions.



   The definitions set forth in the State Act, as may be amended, shall
apply to the city’s implementation and application of the State Act. In
addition, the following definitions shall apply to this chapter.



   (a)   Notice of violation. Initial notification from the city to the
registered owner of a motor vehicle involved in a violation, notifying the
registered owner of the violation, and containing information required by the
State Act.



   (b)   Recorded images. Images recorded by a traffic infraction
detector, which includes but is not limited to photographic or electronic
images or streaming video.



   (c)   Special Magistrate. The city’s Special Magistrates appointed
by the City Commission to conduct hearings pursuant to the State Act.



   (d)   Traffic citation. Notification to the registered owner of a
motor vehicle involved in a violation who failed to timely pay the fine
pursuant to a notice of violation, and containing all information required by
the State Act.



   (e)   Traffic infraction enforcement officer. The city Police
Department employee designated pursuant to Section 14.5-4 herein, who meets
the requirements of the State Act and who shall review the recorded images
and issue notices of violation and traffic citations pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter and the State Act.



   (f)   Violation. Violation of F.S. Sections 316.074(1) or
316.075(1)(c)1.



(Ord. No. 08-034, § 2, 12-16-08; Ord. 10-015, § 2, 7-20-10; Ord. No.
13-019, § 2, 6-18-13)



Sec. 14.5-4.  Traffic infraction enforcement officer.



   In addition to sworn police officers and community service officers,
the city’s Police Chief may designate traffic infraction enforcement
officers, who shall meet the qualifications set forth in the State Act.



   (a)   A reviewing officer shall review the recorded images that
comply with the requirements of the State Act, prior to the issuance of a
notice of violation pursuant to the State Act. Once the reviewing officer has
verified the accuracy of the recorded images he or she shall note the
violation and a notice of violation shall be sent to the registered owner of
the involved vehicle pursuant to the State Act no later than 60 days after
the violation.  The notice of violation shall be sent by first-class mail or
as specified in the State Act.



   (b)   The State Act provides that in the event of non-payment of the
notice of violation, the city shall issue a uniform traffic citation to the
vehicle owner.  In the event of non-payment of the notice of violation
within 60 days of notification, the recorded images will be reviewed again by
a reviewing officer, who will take all necessary action required by the State
Act to send a traffic citation to the registered owner of the involved
vehicle pursuant to the State Act.  The traffic citation shall be sent by
certified mail or as specified in the State Act.



(Ord. No. 08-034, § 2, 12-16-08; Ord. 10-015, § 2, 7-20-10; Ord. No.
13-019, § 2, 6-18-13)



Sec. 14.5-5.   Appointment of Special Magistrate.



   (a)   The City Commission shall appoint at least one Special
Magistrate to consider appeals under this chapter.



   (b)   The qualifications and appointment of the Special Magistrate
shall be as follows:



   (1)   The Special Magistrate shall be appointed by the City
Commission and shall serve with compensation as established by the City
Commission by resolution.



   (2)   The Special Magistrate must be both an attorney and a member
of the Florida Bar for a minimum of five years.



   (3)   The Special Magistrate will be bound by the code of ethics of
the Florida Bar as currently proscribed or as amended from time to time.



   (c)   Rules and regulations, consistent with the provisions of
Florida law, necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter may be
adopted by resolution of the City Commission.



(Ord. No. 13-019, § 2, 6-18-13)



Sec. 14.5-6.   Notice of violation hearings.



   Upon the effective date of state law authorizing notice of violation
hearings to be conducted by the city, the city authorizes its Special
Magistrates, as may be appointed from time to time by the City Commission, to
serve as the city’s local hearing officer, as defined by F.S. Section
316.003(91), as amended from time to time.  The local hearing officer shall
conduct hearings in accordance with the requirements of F.S. Section
316.0083, as amended from time to time.  Administrative costs shall be
assessed in those cases in which the violation is upheld, in an amount to be
established by resolution of the City Commission.



(Ord. No. 13-019, § 2, 6-18-13)



Chapter 15
OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS*



Art. I.   In General, §§ 15-1—15-25



Art. II.   Litter, §§ 15-26—15-43



Art. III.   Civil Emergencies, §§ 15-44—15-59



Art. IV.   Diseased Plants, §§ 15-60—15-69



Art. V.   Aircraft Landing Regulations, §§ 15-70—15-79



Art. VI.   Newsrack Regulations, §§ 15-80—15-95



Art. VII.   Convenience Store Security, §§ 15-98—15-110



Art.  VIII.   Chronic Nuisance Property Code,  § 15-111—15-117.14



Art. IX.   Community Appearance and Maintenance, §§ 15-118—15-120



Art. X.   Sexual Offender Residency Prohibition, §§ 15-121—15-124



Art. XI.   No Fishing, §§ 15-125—15-127



Art. XII.   Loitering, §§ 15-128—15-133



Art. XIII.   Prohibition of Conversion Therapy on Minors, §§
15-134—15-137



   *Cross references-Offenses relating to alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3;
prohibited acts pertaining to library, § 12-7; offenses relating to motor
vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 15-1.  Adoption of state misdemeanors.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, within the corporate
limits of the city, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of
the State of Florida as a misdemeanor, and the commission of such acts is
hereby forbidden and declared a violation of this section. Whosoever shall
violate the provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by the same penalty as is provided therefor by the laws of the State
of Florida, but in no case shall such penalty exceed a fine of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or a term of imprisonment not in excess of one (1) year, or
both such fine and imprisonment.



(Code 1958, § 17-42.1; Ord. No. 79-33, § 1, 12-5-79; Ord. No. 80-43, § 1,
10-21-80; Ord. No. 85-45, Attach. (b), 8-20-85)



   Annotation-Adoption of state misdemeanors, including future enactments
authorized, MacFarland v. Roberts, 74 So.2d 88 (Fla. 1954); Jaramillo v. City
of Homestead, 322 So.2d 496 (Fla. 1975); State v. Smith, 189 So.2d 84 (Fla.
4th DCA 1966).



Sec. 15-2.  Advertising matter; unauthorized posting.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten, in any way, any show
card, poster or other advertising device upon public or private property in
the city unless legally authorized to do so.



Sec. 15-3.  Reserved.



   State law reference-Section 15-3, relative to the distribution of
circulars, throwaways and handbills, derived from Ord. No. 78-45, § 1,
enacted Sept. 19, 1978, was repealed by Ord. No. 82-22, § 2, adopted July
20, 1982.



Sec. 15-4.  Failure to respond to lawful process.



   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for any person to
fail to respond to or comply with any lawful process duly authorized or
issued by any board, commission or other city agency.



Sec. 15-5.  Fireworks displays.



   (a)   Permit required. Fireworks displays shall be lawful only if
held and conducted in accordance with permits issued pursuant to this section.



   (b)   Permit application. Application for a permit for a fireworks
display shall be made in writing to the city manager at least fifteen (15)
days in advance of the date of the display.



   (c)   Application referral. The application for a permit hereunder
shall be referred by the city manager to the chiefs of the police and fire
departments.



   (d)   Conditions for issuance. No permit required by this section
shall be granted unless the operator is approved by both the chiefs of the
police and fire departments, or unless the chief of the fire department finds
that the display is of such a character and is so located, and that the
fireworks will be discharged or fired, so as not to be hazardous to property
or endanger any person.



   (e)   Permits not transferable. Fireworks display permits shall not
be transferable.



(Code 1958, § 17-15)



Sec. 15-6.  Reserved.



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 85-45, Attach. (b), adopted Aug. 20, 1985,
repealed § 15-6, which prohibited misrepresentation of age by minors and use
of nonminors for illegal purposes. Such section had been derived from the
1958 Code, § 17-24.



Sec. 15-7.  Minors; secondhand or junk dealers dealing with.



   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a secondhand dealer,
junkshop keeper, or house-to-house secondhand buyer, or any agent, employee
or servant of such licensee, to buy or accept personal property from any
minor except that such licensee may purchase rags and wastepaper from such
minors.



(Code 1958, § 17-27)



Sec. 15-8.  Noise control-Short title.



   Sections 15-8 through 15-8.8 shall be known and may be cited by the
short title of “City of Boynton Beach Noise Control Ordinance.”



(Ord. No. 85-16, § 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 11-003, § 2, 2-15-11)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 85-16, §§ 1, 2, adopted Mar. 19, 1985,
provided for the repeal of § 15-8, noise, and enacted in lieu thereof new
provisions relative to the same subject matter, designated as §§
15-8—15-8.8 to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 15-8 was derived from
the 1958 Code, § 17-22.2, and Ord. No. 82-12, § 1, adopted May 18, 1982.



Sec. 15-8.1.  Same-Purpose and space.



   IIt is the purpose of sections 15-8 through 15-8.9 to prevent, prohibit
and provide for the abatement ofexcessive and unnecessary noise which may
injure the health or welfare or degrade the quality of life of the citizens
and residents of the City of Boynton Beach. This section shall apply to the
control of all sound and noise originating within the limits of this
jurisdiction. It is further the intent of this chapter to recognize that
factors such as the time of day, location (e.g. proximity to residences),
necessity of public projects for the public good, and necessity of sound and
noise incidental to allowed uses and activities must be considered in
balancing the protection of public peace and individual freedoms.



(Ord. No. 85-16, § 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 11- 003, § 2, 2-15-11; Ord. No.
18-033, § 2, 12-4-18)



   Note-See the editor's note following § 15-8.



Sec. 15-8.2.  Same-Terminology and standards.



   All terminology used in this section shall be as defined herein or, if
not defined, given plain meaning by reference to common dictionary
definition. When interpretation is required by reference to a source more
definitive than this code or a dictionary, reference shall first be made to
publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI):



   A-weighted sound level. The sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The level so
read is designated dBA.



   Apparent property line. The line along the surface, and its vertical
plane extension, which separates one (1) lot or parcel of property from
another.



   Construction. Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial
repair, alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition, for or on
public or private right-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property,
and excluding well pointing.



   Decibel (dB). A unit for measuring the volume of sound or noise, equal
to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the
pressure of the sound or noise measured to the reference pressure, which is
twenty (20) micropascals (twenty (20) micro-newtons per square meter).



   Demolition. Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar
property.



   Emergency. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
eminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action.



   Emergency vehicle. A motor vehicle used in response to a public
emergency or to protect persons or property from imminent danger.



   Emergency work. Any work necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities, or
work required to protect person or property from an imminent exposure to
danger.



   Equivalent. The level of a constant sound, which in a given situation
and time period, has the same sound energy as does a time varying sound.



   Impulse noise. A discrete noise or series of such noises of short
duration  (generally  less than one (1) second) in which the sound pressure
level rises very quickly to a high before decaying to the background level.
Examples of sources of impulse noise, includes explosions and the discharge
of firearms.



   L10 sound level. The sound level exceeded for more than ten (10)
percent of a measurement period which for the purposes of sections 15-8
through 15-8.9 shall not be less than ten (10) minutes.



   LMAX. The maximum A-weighted sound level for a given event.



   Legal holidays. Those recognized by the city include New Year’s Day,
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, day after Thanksgiving, Christmas
Eve, and Christmas Day or any other legally recognized holiday.



   Maximum sound level. The greatest A-weighted sound level reading
obtained when measuring a source of sound during a designated time interval
using the fast meter exponential integration time.



   Micropascal. The international unit for pressure, analogous to pounds
per square inch in English units; one (1) microPascal is one millionth of a
Pascal; the reference pressure used for airborne sound is twenty (20)
microPascals.



   Motorboat. Any boat or vessel propelled or powered by machinery whether
or not such machinery is the principal source of propulsion; including but
not limited to boats, barges, amphibious craft, water-ski towing devices, jet
skis and hover craft.



   Motorized equipment. Any self-propelled vehicle, such as, but not
limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck trailers, semi-trailers, campers,
motorcycles, mini-bikes, go- carts, gopeds, dune buggies, all- terrain
vehicles or racing vehicles which are propelled by mechanical power.



   Multifamily dwelling. A building or other shelter that has been divided
into separate units to house more than one (1) family.



   Noise. For the purposes of this chapter, noise is any sound that is in
violation of any provision of this chapter.



   Noise disturbance. Any sound or noise, in quantities which are plainly
audible and may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or
welfare, animal or plant life, or property, or unnecessarily interfere with
the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation. Any plainly
audible noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in time or
place as to occasion discomfort to any persons within the neighborhood and/or
adjacent neighborhood(s) from which said noises emanate, or as to interfere
with the peace and comfort of neighbors or their guests, or operators or
customers in places of business, or as to negatively affect such residences
or places of business.



   Noise sensitive zone. Existing quiet zones until designated otherwise
by a competent authority. Noise sensitive zones include but are not limited
to operations of schools, libraries open to public, churches, synagogues,
mosques, hospitals, residential zones (after 11:00 p.m.), and nursing homes.



   Octave band sound level. The unweighted sound pressure level in the
specified octave band.



   Person. Any natural person, individual, association, partnership,
corporation, municipality, governmental agency, business trust, estate,
trust, two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest or any other
legal entity including any officer, employee, department, agency, or
instrumentality of the United States, a state or any political subdivision of
a state or any other entity whatsoever of any combination of such, jointly or
severally.



   Plainly audible.  A sound which is capable of being heard by a human
being without the assistance of a mechanical or electronic listening or
amplifying device.



   Powered model vehicle. Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or
landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons,
including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.



   Private right-of-way. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk,
bike path, or alley, or similar place, which is not owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.



   Public right-of-way. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk
or alley or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.



   Public space. Any real property or structures thereon normally
accessible to the public.



   Pure tone. Any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or
a set of single pitches. For the purpose of measurement, a pure tone shall
exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the
tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two
(2) contiguous one-third octave bands by five (5) dB for center frequencies
of 500 Hz and above and by eight (8) dB for center frequencies between 160
and 400 Hz and by fifteen (15) dB for center frequencies less than or equal
to 115 Hz.



   Real property line.  An imaginary line along the surface, and its
vertical plane extension, which separates the real property owned, rented or
leased by one person from that owned, rented or leased by another person,
excluding intra-building real property divisions.



   Receiving land use. The land, which is receiving the noise or sound as
designated by the city zoning map (and for recently incorporated areas, the
effective zoning category).



   Residential. A parcel of land whose use is designated to provide only
permanent housing and excluding all tourist accommodations which includes but
is not limited to hotels, motels, apartment hotels, etc.



   RMS sound pressure. The square root of the time averaged square of the
sound pressure.



   Sound. An oscillation in pressure, stress, particle displacement,
particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal
forces. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound
including duration, intensity and frequency.



   Sound disturbance. Any sound or noise which is:



      (1)   Plainly audible beyond a distance of twenty-five (25)
feet or further from the apparent property line from which the sound
emanates, in a single residential zoning district, or



      (2)   Plainly audible in a dwelling unit adjacent to the unit
from which the sound emanates or is plainly audible twenty-five (25) feet or
further from the apparent property line from which the sound emanates, in
multi-family residential zoning districts.



      (3)   Plainly audible beyond a distance of one hundred (100)
feet or further from the apparent property line from which the sound emanates
when the sound emanates in a commercial zoning district and is heard in a
residential zoning district.



      (4)   Plainly audible beyond a distance of one hundred (100)
feet or further from the apparent property line from which the sound emanates
when the sound emanates in a public use zoning district and is heard in a
residential zoning district.



   For purpose of enforcement, it is not necessary to specifically
identify the property line as would be depicted on a survey, rather an
approximation of the property line may be used taking into consideration
physical landmarks such as fences, landscaping, setbacks, driveways, or
ground treatment.



   Sound level. The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a
metering characteristic and weighting A, B, or C as specified in American
National Standards Institute specification for sound level meters, ANSI
S1.4-1971, or in successor publications. If the weighing employed is not
indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.



   Sound level meter. An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and
weighing networks used to measure sound pressure levels. The output meter
reads sound pressure levels when properly calibrated, and the instrument is
of Type 2 or better, as specified in the American National Standards
Institute Publication S1.4-1971, or its successor publications.



   Sound pressure. The instantaneous difference between the actual
pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as
produced by the presence of sound energy.



   Sound pressure level. Twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten
(10) of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of
twenty (20) micropascals (2 x 106N/m2). The sound pressure level is denoted
Lp or SPL and is expressed in decibels.



   Use. Any activity, event, operation or facility which creates noise.



   Weekday. Any Monday through Friday (at 6:00 p.m.) which is not a legal
holiday as defined herein.



   Weekend.  Any Saturday or Sunday (until 8:00 p.m.).



(Ord. No. 85-16, § 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 86-3, § 1, 3-4-86; Ord. No. 11-
003, § 2, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 18-033, § 2, 12-4-18)



Sec. 15-8.3.  Same-Program administration.



   (a)   The noise and sound control program established by sections
15-8 through 15-8.9 shall be administered by the city manager, or his/her
designee, of the City of Boynton Beach, Florida.



   (b)   For the purposes of section 15-8.9 and its enforcement,
municipal employees or officials engaged in the measurement of noise or
sound, assessing compliance with such sections, making recommendations for
noise and sound abatement, issuing noise and sound violations citations, or
giving evidence regarding noise and/or sound  violations shall have received
formalized training on these subjects from institutions or organizations of
recognized ability and experience in environmental acoustics and noise and
sound control.



(Ord. No. 85-16, § 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 86-3, § 2, 3-4-86; Ord. No. 89-16,
§ 1, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 11- 003, § 2, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 18-033, § 2,
12-4-18)



   Note-See the editor's note following § 15-8.



Sec. 15-8.4.  Same-Inspections.



   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the city manager or his/her
designee, may enter and/or inspect any private property, place, report or
records at any time when granted permission by the owner, or some other
person with apparent authority to act for the owner. When permission is
refused or cannot be obtained, a search warrant may be obtained from a court
of competent jurisdiction upon showing of probable cause to believe that a
violation of sections 15-8 through 15-8.9 may exist. Such inspection may
include administration of any necessary tests.



(Ord. No. 85-16, § 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 11-003, § 2, 2-15-11; Ord. No.
18-033, § 2, 12-4-18)



   Note-See the editor's note following § 15-8.



Sec. 15-8.5.  Sound and noise control—Prohibited acts.



   No person shall make, continue or cause to be made any noise or sound
disturbance. The making of noise or sound in violation of this chapter shall
constitute prima facie evidence of a noise and/or sound disturbance.



   (a)   Sound or noise disturbances prohibited. No person shall
unnecessarily make, continue or cause to be made or continued any sound or
noise disturbances.



   (b)   Specific prohibitions. The following acts, which enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and the causing or permitting thereof in
such a manner as to create a noise or sound disturbance across a residential
or commercial real property line, or within a noise sensitive zone, or at any
time in violation of the provisions of section 15-8.8, are hereby declared to
be a violation:



   (1)   The playing, using, operating or permitting to be played, used
or operated, any radio, phonograph or musical instrument, or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner or with
such volume, that is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s)
or operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the
sound, and is plainly audible from a public street, the adjacent lot nearest
to the source, or at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet or more,
particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



   (2)   Loudspeakers. Using or operating for any purpose other than
those activities specifically exempted in section 15-8.6(4) below, any
loudspeaker, loudspeaker system or similar device, including sound emitting
devices which may be physically attached to any motor vehicle.



   (3)   Street sales. Offering for sale, selling or advertising for
sale by shouting or outcry, anything within any area of the city.



   (4)   Animals. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal, bird or
fowl which persistently howls, barks, meows, squawks, bays, cries or
otherwise makes noises or sounds which create a noise or sound disturbance or
is plainly audible from a public street, and/or from a distance of
twenty-five (25) feet and/or from the adjacent lot nearest to the building,
structure, or yard in which the animal, bird or fowl is located. A person is
responsible for an animal, bird or fowl if the person owns, controls, or
otherwise cares for the animal, bird or fowl. It shall be an affirmative
defense to any charge hereunder that such animal, bird or fowl was emitting
such noise in response to an intrusion upon the premises by any person.



   (5)   Loading or unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or
other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage
cans, or similar objects in such a manner as to cause a noise or sound
disturbance.



   (6)   Construction. Operating or causing the operation of any tools
or equipment used in construction, drilling, excavation, clearing, repair,
alteration or demolition work on weekdays during the times specified in
section 15-8.8, or at any time during Sundays or legal holidays.



   (7)   Fixed mechanical equipment. Operating or causing the operation
of fixed mechanical equipment located on real property including HVAC
equipment, motors, engines, pumps, compressors, fans, tools, machinery, and
its component parts, or any other similar stationary mechanical devices and
their component parts except as otherwise exempted in section 15-8.6(6).



   (8)   Motorboats. Operating or causing the operation of a motorboat
in such a manner as to cause a noise or sound disturbance.



   (9)   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, and other
vocal sounds in excess of a normal conversational level, any of which occurs
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., so as to create a plainly
audible sound across a residential real property line or on a public
right-of-way or public property, or that is plainly audible to an occupant of
a dwelling unit within a building other than an occupant of the unit from
which the sound emanates, that can be heard from a distance of twenty- five
(25) feet or more from the source, particularly in noise- sensitive zones.
This section is to be applied only to those situations where the disturbance
is not a result of the content of the communication but due to the volume,
duration, location, timing or other factors not based on content.



   (10)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of
repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to cause loud grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise that is plainly audible from a distance of
twenty-five (25) feet or more.



   (11)   Operating or permitting the operation of powered model
vehicles, either airborne, waterborne, or landborne, which are designed not
to carry persons or property, such as, but not limited to, model airplanes,
boats, cars, rockets, and which are being propelled by mechanical means,
within a public recreation area or park other than those areas specifically
designated for such purpose by the City Commission.



   (12)   The creation of any sound or noise on any street adjacent to
a noise sensitive zone, where those entities defined herein as being part of
a noise-sensitive zone are in operation, which is plainly audible within the
entity, from a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the noise or sound, and
interferes with the operation of the entity, provided conspicuous signs are
displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or
court street.



   (13)   The sounding of any horn or signaling device, except as a
danger warning, for any unnecessary or an excessive period of time or the
reasonable use of any horn or signaling device, in such manner as to cause a
noise or sound disturbance.



   (14)   The creation or permitting of any loud or raucous noise or
sound so as to disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of a residence within the
immediate or adjacent neighborhood.



   (15)   Vibration. The creation or permitting of any sound or noise
that produces a ground vibration, noticeable, without instruments, at the lot
lines of the property from which the sound or noise emanates, provided there
shall be excepted from the provisions of this division the use of pile
drivers, back hoes, tampers, ditch diggers, bobcats, road graders, rollers
and like equipment used in standard construction between the hours of 7:30
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. of any day.



   (c)   Generators - exemption.  Notwithstanding the foregoing
prohibited acts, the use of gasoline or propane powered generators is
permitted during periods of power outage following natural disasters and
during periods of maintenance.  Operation for purposes of maintenance of the
generator shall only occur during daylight hours on weekdays and only for the
minimum amount of time required by the manufacturer.  Any person using a
generator, except during periods of power outage, is subject to the
restrictions on noise generation as otherwise set forth in this chapter. 



(Ord. No. 85-16, § 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 86-3, § 3, 3-4-86; Ord. No. 89-23,
§ 1, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 91-8, § 3, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 06-058, § 2, 7- 5-06;
Ord. No. 11-003, § 2, 2-15- 11; Ord. No. 18-033, § 2, 12-4-18)



   Note-See the editor's note following § 15-8.



Sec. 15-8.6.  Same-Exemptions.



   The following acts and the causing or permitting thereof shall be
specifically exempted from the prohibitions of section 15-8.5.



   (1)   Motor vehicles. Operating motor vehicle noise enforcement
procedures shall be as established in Chapter 316, Florida Statutes, and
applicable rules and regulations of the Department of Highway Safety and
Motor Vehicles, provided however, that this exemption shall not apply to any
sound emitting devices which may be attached to any motor vehicle as
prohibited by section 15-8.5(b)(2).



   (2)   Aircraft and interstate railway and locomotives and cars.
Noise generated by aircraft and interstate railway locomotives and cars are
exempt from these provisions.



   (3)   Emergency activities. Any noise generated as a result of
emergency work or for the purpose of alerting the public o the existence of
an emergency situation.



   (4)   Public speaking and assembly. Any noise generated by any
noncommercial public speaking or public assembly activities conducted
pursuant to lawful authority on any public space or right-of-way, including
sporting events.



   (5)   Domestic power tools and lawn maintenance equipment. Any noise
generated by the operation and use of domestic power tools and lawn
maintenance equipment.



   (6)   Fixed mechanical equipment, noise generated by the operation
and use of air conditioning units in residential districts.



   (7)   Nonamplified solo musical instrument played by an individual
within a private residence between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m.



   (8)   Construction.  The foregoing provisions of Section 15-8.5(a),
(b) and subparagraph (6)    of this section shall not apply to municipal,
county or state public works, emergency matters or matters having an effect
on the public health, safety and welfare of the city in those zoning
districts of mixed use, commercial and industrial, and where the noise or
sound disturbance across a residential property line would not exceed those
sound and noise limits set forth in section 15-8.8 of this Article. 



   (9)   Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public
business.



   (10)   Noises and sounds of authorized safety signals and warning
devices.



   (11)   Noises and sounds resulting from emergency work, which is to
be construed as work made necessary to restore property and/or utilities to a
safe condition following a public emergency, or work required to protect
persons or property from any imminent exposure to danger. This exemption
includes noises from emergency communications and utility work following a
public calamity and in connection with restoration of service operations.



   (12)   Noises and sounds resulting from community events, including
but not limited to, fairs, sporting events, school activities, community
festivals, etc.



(Ord. No. 85-16, § 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 86-3, § 4, 3-4-86; Ord. No. 89-23,
§ 2, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 01-24, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 11-003, § 2, 2- 15-11;
Ord. No. 18-033, § 2, 12-4-18)



   Note-See the editor's note following § 15-8.



Sec. 15-8.7.  Same-Penalty for violation.



   Any person, firm or corporation convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of a violation of sections 15-8 through 15-8.9 shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable by a fine and/or
incarceration as provided by law. The City of Boynton Beach Code Compliance 
Board shall have the authority and jurisdiction to prosecute such offenses.
Each complaint of said violation shall be a separate offense.



(Ord. No. 85-16, § 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 86-3, § 5, 3-4-86; Ord. No. 97- 51,
§ 2, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 11- 003, § 2, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 18-033, § 2,
12-4-18)



   Note-See the editor's note following § 15-8.



Sec. 15-8.8.  Same-Sound levels by receiving land use.



   (a)   Sound and noise limits established. No person shall operate or
cause to be operated any source of sound or noise as enumerated in section
15-8.5(b), and unless specifically exempted by section 15-8.6, in such a
manner as to create a sound or noise disturbance or an exterior or interior
sound level of any origin which exceeds the limits set forth for the
receiving land use category in question for more than ten (10) per cent of
any measurement period which shall not be less than ten (10) minutes when
measured at or within the boundaries of a property or within the confines of
a building within the receiving land use and as a result of a source of sound
being located on some other property.



   (b)   L10 noise and sound level limits. Permissible noise and sound
levels for noises or sounds transmitted to receiving land use areas shall not
exceed the following limits for L10 sound or noise levels as defined herein.
For the purpose of these sound and noise control provisions, such sound or
noise levels shall be determined using FAST meter responses:



 


Receiving Land Use

 

Emanating Land Use

 

Category

 

Time

 

Level Limit





L10 Sound
 
Residential
 
Exterior
 
Sun. - Thurs. 7:00 a.m. - 11:00 p.m.
 
60 (dB)A


L10 Sound
 
Residential
 
Exterior
 
Fri. & Sat. and holidays    11:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.
 
55 (dB)A


L10 Sound
 
Residential
 
Exterior
 
Sun. - Thurs. 12:00 a.m. - 7:00 a.m.
 
55 (dB)A


L10 Sound
 
Commercial
 
Exterior
 
At all times
 
65 (dB)A


L10 Sound
 
Residential
 
Interior
 
Sun. - Thurs. 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
 
50 (dB)A


L10 Sound
 
Residential
 
Interior
 
Fri. & Sat. and holidays      7:00 a.m. - 12:00 a.m.
 
50 (dB)A


L10 Sound
 
Residential
 
Interior
 
Sun. - Thurs. 12:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.
 
45 (dB)A


L10 Sound
 
Commercial
 
Interior
 
At all times
 
55 (dB)A




 



   (c)   Maximum sound and noise level limits. The maximum sound and
noise level from any applicable sound and noise sources shall not exceed the
L10 sound and noise level limits by more than the values listed below:



   10 (dB) A from 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.



    5 (dB) A from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.



   (d)   Pure tone and impulse noise or sound. For any source of sound
or noise which emits a pure tone or an impulse noise or sound, as defined
herein, the sound or noise level limits for L10 and maximum sound or noise
levels shall be reduced by five (5) (dB) A.



   (e)   District boundaries. When a noise or sound source can be
identified and its noise or sound can be measured in more than one land use
designation, the pressure level limits of the most restrictive use district
shall apply at that designation boundary.



   (f)   The burden shall be on any person contesting the equivalent
sound levels to establish the actual equivalent sound or noise level by clear
and convincing evidence.



(Ord. No. 85-16, § 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 85-45, Attach. (b), 8-20-85; Ord.
No. 86-3, § 6, 3-4-86; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1, 8-19-86; Ord. No. 11-003, § 2,
2-15-11; Ord. No. 18-033, § 2, 12-4-18)



   Note-See the editor's note following § 15-8.



Sec. 15-8.9   Same- Measurement of noise and sound.



   In determining whether a violation of this section has occurred, the
complaint of noise shall be measured by the code enforcement division or
Police Department according to the following plainly audible standard:



   (a)   The primary means of measurement shall be by ordinary,
auditory senses of a reasonable person with normal sensitivities, so long as
any mechanical device does not enhance their hearing, such as a microphone or
hearing aid.



   (b)   The measurement shall be taken on, or as near as possible to
the real property line of the property upon which the sound or noise source
is located, and in any event from a location not less than twenty- five (25)
feet from the source measured in a straight line.



   (c)   When applicable, sound and noise shall be measured with a
sound level meter. The sound or noise level shall be measured at a distance
no closer to the point from which the sound or noise in question is emanating
than the property line of the parcel or lot from which the sound or noise is
emanating or through partitions common to two (2) parties within a building.



   (d)   A measurement period shall not be less than ten (10) minutes
in duration. The sound or noise being measured shall be representative of the
sound or noise which instigated the complaint.



   (e)   A measurement shall be recorded so as to secure and ensure an
accurate representation of the sound or noise.



   (f)   A measurement shall be taken at approximately five (5) feet
above the ground or water surface away from any obstruction or reflecting
surface.



   (g)   When necessary, a microphone windscreen shall be required to
avoid wind noise biasing of a measurement.



   (h)   All manufacturers’ directions on the operation of the sound
level meter shall be followed (e.g. proper microphone angle).



   (i)   All sound level meters used for measurement shall be in
conformance with ANSI section 1.4-1983, as amended.



   (j)   All octave and third octave band filter sets of the sound
level meter shall be in conformance with ANSI section 1.11-1976, as amended.



   (k)   Instrumentation for sound level measurements may be class 1 or
class 2 (ANSI section 1.4-1971), as amended.



   (l)   Measurements of sound and noise shall be made by individuals
trained in a noise or sound measurement program approved by the county or
other training facility.



(Ord. No. 18-033, § 2, 12-4-18)



Sec. 15-9.  Obstruction of passageways.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or erect, upon any public
way or passageway to any building, an obstruction of any type, provided this
section shall not prevent the duly authorized or required placing of
temporary barriers or warning signs for the purpose of safeguarding the
public.



(Code 1958, § 17-31)  (Ord. No. 11-003, § 2, 2-15-11)



Sec. 15-10.  Sound control - Short title.



   This section shall be known and may be cited by the short title of
"City of Boynton Beach Sound Control Ordinance."



(Ord. No. 01-55, § 1, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 11-003, § 2, 2-15-11)



Sec. 15-10.1.  Purpose.



   (a)   It is the purpose of this section to preserve the peace and
tranquility of residential neighborhoods by prohibiting excessively loud
sound and by requir ing abatement of excessively loud sound.



   (b)   This section shall apply to the control of sound originating
within the jurisdictional limits of the city without regard to the content,
meaning, or message of the sound. It is the express intent that enforcement
of these regulations shall be content neutral.



   (c)   Please refer to section 15-8.2 for any definitions applicable
to this section.



(Ord. No. 01-55, § 1, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 11-003, § 2 , 2-15-11)



Sec. 15-10.2.  (Reserved)



Sec. 15-10.3.  Administration.



   The sound control program established by this section shall be
administered by the City Manager, or his designee, of the City of Boynton
Beach, Florida.



(Ord. No. 01-55, § 1, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 11-003, § 2, 2-15-11)



Sec. 15-10.4.  Inspections.



   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the City Manager or his
designee, may enter and/or inspect any private property, place, report or
records at any time when granted permission by the owner, or by some other
person with apparent authority to act for the owner.



(Ord. No. 01-55, § 1, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 11-003, § 2, 2-15-11)



Sec. 15-10.5.  Prohibited acts.



   No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any
sound disturbances, as defined herein, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m on weekdays and between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
weekends or national holidays.



(Ord. No. 01-55, § 1, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 11-003, § 2, 2-15-11)



Sec. 15-10.6.  Exemptions.



   Sound emanating from the following acts and the causing or permitting
thereof shall be specifically exempted from the prohibitions of section
15-10.5.



      (1)   Motor vehicles.  Operating motor vehicle noise
enforcement procedures shall be as established in F.S. Chapter 316, and
applicable rules and regulations of the Department of Highway Safety and
Motor Vehicles.



      (2)   Aircraft and interstate railway and locomotives and rail
cars.  Sound generated by aircraft and interstate railway locomotives and
rail cars.



      (3)   Emergency activities.  Any sound generated as a result
of emergency work or for the purpose of alerting the public to the existence
of an emergency situation.



      (4)   Domestic power tools and lawn maintenance equipment. 
Any sound generated by the operation and use of domestic power tools and lawn
maintenance equipment.



      (5)   Sound generated by the operation and use of air
conditioning units in residential districts.



      (6)   Non-amplified solo musical instrument played by an
individual within a private residence.



(Ord. No. 01-55, § 1, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 11-003, § 2, 2-15-11)



Sec. 15-10.7.  Enforcement and Penalty.



   (a)   The City Code Enforcement Board shall have jurisdiction to
hear and decide cases in which violations of this chapter are alleged; or



   (b)   The city may enforce the provision of this Code by
supplemental Code of Ordinance enforcement procedures as provided by F.S.
Chapter 162, Part 2; or



   (c)   The city may prosecute violations by issuance of notices to
appear for violation of a City Ordinance, in which case, the penalty for a
violation shall be as follows:



      (1)   First violation - $50.00



      (2)   Second violation within twelve (12) months of
adjudication of first violation - $100.00



      (3)   Third violation within eighteen (18) months of
adjudication of first violation - $500.00



Each calendar day on which a violation exists shall constitute a separate
violation for the purpose of determining the fine.



   (d)   A violation of this Article may be prosecuted as a nuisance.
The City Attorney may bring suit on behalf of the city, or any affected
citizen may bring suit in his or her name against the person or persons
causing or maintaining the violation, or against the owner/agent of the
building or property on which the violation exists. Relief may be granted
according to the terms and conditions of F.S. Chapter 60, entitled Abatement
of Nuisances.



   (e)   Violations of this Article may be enforceable by arrest.



   (f)   For the purpose of this section, any person owning or having
responsibility for management of a business premises, however temporarily,
any performer or disc jockey producing sound upon any business premises, any
person playing, producing or controlling music, or other sound, any person
having control of the volume of music or sound, and the business as named on
the business tax receipt where the music or sound is emanating may be jointly
and severally liable for compliance with this Article and shall be
responsible for any violations hereof.



   (g)   No citation or notice to appear for a violation of this
section shall be issued until a law enforcement officer or code enforcement
officer has made contact with the owner, occupant or operator of the property
from which the offending sound emanates to request abatement of the offending
sound. When a request for abatement is made and the offending sound is not
immediately abated, or if it resumes within ninety (90) minutes following
initial abatement, or occurs again within three (3) days, a citation or
notice to appear may issue without additional request for abatement.



(Ord. No. 01-55, § 1, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No.
11-003, § 2, 2-15-11)



Sec. 15-11.  Stench bombs and other offensive matter.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to throw,
drop, pour, deposit or discharge upon the person or property of another any
liquid, gaseous or solid substance which is injurious to persons or property
or which is nauseous, sickening, irritating or offensive to any of the senses
with intent to wrongfully injure, molest, discomfort, discommode or coerce
another in the use, management, conduct or control of his person or property;
or to attempt, or aid in the attempt or commission of any of these prohibited
acts.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to manufacture
or prepare or have in his possession or under his control, any liquid,
gaseous or solid substance or matter of any kind which is injurious to person
or property, or which is nauseous, sickening, irritating or offensive to any
of the senses with the intent to use the same in violation of subsection (a)
or with intent that the same shall be used in violation of subsection (a).
The possession or control by any person of any such liquid, gaseous or solid
substance or matter shall be deemed prima facie evidence of intent to use the
same or cause the same to be used in violation of subsection (a).



   (c)   The prohibitions of subsections (a) and (b) above shall not
apply to police officers acting in the line of duty or to proprietors of
business places or their employees using such substances for the protection
of their property and their business places when the substances referred to
herein are kept solely for the purpose of repelling robbers, thieves, murders
or other law violators.



(Code 1958, § 17-43)



Sec. 15-12.  Switchblade knives.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or display
any knife or knives having the appearance of a pocket- knife, the blade of
which can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on the handle or other
mechanical devices. Such knife is hereby declared to be a dangerous or deadly
weapon and shall be subject to forfeiture to the city.



(Code 1958, § 17-44)



Sec. 15-13.  Throwing stones or missiles.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stone or any other
missile, upon or at any vehicle, building, tree or other public or private
property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place or
enclosed or unenclosed ground.



(Code 1958, § 17-46)



Sec. 15-14.  Reserved.



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 11-028, adopted Oct. 18, 2011, repealed §
15-14, which prohibited carrying of weapons, with limited exceptions. Such
section had been derived from the 1958 Code, § 17-49.



   Cross reference-Possession, use of weapons in beaches, parks, § 16-53.



   State law reference-Weapons generally, F.S. Ch. 790.



Sec. 15-15.  Window peeping.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peep into, or be found
loitering around or within view of, any window not on his own property with
the intent of watching or looking through such window.



(Code 1958, § 17-55)



   State law reference-Loitering and prowling and prowling generally, F.S.
§ 856.021.



Sec. 15-16.  Mandatory street numbers on all buildings.



   (a)   The owners and/or occupants of all properties having a
building within the city limits shall install and maintain in a conspicuous
place a correct street number of sufficient size, shape and character, to be
visible and readable from the adjacent street. All existing single family and
multi-family units and commercial structures shall have exterior
identification/numbering as set forth in subsections E.16 and F.13 of the
Land Development Regulations of the City of Boynton Beach, Chapter 20,
Section 8, subsections E.16 and F.13.



   (b)   The owner and/or occupants of any building located by the city
building department or the police department without a number or an incorrect
number shall be notified by mail that they should place the correct number on
the house within sixty (60) days after receiving notice.



   (c)   The terms and provisions of this section shall be applicable
to all apartments, condominiums or rental units within multifamily districts
where the entrance to said unit is visible from the public right-of-way.



   (d)   Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this
section following the aforesaid notice shall be in violation of the City Code.



   (e)   The provisions of this section shall be enforceable by a
complaint initiated by any city police officer or building department
inspector and shall be prosecuted in front of the city's code compliance
board.



   (f)   The fire department and police department with the aid of
other city departments shall establish and maintain a map of the city,
reflecting the numbers on buildings herein provided.



(Ord. No. 82-15, § 1, 8-3-82; Ord. No. 97-51, § 2, 11-18-97; Ord. No.
04-018, § 3, 4-7-04)



   Cross reference-Code compliance board, § 2-72 et seq.



Sec. 15-17.  Commercial establishments, after-hours operation.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial
establishment, or otherwise be open for business, without an employee on duty
and physically on the premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



   (b)   Commercial establishments which are not contiguous to a
residential zoning district or which are completely enclosed within a
building are specifically exempted from the prohibition in subsection (a).



(Ord. No. 87-42, § 1, 12-1-87)



Sec. 15-18.  Graffiti.



   Graffiti shall mean any message, slogan, word, symbol, or drawing made
on any public or private surface without the express permission of the owner
of such surface.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to paint or mark any
public or private property without the consent of the respective owner of
said property.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, public agency or
utility owning or acting as manager or agent for the owner of property
whether privately or publicly owned, to permit the application of or fail to
remove any graffiti from the property within thirty (30) days of receipt of
notice from the city to remove such graffiti.



   (c)   Any person convicted of violating subsection (a) or (b) above
shall be subject to penalties and fines not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00).



   (d)   In addition to any punishment, the court shall order the
defendant to make restitution to the victim for damage or loss caused
directly or indirectly by the defendant's offense in a reasonable amount or
manner to be determined by the court.



(Ord. No. 94-08, § 1, 4-5-94)



Sec. 15-19.  Non-smoking areas.



   (a)   The City Commission of the City of Boynton Beach, Florida
hereby recognizes and supports the legislative intent which was the basis for
the Florida Clean Indoor Air Act (F.S. § 386.202).



   (b)   The City Commission of the City of Boynton Beach, Florida does
designate all indoor city facilities, including common areas, as non-smoking
areas.



(Ord. No. 98-30, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-98)



Secs. 15-20—15-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II. LITTER*



   *Cross reference-Garbage, trash and offensive conditions generally, Ch.
10.



   State law reference-Florida litter law, F.S. § 403.413.



Sec. 15-26.  Defined.



   For the purpose of this article, “litter” shall mean garbage, trash
and all rubbish and wastes such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cigars,
cardboard, tin cans, containers, wood, glass and other materials of any kind.



(Code 1958, § 17-41)



Sec. 15-27.  Prohibited generally.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in
authorized private receptacles for collection, or in the official city
sanitary landfill areas.



(Code 1958, § 17-41)



Sec. 15-28.  Sweeping, depositing into gutters or public places.



   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.



(Code 1958, § 17-41)



Sec. 15-29.  Throwing from vehicles.



   No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or
deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon
private property.



(Code 1958, § 17-41)



Sec. 15-30.  In bodies of water.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city.



(Code 1958, § 17-41)



   Cross reference-Polluting park waters, § 16-26.



Sec. 15-31.  On occupied private property.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may deposit such household
trash or litter in designated areas of said private property for collection
as provided elsewhere in this Code.



(Code 1958, § 17-41)



Sec. 15-32.  On vacant property.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the city whether owned by such person or not.



(Code 1958, § 17-41)



   Cross reference-Depositing refuse on vacant property, § 10-24.



Sec. 15-33.  Prevention of scattering of loads.



   No person shall drive, propel, operate, move or cause to be driven,
propelled, operated or moved, any truck or other vehicle within the city
while transporting ashes, fuel, cinders, sand, gravel, paper, garbage, trash,
rubbish, wastes, litter or other similar substances without using a
tarpaulin, tailgate or other device, if necessary, to prevent any litter or
other materials from being dropped, scattered, blown or deposited upon any
street, alley or other public place within the city.



(Code 1958, § 17-41)



Secs. 15-34—15-43. Reserved.



ARTICLE III. CIVIL EMERGENCIES*



   *State law reference-Local declaration of states of emergency, F.S. §
870.042 et seq.



Sec. 15-44.  Definitions.



   As used in this article:



   A civil emergency is hereby defined to be:



      (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by
immediate power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting together
without authority of law.



      (2)   Any natural disaster or man-made calamity including
flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the
city, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of
property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.



   Curfew is hereby defined as a prohibition against any person or persons
walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street,
highway, public property or vacant premises within the city, excepting
persons officially designated to duty with reference to said civil emergency.



(Code 1958, § 6A-1)



Sec. 15-45.  Reserved.



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 11-028, adopted Oct. 18, 2011, repealed §
15-45, which authorized emergency proclamations for the preservation of peace
and order by the major. Such section had been derived from the 1958 Code, §
6A-2.



Sec. 15-46.  Filing, publication of emergency measures.



   Any state of emergency or emergency measure declared or ordered and
promulgated pursuant to this article shall, as promptly as practicable, be
filed in the office of the city clerk and delivered to appropriate news media
for publication and radio and television broadcast thereof. If practicable,
such state of emergency shall be published by other means such as by posting
and loudspeakers.



   State law reference-Similar provisions, F.S. § 870.046.



Sec. 15-47.  When proclamation effective.



   The proclamation of emergency provided herein shall become effective
upon its issuance.



(Code 1958, § 6A-3)



Sec. 15-48.  Termination; extension.



   Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this
article shall terminate after seventy-two (72) hours from the issuance
thereof, or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no
longer exists, whichever occurs first;  provided, however, that such
emergency may be extended for such additional periods of time as determined
necessary by resolution of the governing body.



(Code 1958, § 6A-4)



   State law reference-Similar provisions, F.S. § 870.047.



Sec. 15-49.  Violations.



   Any persons who shall fail or refuse to comply with the orders of duly
authorized law enforcement officers or personnel charged with the
responsibility of enforcing this article or the regulations of the
proclamation of emergency authorized herein shall be in violation of this
Code.



(Code 1958, § 6A-5)



Secs. 15-50—15-59. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV. DISEASED PLANTS



Sec. 15-60.  Definitions.



As used in this article:



   Abatement is the procedure of treating a diseased plant to render the
plant harmless to other plants to the satisfaction of the department, or
entirely removing the plant from the property and causing the same to be
disposed of.



   Department is the public works department of the city.



   Plant disease is any fungus, bacteria, virus, parasitic plant, blight
(such as lethal yellowing in palm trees), or other organism injurious to
plants, including any state of development of such organism which is
communicable and injurious to plants, other than the host plant.



   Plants are trees, shrubs, vines, forage, and the cuttings, grafts,
scions, buds, and other parts of plants, including the fruit, vegetables,
roots, bulbs, seeds and other produces of plants.



   Property owner is any person who:



      (1)   Owns the fee simple title to realty in the city; or



      (2)   Leases from the owner realty located in the city, the
lease period being for a duration of two (2) years or longer.



   If the real property involved is being managed in an estate, or by a
guardian or other personal representative of the owner or lessee, then
property owner shall include such administrator, executor, personal
representative, or guardian, for the purposes of complying with the
provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. 79-14, § 1, 5-16-79)



Sec. 15-61.  Presence of diseased plants declared nuisance.



   The presence of a diseased plant anywhere in the city, on public or
private property, is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as
such in accordance with the provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. 79-14, § 2, 5-16-79)



Sec. 15-62.  Procedure.



   (a)   Notice to abate. Whenever it comes to the attention of the
department that any public nuisance as above defined exists in the city, a
notice in writing shall be served upon the property owner of the property
where the nuisance exists, notifying such person of the existence of the
nuisance and requesting its abatement within the time specified in this
article. The property owner shall be given thirty (30) days to abate the
nuisance.



   (b)   Responsibility for abatement. Upon receipt of the aforesaid
written notice, the property owner shall be responsible for the abatement of
the public nuisance. In the event of abatement by the city, the property
owner shall be liable for all expenses incurred in such removal.



   (c)   Notice procedure. It shall constitute legal and sufficient
notice when a copy of the notice is posted in a conspicuous place on the
plant constituting the nuisance, or at some other place on the property which
is conspicuous to one using the property. Members of the department, or their
authorized representatives or agents, are hereby authorized to enter private
property at reasonable times, having announced their reason for entry to
persons thereon, for the purpose of inspecting plants for plant disease, and
for the posting of the notices aforesaid.



   (d)   Content of notice. The written notice shall specify the time
within which the nuisance must be abated either by treatment or removal, not
to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of the notice. Such notice shall be
dated and shall describe the particular plant believed to carry a plant
disease, the date of its examination, and the common name of the plant
disease. The notice shall further indicate that the property owner has the
right to a hearing before the city council to protest the designation of such
plant as a public nuisance, and give proof of such contention.



   (e)   Request for hearing. The property owner may file with the city
clerk a written request for a hearing before the city council within the
period of compliance described in the written notice. The hearing shall be
held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request, and the time for
compliance shall be stayed from the date of request until such hearing. The
property owner shall have full opportunity at such hearing to present
evidence that the plant designated as a public nuisance is not, in fact, a
public nuisance. The city council shall either affirm or deny the designation
of the plant as a public nuisance, and make such other direction as it deems
appropriate.



   (f)   Abatement of nuisance. In the event the city council has
required abatement pursuant to a hearing, the property owner shall cause the
nuisance to be abated to the satisfaction of the department within ten (10)
days after the hearing. In the event the plant is not timely treated or
removed by the property owner, the department shall have the authority to
enter the private property and cause the plant to be treated or removed
therefrom.



(Ord. No. 79-14, § 3, 5-16-79)



Sec. 15-63.  Refusing to permit entry.



   It shall be unlawful and punishable pursuant to section 1-6 of this
Code of Ordinances, for any person to knowingly refuse to allow a member of
the department, or its representative or agent, who has announced his reason
for entry, to enter upon private property at a reasonable time for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. 79-14, § 4, 5-16-79)



Sec. 15-64.  Abatement by city; assessment and lien.



   (a)   In the event the city abates a nuisance as herein described on
private property, the city shall assess the actual costs of such abatement,
including administrative costs, if any, against the property on which the
nuisance was located. Such assessment shall be filed in the office of the tax
collector, and thereupon entered as an assessment lien against such real
property.



   (b)   Such assessment shall be a lien against the land and premises
against which the same is made, from the date of the assessment of the costs
thereof by the city council; and such lien is hereby declared to be prior and
prior in dignity, to all other liens against such property, save and except a
lien for taxes. Such lien shall become due and payable on or before six (6)
months from its assessment, and shall bear interest at the rate of eight
percent (8%) per annum until paid.



   (c)   The authority is hereby reserved unto the city council to
determine the reasonableness of all complaints arising out of this assessment
procedure.



(Ord. No. 79-14, § 5, 5-16-79)



Sec. 15-65.  Council may waive provisions of article.



   The city council is hereby authorized to waive the requirements and
provisions of this article when it shall appear that unusual circumstances
exist or undue hardship would occur to the property owner by its strict
enforcement.



(Ord. No. 79-14, § 5, 5-16-79)



ARTICLE V. AIRCRAFT LANDING REGULATIONS*



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 85-13, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 1985, provided
for the addition to the Code of provisions designated by the city as Art. V
§§ 15-70, 15-71, to read as herein set out.



Sec. 15-70.  Aircraft and helicopter landings at authorized locations only.



   (a)   No person owning, piloting or operating any aircraft or
helicopter shall land the same or permit the same to be landed in the City of
Boynton Beach, except at an approved airport or helistop location. This
provision shall not apply in the event of an emergency involving the safety
of any helicopter or aircraft or its passengers, nor in those instances where
the aircraft or helicopter is involved in the performance of rescue, search,
law enforcement, medical evacuation, or civil defense duties.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee of real property
located within the City of Boynton Beach to permit any aircraft to land on or
take off from such property unless authorized as set forth herein, except
under emergency conditions where human life or property is in clear and
imminent danger.



(Ord. No. 85-13, § 1, 2-19-85)



Sec. 15-71.  Spot landing approvals; regulations.



   The city manager, or his designee, shall have the authority to grant
temporary approval for spot landings of airplanes, helicopters, or other
aircraft at specific locations, provided the following criteria are fully
complied with:



      (1)   The applicant desiring such approval shall submit a
writ- ten application to the city which shall describe fully the time and
place of the proposed landing, the purpose, the type of aircraft to be used,
the pilot, the applicable insurance coverage, and all crowd control measures
to be employed to safeguard the safety of life and property at the site. The
applicant shall agree to reimburse the city for all reasonable costs incurred
on the applicant's behalf, including the cost of any police officers which
may be required for crowd control.



      (2)   The applicant shall agree in writing to indemnify the
city against all risk of loss from any cause for injury or death to any
person or for property damage arising out of the landing approval requested,
and shall provide liability insurance coverage for bodily injury, including
death, and property damage, naming the city as an additional insured in
limits as prescribed by the city manager, or his designee.



      (3)   The applicant shall establish to the satisfaction of the
city manager, or his designee, by clear and convincing proof, that no risk to
the safety of pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic or to the residents of the
area in question may be reasonable considered to be involved.



      (4)   The landing of the aircraft and the subsequent take-off
after completion of the activities shall be supervised by a police officer of
the City of Boynton Beach, who shall remain in attendance on the ground
location during the entirety of the proposed operation. The applicant shall
reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of any such police supervision.



(Ord. No. 85-13, § 1, 2-19-85)



Secs. 15-72—15-79. Reserved.



ARTICLE VI. NEWSRACK REGULATIONS*



   *Editor's note-Inasmuch as Ord. No. 88-28, §§ 1-9, adopted June 7,
1988, did not specify manner of inclusion in the Code, such provisions have
been designated by the editor as Art. VI, §§ 15-80—15-88.



Sec. 15-80.  Short title.



   This article shall be known and cited as the “newsrack ordinance.”



(Ord. No. 88-29, § 1, 6-7-88)



Sec. 15-81.  Rules of construction.



   For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article,
unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction
shall apply to the text of this article.



      (1)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary
table, or illustrative table, the text shall control.



      (2)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not
discretionary; the word “may” is permissive.



      (3)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future
and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



      (4)   The phrase “used for” includes “arrange for”,
“designed for”, “maintained for” or “occupied for”.



      (5)   The word “person” includes an individual,
corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar
legal entity.



      (6)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where
a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or
events connected by the conjunction “and”, “or”, or “either . . .
or”, the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:



         a.   “And” indicates that all the connected terms,
conditions, provisions, or events shall apply.



         b.   “Or” indicates that the connected items,
conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination.



         c.   “Either . . . or” indicates that the connected
items, conditions, provisions or events shall [apply] singly, but not in
combination.



      (7)   The word “includes” shall limit a term to the
specified example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances or circumstances of like kind or character.



(Ord. No. 88-29, § 2, 6-7-88)



Sec. 15-82.  Definitions.



   [As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meaning ascribed thereto:]



   Advertising circular: Any publication that contains only advertising
and no news reports.



   Bike path: That portion of a right-of-way improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for bicycle traffic.



   Distributor: The person responsible for placing and maintaining the
newsrack, the owner of the newsrack, or the publisher of the newspaper, news
periodical or advertising circular vended therein.



   Newsrack: Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage
unit or other dispenser located, placed, installed, used, or maintained for
the display, sale or distribution of newspapers or other news periodicals or
advertising circulars.



   Right-of-way: That area dedicated to public use or otherwise owned by a
public agency for public street purposes and shall include, but not be
limited to, roadways, swales, bike paths and sidewalks.



   Roadway: That portion of the right-of-way improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.



   Sidewalk: Any surface within a right-of-way provided for the primary
use of pedestrians.



   Swale: Any area within a right-of-way which is not either a bike path,
sidewalk, or roadway. The term shall also include any area within a roadway
which is not open to vehicular traffic.



(Ord. No. 88-29, § 3, 6-7-88)



Sec. 15-83.  Authority and legislative intent.



   This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to
municipalities under Article VIII, Section 2, Florida Constitution, and
Chapter 166, Florida Statutes. This article is intended solely to further the
public's health, safety and general welfare by insuring that newsracks are
located so as to protect both pedestrians and the operators of motor vehicles
and bicycles and is in no way intended to regulate or obstruct the free flow
of information by the “press” or other print media.



(Ord. No. 88-29, § 4, 6-7-88)



Sec. 15-84.  Standards for maintenance, installation, location and placement.



   Any newsrack located in whole or in part within the city limits of the
City of Boynton Beach shall comply with the following standards:



      (1)   No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or
publicity purposes other than to state the name of the newspaper or news
periodical sold therein.



      (2)   Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, neat and
attractive condition and in good repair at all times.



      (3)   Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily
visible place, the name, address and telephone number of the distributor of
the newsrack.



      (4)   No newsrack shall be used or maintained if it projects
onto, into or over, any part or any roadway or bicycle path or rests wholly
or in part upon or over any portion of any roadway or bicycle path.



      (5)   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack
which in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way or
other public property which such installation, use or maintenance endangers
the safety of persons  or property or when such site or location is used for
public utility purposes, public transportation purposes, or other government
use, or when such newsrack interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of
business, or any legally parked or stopped vehicle or the use of poles,
posts, traffic signs, or signals, hydrants, mail boxes or other objects
permitted at or near said location when such newsrack interferes with the
maintenance of any sidewalk or swale by the use of mechanical machinery or
when such newsracks interfere with the ordinary use of public property.



      (6)   No newsrack shall be permitted in any city maintained
swale when placement of said newspaper rack interferes with the maintenance
or integrity of the swale.



      (7)   No newsrack shall exceed fifty-four (54) inches in
height, twenty-seven (27) inches in width or eighteen (18) inches in depth.



      (8)   Newsracks placed adjacent to a wall of a building shall
be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six (6) inches from the
wall.



      (9)   No newsrack may be chained, bolted or otherwise attached
to any fixture located in the right-of-way when such chaining, bolting or
other attachment substantially increases dangers to the safety of persons or
property.



      (10)   No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise
attached to any property or to any permanently fixed object not owned by the
owner of the newsrack unless the consent of the owner of such property or
object is obtained, in writing.



      (11)   Newsracks may be placed, chained or otherwise attached
to one another, however, no more than three (3) newsracks may be joined or
placed together in this manner and a space of no less than eighteen (18)
inches shall separate each group of three (3) racks so attached.



      (12)   No newsrack or group of attached newsracks allowed
under subsection (11) of this section shall weigh in the aggregate in excess
of one hundred twenty-five (125) pounds when empty.



      (13)   No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or
maintained:



         a.   Within three (3) feet of any marked crosswalk.



         b.   Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any
unmarked crosswalk.



         c.   Within three (3) feet of any fire hydrant, fire
call-box or other emergency facility.



         d.   Within three (3) feet of any driveway.



         e.   Within fifteen (15) feet of any sign marking a
designated bus stop.



         f.   At any location whereby the clear space for the
passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6) feet.



      (14)   No more than one (1) newsrack containing the same issue
or edition or the same publication shall be located within the same block, or
one thousand (1,000) feet, whichever is the lesser distance, on the same side
of the street. Provided, however, a distributor may locate newsracks in
excess of this limitation by demonstrating a public need for the excess
newsracks. A public need may be established by the following method, but such
method is not exclusive. After notice to the city, the distributor may
monitor the sales activity of the newspaper at a particular location for a
period of one (1) month. If, during that one-month test period, the
distributor can demonstrate that the average circulation from that newsrack
equals or exceeds seventy- five (75) percent of the capacity of the newsrack,
then a public need is established and an additional newsrack may be placed at
the location. Provided, further, this limitation shall not apply in any area
that is predominately developed for business or commercial purposes.



      (15)   The placement of all newsracks in this city shall
comply with all local and state handicap accessibility regulations.



(Ord. No. 88-29, § 5, 6-7-88)



Sec. 15-85.  Liability and hold harmless.



   The owner of each newspaper rack shall execute a document approved as
to form by the city attorney agreeing to hold the city, its officers,
employees and agents free and harmless from any claim, demand or judgment in
favor of any person arising out of the location of any newsrack located upon,
in or over a public right-of-way or other public property and deposit with
the city manager a certificate of insurance evidencing that a liability
insurance policy in minimum amounts set by the city commission has been
issued, naming the city as an additional insured and containing a provision
that the policy cannot be canceled, except upon five (5) days' written notice
to the city of the fact of such cancellation. If such insurance is canceled
at any time during the time the newsrack is installed or maintained on public
property, said newsrack shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of
this article.



(Ord. No. 88-29, § 6, 6-7-88)



Sec. 15-86.  Newsracks located on private property.



   Any newsrack located totally on private property shall also be subject
to and comply with the provisions of this article contained in section
15-84(1), (2), and (3). The distributor shall receive written permission of
property owner for placement of newsracks on private property.



(Ord. No. 88-29, § 7, 6-7-88)



Sec. 15-87.  Abandonment.



   In the event a newsrack remains empty for a period of thirty (30)
continuous days, it shall be deemed abandoned and may be treated in the
manner as provided in section 15-88 for newsrack in violation of the
provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. 88-29, § 8, 6-7-88)



Sec. 15-88.  Enforcement of newsrack provisions.



   (a)   Upon the determination of the city manager or his designee
that a newsrack has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this article, notice of violation pursuant to Chapter 2,
Article V of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Boynton Beach shall be
issued to the distributor of the newsrack. In addition, a copy of the notice
shall be posted on the offending newsrack.



   (b)   Failure to properly correct the offending condition within the
time specified by order of the code compliance board after proper notice and
hearing shall entitle the city to remove the offending newsrack. If the
offending newsrack is not properly identified as to the distributor under
provisions of section 15-84(3) hereof and the distributor is not otherwise
known, a notice of violation may be posted thereon, and if the offending
condition is not corrected within thirty (30) days, it shall be removed by
the city. Any newsrack removed herein shall be stored by the city at the
distributor's expense for a period of ninety (90) days. The newsrack shall be
released to the distributor upon a proper showing of ownership and payment of
all storage charges. In the event the newsrack is not claimed within the
ninety-day period, the newsrack is not claimed within the ninety-day period,
the newsrack may be sold at public auction and the proceeds applied first to
storage charges and then paid to the city. At least ten (10) days prior to
the auction the city clerk shall publish a description of the newsrack, the
location from which it was removed, and a notice of the auction in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city and shall provide the
distributor, if it has been properly identified on the newspaper rack,
pursuant to section 15-84(3) or if otherwise known, with written notice of
the auction by certified mail, return receipt requested.



   (c)   In the event a newsrack distributor has been ordered by the
code compliance board to correct a violation of this article, the removal of
the newsrack shall be stayed pending final disposition of an appeal, if any,
to the circuit court as provided for in the code compliance board ordinance
(section 2-72 et seq.) and Chapter 162, Florida State Statutes.



   (d)   In the event of an emergency, such as a severe storm, in which
the newsrack may become a dangerous instrumentality by virtue of the natural
forces of catastrophe, all newsracks which are not securely bolted down must
be removed by the owners thereof upon notification by the city that such an
emergency is expected in the City of Boynton Beach area. If the newsrack is
not removed by the owner thereof, the city may remove said newsrack pursuant
to this section.



(Ord. No. 88-29, § 9, 6-7-88; Ord. No. 89-24, § 1, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 97-51,
§ 2, 11-18-97)



Secs. 15-89—15-95. Reserved.



ARTICLE VII. CONVENIENCE STORE SECURITY*



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 90-55, §§ 1—5, adopted Nov. 20, 1990,
enacted provisions pertaining to convenience store security. Inasmuch as such
provisions did not specify manner of codification, they have been designated
by the editor as Art. VII, §§ 15-96—15-100.



Sec. 15-96.  Short title.



   This article shall be known as and may be cited as “The Convenience
Store Security Ordinance of the City of Boynton Beach, Florida.”



(Ord. No. 90-55, § 1, 11-20-90)



Sec. 15-97.  Definition of convenience store.



   As used in this article, the term “convenience store” means any
place of business that is engaged in the retail sale of groceries, including
the sale of prepared foods, and gasoline and services, that is regularly open
for business at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., and
that is attended during such hours by one (1) employee. The term
“convenience store” does not include a store which is solely or primarily
a restaurant. The term also does not include any store in which the owner and
members of his or her family work in the store between the hours of 10:00
p.m., and 5:00 a.m.



(Ord. No. 90-55, § 2, 11-20-90)



Sec. 15-98.  Requirements.



   Each convenience store located within the municipal boundaries of the
city shall:



      (1)   Be equipped with the following security devices:



         a.   A silent alarm that notifies a private security
agency that a robbery is taking place;



         b.   A security camera system capable of returning an
image to assist in the identification and apprehension of a robber; and



         c.   A drop safe or cash management device that provides
minimum access to the facility's cash receipts;



      (2)   [Provide] lighted parking lots illuminated at an
intensity of two (2) footcandles per square foot with a uniformity ratio of
no more than five to one (5:1) at eighteen (18) inches above the surface;



      (3)   Post a conspicuous sign in the convenience store
entrance which states that the cash register contains fifty dollars ($50.00)
or less;



      (4)   Maintain window signage so that there is a clear and
unobstructed view of the cash register and transaction area;



      (5)   Prohibit window tinting on the windows of the
establishment if such tinting reduces exterior or interior viewing during the
hours of operation to which this article is applicable;



      (6)   Install height markers at the entrance of the
establishment which display height measures from the floor;



      (7)   Establish a cash management policy to limit the amount
of available cash on hand between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; and



      (8)   Install safety enclosures constructed of bullet-proof
glass or, in the alternative, provide two (2) employees to be on duty at the
same time.



(Ord. No. 90-55, § 3, 11-20-90)



Sec. 15-99.  Training of employees.



   No later than June 30, 1991, the owner or principal operator of a
convenience store shall provide proper robbery deterrence and safety training
to at least its employees who work between the hours of 9:00 p.m., and 6:00
a.m. The convenience store owner or operator may utilize a training program
of his or her choice; however, said program must be submitted in writing to
the attorney general for approval.



(Ord. No. 90-55, § 4, 11-20-90)



Sec. 15-100.  Noncompliance.



   (a)   Should any convenience store fail to comply with any of the
provisions of this article, a fee shall be assessed at the maximum rate
allowed by law, not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation
as provided in subsection (b).



   (b)   If noncompliance with this article is corrected within ten
(10) days alter receipt of written notice of noncompliance, no fee will be
assessed. However, any owner or principal operator of a convenience store who
wilfully and deliberately violates the requirements of this article shall be
required to pay to the city, upon a complaint filed by the city with the city
code enforcement board, a civil fine of up to five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).



(Ord. No. 90-55, § 5, 11-20-90)



Secs. 15-101—15-110. Reserved.



ARTICLE VIII. CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY CODE*



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 92-48, §§ 1—7, adopted Oct. 8, 1992,
enacted provisions pertaining to nuisance abatement. Inasmuch as such
ordinance did not specify manner of codification, inclusion herein as Art.
VIII, §§ 15-111—15-117, has been at the discretion of the editor. Ord.
92-48, as amended by Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, adopted February 2, 1996, Ord. No.
04- 009, § 3, adopted March 16, 2004, and Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, adopted
January 2, 2007, was subsequently repealed and replaced by Ord. 17- 012, §§
1—7, adopted June 6, 2017, and renamed Chronic Nuisance Property Code.



   Cross references-Qualifications for appointment to boards, etc.,
generally, § 2-16; community relations board, § 2-101; children and youth
advisory board, § 2-116; education advisory board, § 2-126 et seq.



Sec. 15-111.  Statement of legislative intent.



   Chronic nuisance properties present health, safety and quality of life
concerns and exist when the persons responsible for such properties fail to
take corrective action to abate nuisance activities or a nuisance condition.
Chronic nuisance properties have a significant adverse effect on the quality
of life, safety and health of the neighborhoods where they are located.
Chronic nuisance properties are a financial and operational burden to the
City by generating repeated calls for service to the properties. Chronic
nuisance properties adversely affect the value of adjacent properties. The
Boynton Beach Chronic Nuisance Property Code is enacted to address and reduce
nuisance activities and/or nuisance conditions that disrupt quality of life
and repeatedly occur or exist at properties. The nuisance abatement process
hereinafter set forth may be used by the City in conjunction with any and all
legal actions available to the City. It is the City's intent:



   (1)   To identify chronic nuisance activities and chronic nuisance
conditions.



   (2)   To hold accountable those persons responsible for such
nuisance activities and/or conditions on the property.



   (3)   To assist victims of crime and penalize those who commit
crimes or those who permit conditions to exist that give rise to crime or
excessive calls for service to the police and fire departments.



   (4)   To establish rules, procedures, and penalties to address
property owners that have chronic nuisance issues and fail to take corrective
measures.



   (5)   To work in partnership with the owners to address the negative
results caused by chronic nuisance activities and/or conditions, and to
improve the vitality of neighborhoods by addressing excessive calls for
service to the police and fire departments.



   (6)   To encourage owners and operators to cooperate by classifying
calls for service made by the owners or operators which demonstrate their
commitment to abate nuisance activities and/or conditions on their property
such that the self-reported activities will not be included as nuisance
activity responses.



   (7)   To establish the cost of City response and enforcement
services to the property owners identified as owning chronic nuisance
properties.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-112.  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall
control:



   (a)   Chronic nuisance property. A property on which one or more
continuing nuisance activities occurs or re-occurs.



   (b)   Chronic nuisance services. Remedial action(s) taken by the
City to eliminate or mitigate a nuisance condition that threatens public
health, safety, or welfare.



   (c)   Corrective Action Plan. A plan prepared by the City,
incorporated in the Nuisance Abatement Agreement, and agreed to by the owner
to address and eliminate nuisance activity on the owner’s property by the
implementation of proactive steps by the property owner.



   (d)   Nuisance activity. Nuisance activity or nuisance means any
activities relating to the following violations, whenever engaged in by the
property owner, operator, agent, tenant, or invitee of the property owner,
operator, agent or tenant:



      (1)   Chapter 3 - alcoholic beverages.



      (2)   Chapter 15, article I - noise control regulations.



      (3)   Chapter 15, article VIII - criminal street gang
injunction.



      (4)   Chapter 15, article X - sexual offender residency
prohibition.



      (5)   F.S. § 767.12 - dangerous dogs.



      (6)   F.S. § 790.15(1) - discharging firearm in public.



      (7)   F.S. § 796.06 - renting space to be used for
prostitution.



      (8)   F.S. § 796.07 - prostitution.



      (9)   F.S. § 800.03 - exposure of sexual organs.



      (10)   F.S. § 806.13 - criminal mischief.



      (11)   F.S. § 810.08 - trespass in structure or conveyance.



      (12)   F.S. § 810.09 - trespass on property other than
structure or conveyance.



      (13)   F.S. § 812.014 - theft.



      (14)   F.S. § 812.019 - dealing in stolen property.



      (15)   F.S. § 812.173 - convenience business security.



      (16)   F.S. § 823.01 - nuisances.



      (17)   F.S. § 828.12 - cruelty to animals.



      (18)   F.S. § 856.011 - disorderly intoxication.



      (19)   F.S. § 856.015 - open house parties.



      (20)   F.S. § 856.021 - loitering or prowling.



      (21)   F.S. § 856.022 - loitering or prowling in close
proximity to children.



      (22)   F.S. Ch. 874 - criminal gang enforcement and prevention.



      (23)   F.S. § 877.03 - breach of the peace; disorderly
conduct.



      (24)   F.S. Ch. 893 - any offense under the Florida
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention & Control Act, including but not limited
to public nuisances as defined by F.S. § 893.138.



      (25)   Any other offense under state or federal law that is
punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year.



      (26)   Two (2) or more calls for service within a period of
thirty (30) calendar days to the same property for police, fire, medic,
emergency personnel, or other City personnel to assist an individual who
displays the symptoms of an overdosed of a controlled substance.



   (e)   Nuisance Abatement Agreement. An agreement entered into
between the City and property owner that contains a "Corrective Action Plan"
to be implemented by the property owner to address and abate the nuisance
activity.



   (f)   Nuisance Condition. Any temporary or permanent condition on
the property which arises from nuisance activity.



   (g)   Operator. Any agent; employee; property manager; tenant;
sub-tenant; contractor; sub-contractor; licensee; invitee; or other
individual or entity that is authorized by the property owner to supervise,
manage, or otherwise control any activities which may occur on the property.



   (h)   Pattern of nuisance activity. Real property shall be deemed to
exhibit a pattern of nuisance activity when:



      (1)   The City has responded to three (3) or more nuisance
activities at the property within thirty (30) days; or



      (2)   The City has responded to seven (7) or more nuisance
activities at the property within six (6) months; or



      (3)   An alcoholic beverage establishment that employs private
security is located on the property and the police department has responded
to five or more nuisance activities at the property within thirty (30) days
or twenty (20) or more nuisance activities at the property within six (6)
months; or



      (4)   There is a failure to correct code violations by the
time ordered by the special magistrate in any order entered pursuant to
section 26-77 of this Code.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17; Ord. No. 18-009, § 2, 6-19-18)



Sec. 15-113.  Construction and application.



   Pattern of nuisance activity will not be construed to include:



   (1)   A nuisance activity where the property owner, operator, agent,
tenant, or invitee of the property owner agent or tenant is the victim of a
crime; or



   (2)   A complaint or call for service to which the City responded
and determined that no violation was committed.



   (3)   A domestic violence call.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17; Ord. No. 18-009, § 2, 6-19-18)



Sec. 15-114.  Separate occurrences.



   For purposes of this article, each time (instance) that the City
responds to a nuisance activity at the property shall be a separate
occurrence.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17; Ord. No. 18-009, § 2, 6-19-18)



Sec. 15-115.  Declaration of chronic nuisance; Corrective Action Plan.



   (a)   If a pattern of nuisance activity exists upon real property,
the City may declare the property to be a chronic nuisance property. The
City's Declaration of Chronic Nuisance shall be sent to the property owner by
hand delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address
listed on the ad valorem tax roll. The City's Declaration of Chronic Nuisance
constitutes a Notice of Violation which, if unaddressed in an executed
Nuisance Abatement Agreement, may be prosecuted by the City before the City's
Special Magistrate.



   (b)   Mailing to the property owner at the address listed on the ad
valorem roll shall be prima facie proof of delivery. Notice shall also be
posted at the property where the nuisance activities occurred. Removal of the
posted Notice without written approval from the City is prohibited. The
Declaration of Chronic Nuisance shall be sent with at least the following
information:



      (1)   A reference to chapter 15, article XIII (the "City of
Boynton Beach Chronic Nuisance Property Code");



      (2)   The address and parcel control number of the property;



      (3)   The dates that the nuisance activities occurred at the
property;



      (4)   A description of the nuisance activities;



      (5)   A proposed Nuisance Abatement Agreement which outlines
the corrective action to be taken by the property owner to remedy the
nuisance activity;



      (6)   A statement that the property owner's failure to enter
into the Nuisance Abatement Agreement within fifteen (15) days of the
Declaration of Chronic Nuisance will result in a violation of this article
and further prosecution and



      (7)   A statement that the costs of any chronic nuisance
services provided by the City to a property that has been declared to be a
Chronic Nuisance may be levied against the property as a non-ad valorem
assessment superior to all other private rights, interests, liens,
encumbrances, titles and claims upon the property and equal in rank and
dignity with a lien for ad valorem taxes; and



      (8)   A statement that unpaid assessments may be certified to
the tax collector for collection pursuant to the uniform method provided in
F.S. § 197.3632.



      (9)   A warning that the posted notice cannot be removed
except with written permission from the City.



   (c)   A Nuisance Abatement Agreement shall set forth a Corrective
Action Plan with specific measures that the property owner must take to
curtail or eliminate the reoccurrence of nuisance activities at the property.
The Nuisance Abatement Agreement shall contain a timetable for corrective
action. The Corrective Action Plan may include abatement measures which must
be taken by the property owner such as:



      (1)   Commencement of an eviction action by the property owner
pursuant to F.S. Chapter 83 to remove from the property those individuals
engaged in the nuisance activity;



      (2)   Implementation of "crime prevention through
environmental design" (CPTED) measures;



      (3)   Frequency of site visits and inspections by the owner or
owner's agents at various times of both day and night;



      (4)   Hiring of property management;



      (5)   Hiring of private security;



      (6)   Installation of security cameras;



      (7)   Use of a written lease agreement which delineates
prohibited tenant or tenant invitee conduct;



      (8)   Criminal background checks for prospective tenants and
lease renewals;



      (9)   The operator must post "no trespassing" signs at the
property and execute a "no trespass affidavit" authorizing the police
department to act as an agent of the property owner to enforce trespass
statutes on the property;



      (10)   The operator must make regular requests to the police
and fire departments for offense and incident reports relating to the
property. Reports are available through the records division;



      (11)   Written documentation of any and all efforts to curtail
or eliminate the reoccurrence of nuisance activities on the property;



      (12)   Other action that the City determines is reasonably
sufficient to curtail or eliminate the re-occurrence of nuisance activities
on the property.



   (d)   The City may agree to modify the proposed or finalized
Nuisance Abatement Agreement when the property owner demonstrates that
modification will improve nuisance abatement action.



   (e)   When a Nuisance Abatement Agreement is entered into, a
memorandum of agreement specifying the property address shall be recorded by
the City in the official records of Palm Beach County Florida.



   (f)   The City will periodically monitor the property to assure
compliance for a period of one (1) year following execution of the Agreement.
If the property owner complies with the Agreement, as determined by the City,
the Declaration of Chronic Nuisance will be rescinded, the City will issue
and record a Notice of Compliance related to the Memorandum of Agreement that
was previously recorded, and no further action by the property owner shall be
required. The City may require the property owner to enter into a new
Agreement if a nuisance activity re-occurs.



   (g)   If the City determines during the monitoring period that the
Corrective Action Plan is not adequate to curtail or eliminate the
re-occurrence of nuisance activities on the property, the City may require
the property owner to revise the Corrective Action Plan. The determination as
to whether or not the Corrective Action Plan is adequate is in the sole and
exclusive discretion of the City, based on the totality of the circumstances
for the specific property.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17; Ord. No. 18-009, § 2, 6-19-18)



Sec. 15-116.  Refusal to sign or violation of agreement.



   (a)   When a property owner refuses to timely enter into a Nuisance
Abatement Agreement or subsequently violates the terms of an Agreement, the
City may prosecute its Declaration of Chronic Nuisance at a hearing before
the City's Special Magistrate.



   (b)   A request for hearing shall be filed by the Director of
Community Standards or designee with the City within fifteen (15) days from
the deadline for entry into a Nuisance Abatement Agreement or the violation
of a provision of the Agreement or Corrective Action Plan.



   (c)   The City shall schedule a hearing before the City's Special
Magistrate. The hearing shall be limited to the review of the record or
evidence upon which the City based the Declaration of Chronic Nuisance or the
failure by the property owner implement the Agreement/Corrective Action Plan
and any rebuttal offered by the property owner. All testimony shall be under
oath and the City and property owner shall be afforded the opportunity to
call or cross-exam any witness.



   (d)   After hearing the testimony and evidence, the Special
Magistrate shall either uphold or reject (i) the City's Declaration of
Chronic Nuisance, or (ii) the notice of violation regarding the Corrective
Action Plan, as appropriate.



   (e)   The decision of the Special Magistrate shall be in writing and
shall be deemed final.



   (f)   If the special magistrate upholds the notice of violation, the
special magistrate shall enter a Chronic Nuisance Order which shall:



      (1)   Contain findings of fact establishing a pattern of
nuisance activity and a violation of this article;



      (2)   Authorize the City to provide chronic nuisance services
to the property;



      (3)   Authorize the City to bill the costs of any chronic
nuisance services to the owner of the chronic nuisance property;



      (4)   Provide for the mailing of a copy of the chronic
nuisance service order by first class mail to any mortgagee of record.
Failure to provide a copy of the chronic nuisance service order to a
mortgagee of record shall not operate to release or discharge any obligation
under this article or otherwise affect the validity of a chronic nuisance
service order;



      (5)   Provide for the recording of a certified copy of the
Magistrate's chronic nuisance service order in the public records; and



      (6)   Provide for continuing jurisdiction over the chronic
nuisance property.



   (g)   If the Special Magistrate rejects the City's Declaration of
Chronic Nuisance of chronic nuisance notice of violation, the Special
Magistrate shall identify the factual, procedural or legal error upon which
the decision is based.



   (h)   An Order rejecting the City's Declaration of Chronic Nuisance
shall not bar the City from recommencing the chronic nuisance process.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17; Ord. No. 18-009, § 2, 6-19-18)



Sec. 15-117.  Appeal of Orders of Special Magistrate.



   The property owner or the City may appeal a final order of Special
Magistrate to the circuit court of Palm Beach County. Such an appeal shall
not be a hearing de novo, but shall be limited to appellate review of the
record created before the Special Magistrate. An appeal shall be filed within
thirty (30) days of the execution of the order to be appealed.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.1.   Finality and duration of a chronic nuisance order.



   (a)   Finality of Special Magistrates order. An order is final 30
days following entry. Entry means the order is signed by the Special
Magistrate and filed with the City Clerk.



   (b)   Duration of Chronic Nuisance Order. The chronic nuisance order
entered in accordance with this section shall be terminated by subsequent
Order of the Special Magistrate when either the City or the property owner
request reconsideration of the original Order and the Magistrate finds that
the nuisance activities have been abated at the property for a period of one
year. It is the responsibility of the property owner to contact the City to
document the abatement. If the City determines that the nuisance has been
abated, the one-year time period specified herein shall commence as of the
date of the City's abatement determination.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.2.   Abatement of chronic nuisances; provision of services;
apportionment.



   (a)   Abatement by City. The property owner is responsible for
abatement of nuisances on the property. In those circumstances when City
staff, in consultation with the City Attorney’s Office, determines that
conditions exist on the property that constitute health and safety issues and
the property owner has not taken remedial action, the City may act in the
interest of public health, safety, and welfare and take remedial action.
Example: the retention of stagnant water in pools, ponds, pots, or containers
that can serve as breeding sites for mosquitoes. The City may also take
abatement action when authorized to take action by a Special Magistrate or
Judge. The City's cost of taking remedial action shall be billed to the
property owner and such costs may be collected by the City by any legal means.



   (b)   Apportionment. City incurred costs in providing remedial
action shall be entirely apportioned to the assessed real property receiving
the remedial service.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.3.   Establishment of costs; billing of costs; notice of
delinquency.



   (a)   Chronic nuisance service or remediation costs are established
by City Commission Resolution.



   (b)   Billing of chronic nuisance service or remediation costs. The
City shall bill the owner(s) of the chronic nuisance property by first class
mail to the address listed on the ad valorem tax roll. When there are
multiple owners of a property, the City need only bill one of the owners. The
bill shall contain at least the following information:



      (1)   The address and parcel control number of the chronic
nuisance property;



      (2)   The date of each chronic nuisance service;



      (3)   A brief description of each chronic nuisance service;



      (4)   The amount of the bill for each chronic nuisance service;



      (5)   A statement that the total amount of the bill shall be
paid to the City within 30 days from the date of the bill and that any
chronic nuisance service or remediation cost which has not been paid within
30 days from the date of the bill shall be delinquent;



      (6)   A statement that any unpaid chronic nuisance service or
remediation costs will be levied against the property as a non-ad valorem
assessment superior to all other private rights, interests, liens,
encumbrances, titles and claims upon the property and equal in rank and
dignity with a lien for ad valorem taxes; and



      (7)   A statement that unpaid assessments may be certified to
the tax collector for collection pursuant to the uniform method provided in
F.S. § 197.3632.



   (c)   Notice of delinquency. The total amount of the bill shall be
paid to the City within 30 days from the date of the bill. Any chronic
nuisance service or remediation cost which has not been paid within 30 days
from the date of the bill shall be delinquent. If the property owner fails to
pay the total amount of the bill within 30 days from the date of the bill,
the City shall notify the property owner of the delinquency. The notice of
delinquency shall be by first class mail to the address listed on the ad
valorem tax roll and shall contain at least the following information:



      (1)   The address and parcel control number of the property;



      (2)   The amount of the delinquent billings, individual and
total;



      (3)   A statement that any unpaid chronic nuisance service
costs will be levied as a non-ad valorem assessment superior to all other
private rights, interests. liens, encumbrances, titles and claims upon the
property and equal in rank and dignity with a lien for ad valorem taxes; and



      (4)   A statement that unpaid assessments may be certified to
the tax collector for collection pursuant to the uniform method provided in
F.S. § 197.3632.



   (d)   Construction of chronic nuisance service cost. Chronic
nuisance service or costs shall not include any amount attributable to
general law enforcement activities or the general enforcement of municipal
codes upon a property that has not been declared by the City to be a chronic
nuisance and that has not received a chronic nuisance service order from the
Special Magistrate.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.4.   Method of notice; construction.



   (a)   Notice. Unless otherwise provided, notice required by this
article shall be by certified mail, return receipt required and by first
class mail to the address listed on the ad valorem tax roll. Notice shall be
posted at the property where the nuisance activities occurred.



   (b)   Construction of notice. A property owner shall be deemed to
have notice of a nuisance activity if that property owner:



      (1)   Has actual knowledge of the nuisance activity;



      (2)   Has received notice of the nuisance activity;



      (3)   Has reason to know about the nuisance activity;



      (4)   Knows about a fact related to the nuisance activity; or



      (5)   Is able to ascertain the existence of a nuisance by
checking an official filing or recording.



   (c)   The lack of knowledge of, acquiescence, or participation in,
or responsibility for a nuisance activity on the part of property owner shall
not be a defense to any enforcement of this article.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.5.   Change in title to chronic nuisance property.



   (a)   Purchase at judicial sale upon final judgment of foreclosure.
Every purchaser of a chronic nuisance property at judicial sale upon final
judgment of foreclosure shall provide the City with a Corrective Action Plan
and implement a Corrective Action Plan no later than forty-five (45) days
from the date of sale.



   (b)   Receivership. Every trustee of a chronic nuisance property
appointed after the entry of a chronic nuisance service order shall provide
the City with a Corrective Action Plan and implement the Corrective Action
Plan no later than forty-five (45) days from the date of appointment of
receiver in any state or federal action at law.



   (c)   Probate. Every personal representative of an owner of a
chronic nuisance property shall provide the City with a Corrective Action
Plan and implement a Corrective Action Plan no later than forty-five (45)
days from the date of appointment. If the owner of the chronic nuisance
property died intestate, beneficiaries of the estate shall be required to
provide the City with a Corrective Action Plan and implement a Corrective
Action Plan.



   (d)   Other changes in title to chronic nuisance property. An
arms-length purchaser of a chronic nuisance property that has purchased the
property after entry of a chronic nuisance service order for the property
shall have forty-five (45) days from the date of closing or recording of the
order, whichever occurs last, to provide the City with a proposal to release
or modify a Nuisance Abatement Agreement or Corrective Action Plan. Until
such time as the City agrees to release or modify an Agreement, the Agreement
shall be enforceable as provided herein.



   (e)   To facilitate the transfer of property that is the subject of
a chronic nuisance service order or agreement, the City Manager is authorized
without the necessity of City Commission action, to modify Nuisance Abatement
Agreements, waive the City's rights under a Special Magistrate order, or
compromise a fine or assessment owed to the City, provided the City Manager
has reasonable assurance the nuisance conditions on the property will be
remedied and will not re-occur under the new ownership.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17; Ord. No. 18-009, § 2, 6-19-18)



Sec. 15-117.6.   Construction of article.



   (a)   Levy of special assessments. This srticle shall not be
construed to limit the City from levying special assessments in accordance
with the amendments to the standard unsafe building abatement code, as
adopted by the City.



   (b)   Monthly re-inspection assessments. This article shall not be
construed to limit the City from imposing monthly re-inspection assessments
in accordance with chapter 9, Article II, of this Code.



   (c)   Imposition of administrative fines. This article shall not be
construed to limit the City from imposing administrative fines in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article V, of this Code.



   (d)   Exemptions. This article shall not be construed to apply to
property owned by the City or any other governmental entity.



   (e)   Provision of this article supplemental. Nothing in this
article shall be construed to limit the authority of the City to collect
special assessments by any other method according to law.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.7.   Unpaid chronic nuisance service costs; non-ad valorem
assessment.



   Any chronic nuisance service costs that remain delinquent and unpaid as
of June 1 of each year shall be a special assessment levied against the
benefitted real property as a non-ad valorem assessment superior to all other
private rights, interests, liens, encumbrances, titles and claims upon the
benefitted real property and equal in rank and dignity with a lien for ad
valorem taxes.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.8.   Initial assessment roll.



   (a)   Contents of initial assessment roll. The Assistant City
Manager-Administrative Services shall, annually, prepare or direct the
preparation of an initial assessment roll which shall contain the following:



      (1)   A summary description of all benefitted real property
with delinquent chronic nuisance service costs to be assessed, conforming to
the description contained on the ad valorem tax roll;



      (2)   The name of the owner of the benefitted real property as
listed on the ad valorem tax roll and maintained on the property appraiser's
system; and



      (3)   The amount of the chronic nuisance service costs to be
assessed against each parcel of benefitted real property.



   (b)   Public inspection of initial assessment roll. The initial
assessment roll shall be retained by the City clerk and shall be open to
public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the
assessment roll be in printed form if the amount of the chronic nuisance
service assessment for each parcel of benefitted real property can be
determined by use of a computer terminal available to the public;



   (c)   Notice to property appraiser. A copy of the initial assessment
roll shall be provided to the property appraiser and included as a part of
the notice of proposed property taxes under F.5. § 200.069, the
truth-in-millage notification.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.9.   Notice of public hearing.



   (a)   Public hearing. The City Commission shall adopt a non-ad
valorem assessment roll at a public hearing in accordance with F.S. §
197.3632.



   (b)   Notice by mail. The City shall notice the hearing related to
the initial assessment roll by first class mail. The notice by mail shall be
sent to each person owning property subject to the assessment and shall
include the following information:



      (1)   The purpose of the assessment;



      (2)   The total amount to be levied against each parcel of
assessed real property;



      (3)   A statement that failure to pay the assessment will
cause a tax certificate to be issued against the property which may result in
a loss of title;



      (4)   A statement that all affected property owners have a
right to appear at the hearing and to file written objections with the City
commission within 20 days of the notice; and



      (5)   The date, time, and place of the hearing.



   (c)   The mailed notice shall conform to the requirements set forth
in F.S. § 197.3632. Notice shall be mailed at least 20 calendar days prior
to the hearing to each property owner at the address listed on the ad valorem
tax roll. Failure of the property owner to receive such notice due to mistake
or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll nor
release or discharge any obligation for payment of a chronic nuisance service
assessment.



   (d)   Notice by publication. The City shall notice the hearing
related to the initial assessment roll by publication in a newspaper
generally circulated within the county, the published notice shall conform to
the requirements set forth in F.S. § 197.3632 and shall contain at least the
following information:



      (1)   Identifying the City;



      (2)   A geographic depiction of the City boundaries subject to
the assessment;



      (3)   A brief and general description of the chronic nuisance
services provided;



      (4)   The proposed schedule of the assessment;



      (5)   The fact that the assessment will be collected by the
tax collector;



      (6)   A statement that all affected property owners have the
right to appear at the public hearing and the right to file written
objections within 20 days of the publication of the notice; and



      (7)   A statement that the initial assessment roll is
available for inspection at the office of the City clerk and that all
interested persons may ascertain the amount to be assessed against a parcel
of assessed real property at the office of the City clerk.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.10.   Public hearing; adoption of final assessment roll.



   (a)   Public hearing. At the public hearing, the City Commission
shall receive the written objections and shall hear testimony from all
interested persons. The City Commission may adjourn the hearing from time to
time. If the City Commission adopts the non-ad valorem assessment roll, the
City Commission shall specify the amount of the assessment. Notwithstanding
the notices provided for in this article of the Code, the City Commission may
adjust the assessment or the application of the assessment to any assessed
real property based on the benefit which the City will provide or has
provided to the property.



   (b)   Adoption of final assessment roll. The City Commission may at
the public hearing or at any subsequent meeting of the City Commission, adopt
an assessment roll which shall confirm, modify, or repeal the initial
assessment roll with such amendments, if any as the City Commission deems
equitable.



   (c)   Legislative determination of special benefit and fair
apportionment. The adoption of the final assessment roll by the City
Commission shall constitute a legislative determination that all assessed
parcels of real property derive a special benefit from the chronic nuisance
services provided by the City and a legislative determination that the
assessments are fairly and reasonably apportioned to the properties.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.11.   Lien of chronic nuisance service assessments.



   Upon the adoption of the final assessment roll, all chronic nuisance
service assessments shall constitute a perfected lien against the assessed
real property superior to all other private rights, interests, liens,
encumbrances, titles and claims upon the property and equal in rank and
dignity with a lien for ad valorem taxes.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.12.   Correction of errors and omissions.



   (a)   Validity of assessment. Any informality or irregularity in the
proceedings in connection with the levy of a chronic nuisance service
assessment shall not affect the validity of the assessment after approval by
the City Commission. A chronic nuisance service assessment as finally
approved by the City Commission shall be competent evidence that the
assessment was duly levied, made and adopted, and that all other proceedings
were duly taken. No act of error or omission on the part of the property
appraiser, tax collector, Assistant City Manager- Administrative Services for
designee), or other employee of the City shall operate to release or
discharge any obligation for payment of a chronic nuisance service assessment
imposed by the City under this article.



   (b)   Correction of errors by director of financial services. Prior
to the delivery of the assessment roll to the tax collector in accordance
with F.S. § 197.3632, the Assistant City Manager- Administrative Services
(or designee) shall have the authority at any time to correct any error or
omission in applying the assessment to any particular parcel of assessed real
property not otherwise requiring the provision of notice pursuant to F.S. §
197.3632. Any such correction shall be considered valid ab initio and shall
not affect the enforcement of the chronic nuisance service assessment. Any
such correction shall be processed by the Assistant City Manager-
Administrative Services (or designee) and not the property appraiser or tax
collector.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.13.   Method of collection.



   Unless otherwise directed by the City Commission, chronic nuisance
service assessments shall be collected pursuant to the uniform method
provided in F.S. § 197.3632. Any required hearing or notice may be combined
with any other hearing or notice required by F.S. § 197.3632 or other
provision of law.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 15-117.14.   Alternative method of collection.



   (a)   In lieu of using F.S. § 197.3632. the City may elect to
collect a chronic nuisance service assessment by any other method authorized
by law or under the alternative collection method provided by this section.



   (b)   The City shall have the right to foreclose and collect all
delinquent chronic nuisance service assessments in the manner provided by law
for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property. All costs, fees and
expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses,
related to any foreclosure action shall be included in any judgment or decree
rendered.



(Ord. No. 17-012, § 2, 6-6-17)



ARTICLE IX.  COMMUNITY APPEARANCE AND MAINTENANCE



Sec. 15-118.  Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to define, and generally improve the
quality of life by prohibiting, abating, suppressing and preventing all
things detrimental to the health, comfort, safety, convenience, visual
aesthetics and welfare of the inhabitants of all zoning districts within the
municipal limits of the city.



(Ord. No. 96-25, § 1, 4-2-96)



Sec. 15-119.  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein when not
inconsistent with the text.  Words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number.



   Nuisance:  For the purposes of this article, the term “nuisance”
is defined to mean any condition or use of property or of the exterior of
buildings which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or
tends to cause substantial deterioration in the value of the subject property
or other property in the neighborhood or area in which such property or
building is located.



(Ord. No. 96-25, § 1, 4-2-96)



Sec. 15-120.  Minimum standards for appearance and maintenance of public
property and private property.



   (a)   Streets and sidewalks.  The owner(s) of all real property
within the city abutting a public or private street or sidewalk shall not
permit and it shall be unlawful to permit the growth of grass, weeds, or
other flora into or over such street or sidewalk, and such owners(s) shall
not allow a tree(s) or any part thereof to extend over a street or sidewalk
below a height of ten (10) feet or the roots of a tree to break or raise up
such street or sidewalk, or allow a tree or any part thereof to extend over a
road, street or right-of-way below a height of fourteen (14) feet.



   (b)   Swales, rights-of-way and alleys.



      (1)   The owner(s) of all real property within the city
abutting a public or private swale, right-of-way or alley shall not permit
and it shall be unlawful to permit the growth of a tree growing in the
adjacent swale, right-of-way or alley or any part thereof to extend over a
street or sidewalk below a height of ten (10) feet or the roots thereof to
break or raise up the contiguous street or sidewalk, or allow a tree or any
part thereof to extend over a road or right-of-way below a height of fourteen
(14) feet.



      The preceding paragraph shall also require property owners to
maintain swales and shoulders which lie between a property line and the
pavement edge of an adjacent public street, except where the swale or
shoulder is regularly maintained by the city, Palm Beach County, or other
government agency.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be
placed any object or thing known to modify the design, function or shape of
swales, rights-of-way or alleys, on, over, or across any swale, right-of-way
or alley, except the following:



         a.   Grass, sod, soil or dirt;



         b.   Floral ground cover, shrubbery or trees - provided
approval is granted from the city's Utility Department and Development
Department for shrubbery and trees located within swales, rights-of-way or
alleys;



         c.   Postal mail boxes meeting the criteria of the U.S.
Post Office.



         d.   Solid objects made of metal, concrete, plastic, or
similar materials protruding no more than three and one-half (3½) inches
above the ground, having a diameter no greater than eight (8) inches at their
widest points, having flat or rounded top surfaces, with each of such objects
being placed no less than five (5) feet apart.



   (c)   Waterways.



      (1)   The owner(s) of all real property within the city
abutting a waterway shall not permit and it shall be unlawful to permit the
accumulation thereon of grass or weeds which attain a height of twelve (12)
inches or more.



      (2)   The owner(s) of all real property within the city
abutting upon a waterway shall not permit and it shall be unlawful to permit
trees on their respective properties to grow over the waterways (unless ten
(10) feet above the water surface) or limbs, fronds, coconuts, or other
debris to fall therefrom into such waterways.  This shall not apply to
species protected by the state unless removal of such species has been
approved by the state.



      (3)   The owner(s) of the bottom of waterways within the city
shall not permit and it shall be unlawful to permit the growth of subsurface
aquatic weeds above the surface of the water or to an extent that they affect
public stormwater drainage in the waterway.



   (d)   Front, side and rear open and/or landscaped areas of private
property.



      (1)   Open and/or landscaped area maintenance:  This
includes, but is not limited to:



         a.   The keeping or deposition (depositing) on, or the
scattering over the premises of any junk, trash, debris, construction
materials not being actively used for construction, abandoned, discarded or
derelict objects or equipment, including but not limited to automobiles,
trucks, buses, motorcycles, bicycles, furniture, major and minor appliances,
trailers, cans or containers.



         b.   The failure to keep or maintain all lots, 
fences,  sheds, steps, driveways and other premises in any district clean,
sanitary and free from weeds or overgrowth or deterioration.



         c.   The keeping, maintaining, propagation, existence or
permitting of any thing, by any person or entity, by which the life or health
of any person or persons may be threatened or impaired, or by which or
through which, directly or indirectly, disease may be caused, or the
environment of any person or place rendered unclean or unsanitary by the act
of another or others.



         d.   The total areas void of landscaping or xeriscape
ground covers shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet of any pervious
area visible from a public or private right-of-way, excluding alleys abutting
rear yards.  When such “dead spots” occur, they will be sodded or seeded
to reestablish grass, landscaping or groundcover.



         e.   Open and/or landscaped areas of the city, on
developed properties, shall be covered by a lawn which shall be maintained at
a height not to exceed twelve (12) inches.



         f.   Irrigation systems shall be maintained in good
working order to provide complete coverage.



         g.   Pervious surfaces without irrigation systems shall
utilize drought-tolerant grass, shrubbery with mulch or wood chips, or other
drought-tolerant species so that they may be restored to a uniform green
appearance as soon as weather conditions permit.  Lawns which have died from
lack of water or other causes shall be reseeded or sodded.  This requirement
shall not apply to areas covered by pavement, areas that are covered by
shellrock, limerock, gravel, decorative stone or any other  dust-free
surface, or areas covered by landscaping, mulch or wood chips, which are
regularly renewed and kept free of weeds.



         h.   Trees, and shrubs shall be trimmed and pruned and
the property owner shall be responsible for maintaining said trees and shrubs
in accordance with subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section.



      (2)   Prohibition against nuisances:  The owner(s) of all
real property within the city shall not permit a nuisance as defined by this
article and it shall be unlawful to permit a nuisance to exist on its
property such as: placing, depositing, leaving or dumping any debris, refuse,
trash, rubbish, junk, garbage, ashes, broken articles or waste material of
any kind or nature on private property, or to create thereby an attraction
for animals, insects or vermin, or to the deterioration of any structure or
to create thereby a nuisance as defined in this article or to place in
jeopardy, the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.  This
shall not preclude placing of trash at curb-side for pick up by sanitation
vehicles.



   (e)   Exterior of buildings and structures.



      (1)   The owner(s) of all real property within the city shall
not permit and it shall be unlawful to permit the deterioration of the
exterior of a building to become a nuisance as defined by this article.



      (2)   Building exterior maintenance:  For the exterior of any
buildings and structures, a nuisance is declared to exist if the owner or
tenant of real property permits the exterior of a dwelling to deteriorate to
the point where:



         a.   20% or more of the paint is blistered and peeling
or missing, or rotted on the exterior non-fenestrated building surface area,
including but not limited to, facia boards, eaves, siding; or awnings,
garages, carports.



         b.   20% or more of the roof surface materials such as,
shingles, tiles or any other roofing materials are loose or missing.



         c.   fenestrable areas, such as windows, doors, screens,
i.e. broken glass, screening, rails and styles are deteriorated.



(Ord. No. 96-25, § 1, 4-2-96; Ord. No. 04-078, § 2, 10-4-04)



ARTICLE X.  SEXUAL OFFENDER RESIDENCY PROHIBITION



Sec. 15-121.  Findings and intent.



   (a)   Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical
violence, and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who
present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are
extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and
most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are
ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This
makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while
incalculable, clearly exorbitant.



   (b)   It is the intent of this article to serve and to protect the
city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations
where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain
sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing
temporary or permanent residence.



(Ord. No. 05-035, § 2, 7-19-05)



Sec. 15-122.  Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   "Permanent residence" means a place where the person abides, lodges, or
resides for 14 or more consecutive days.



   "Temporary residence" means a place where the person abides, lodges, or
resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar
year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the
person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more
consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's
permanent residence.



(Ord. No. 05-035, § 3, 7-19-05)



Sec. 15-123.  Penalties; exceptions.



   (a)   It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a
violation of F.S. §§ 794.011, 800.04, 827.071, or 847.0145, regardless of
whether adjudication has been withheld, in which the victim of the offense
was less than 16 years of age, to establish a permanent residence or
temporary residence within two thousand five hundred (2,500') feet of any
school, designated public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground,
or other place where children regularly congregate.



   (b)   It is unlawful for any person who is required to register as a
sexual predator or sexual offender under the laws of the state, to establish
a permanent residence or temporary residence within two thousand five hundred
(2,500') feet of any school, designated public school bus stop, day care
center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate.



   (c)   For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation,
the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the
nearest outer property line of a school, designated public school bus stop,
day care center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly
congregate.



   (d)   Penalties. A person who violates this section shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second or
subsequent conviction of a violation of this section, such person shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the county jail
not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.



   (e)   Exceptions. A person residing within two thousand five hundred
(2,500') feet of any school, designated public school bus stop, day care
center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate
does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply:



      (1)   The person established the permanent residence prior to
July 1, 2005.



      (2)   The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense
and was not convicted as an adult.



      (3)   The person is a minor.



      (4)   The school, designated public school bus stop or day
care center within two thousand five hundred (2,500') feet of the person’s
permanent residence was opened after the person established the permanent
residence.



(Ord. No. 05-035, § 4, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 06-048, § 2, 6-6-06)



Sec. 15-124.  Property owners prohibited from renting real property to
certain sexual offenders and sexual predators; penalties.



   (a)   It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part
thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used
as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from
establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this
Code, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance,
is located within two thousand five hundred (2,500') feet of any school,
designated public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground, or
other place where children regularly congregate.



   (b)   A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this
section shall constitute a violation of this section and shall subject the
property owner to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided
for in this Code of Ordinances, including the provisions that allow the city
to seek relief as otherwise provided by law.



(Ord. No. 05-035, § 5, 7-19-05)



ARTICLE XI.  NO FISHING



Sec. 15-125.  Fishing prohibited.



   Fishing in areas designated as "No Fishing" areas by the City
Commission and posted as such is prohibited.



(Ord. No. 06-059, § 2, 7-5-06)



Sec. 15-126.  Penalty.



   A violation of this article of the code of ordinances is punishable by
a fine of $50.00.



(Ord. No. 06-059, § 2, 7-5-06)



Sec. 15-127.  Designated no fishing areas.



   The areas bounded by the north right-of-way line of Boynton Beach
Boulevard and the south right-of- way line of Boynton Beach Boulevard, where
Boynton Beach Boulevard intersects with the Intracoastal Waterway and along
the public promenade area of Boynton Beach Boulevard extended from a point
eight hundred and twenty-five (825') feet east of the east line of Federal
Highway to a point one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350') feet east of the
east line of Federal Highway are hereby designated a "No Fishing" area.  The
City Commission may, by resolution, designate additional "No Fishing" areas.



(Ord. No. 06-059, § 2, 7-5-06)



ARTICLE XII.  LOITERING



Sec. 15-128.  Findings and intent.



   (a)   The City Commission finds that it is the right of every
person, regardless of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex,
age, sexual orientation, or handicap, to be secure and protected from fear,
intimidation, and physical harm caused by the activities of criminal street
gangs and their members.  It is not the intent of this article to interfere
with the exercise of the constitutionally protected rights of freedom of
expression and association.  The City Commission recognizes the
constitutional right of every citizen to harbor and express beliefs on any
lawful subject whatsoever, to lawfully associate with others who share
similar beliefs, to petition lawfully constituted authority for a redress of
perceived grievances, and to participate in the electoral process.



   (b)   The City Commission finds, however, that the city and its
surrounding communities are facing a mounting crisis caused by persons
engaged in suspicious loitering and criminal street gangs whose members
threaten and terrorize peaceful citizens and commit a multitude of crimes. 
These activities, both individually and collectively, present a clear and
present danger.  The city has a compelling interest in preventing criminal
activity, and the City Commission finds that the provisions of this act are
necessary to maintain the public order and safety.



   (c)   It is the intent of the City Commission to eradicate the
terror created by persons engaged in suspicious loitering and criminal street
gangs and their members by providing law enforcement with the tools to
eradicate suspicious loitering within the city.



(Ord. 07-009, § 2, 4-17-07)



Sec. 15-129.  Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Loiter means to stand around without any obvious purpose, and to
remain, linger, idle, or stay in a public place, or private place open to the
public, following a request to leave the property or public place following a
request to leave from the property owner or a law enforcement officer acting
on behalf of the property owner.



   Public place is an area generally visible to public view and includes
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
open areas and buildings open to the general public, including those which
serve food or drink, or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances
to building or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them, whether publicly or
privately owned.



   Street includes the legal right-of-way, including but not limited to,
the traffic lanes, curb, sidewalk, whether paved or unpaved, parkway and any
grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a
street.  The term street also includes private rights-of-way or access road
when the city and the property owner have entered into an enforcement
agreement as provided in F.S. § 316.006(b).



(Ord. 07-009, § 2, 4-17-07)



Sec. 15-130.  Acts declared unlawful.



   It shall be unlawful for any person:



   (a)   To loiter in or near any street or public place in a manner
and under the circumstances that would lead a sworn law enforcement officer
to reasonably suspect that a person or persons are engaged in conduct that is
intimidating, harassing, threatening to any citizen or otherwise interfering
with the free flow of pedestrians or vehicular traffic that threatens public
safety or may cause a breach of the peace; and



   (b)   To loiter in or near any street or public place in a manner
and under the circumstances that would lead a sworn law enforcement officer
to reasonable suspect that a person or persons are engaged in any activity
that would promote, benefit or otherwise further the interest of a criminal
street gang as defined in the provisions of F.S. Chapter 874.



(Ord. 07-009, § 2, 4-17-07)



Sec. 15-131.  Suspicious loitering.



   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to loiter in a place, at a time
or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals, under circumstances
that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the
safety of persons or property in the vicinity.



   (b)   Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such alarm or immediate concern is warranted is the fact that the
person takes flight upon appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to
identify himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or
herself or any object.  Unless flight by the person or other circumstance
makes it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest
for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel
any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by
requesting the person to identify himself or herself and explain his or her
presence and conduct.



   (c)   No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section
if the law enforcement officer did not comply with this procedure or if it
appears at trial that the explanation given by the person is true and, if
believed by the officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm or
immediate concern.



(Ord. 07-009, § 2, 4-17-07)



Sec. 15-132.  Loitering after warning.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any persons, after first being warned
by a law enforcement officer, or where a "no loitering" sign or signs have
been posted by the property owner to loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any
public or quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway, mall or
that portion of private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or
obstruct unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles, thereon,
nor shall any person block or obstruct, or prevent the free access to the
entrance any building open to the public.



   (b)   Whenever a police officer observes one (1) or more persons
loitering in any public place displaying a "no loitering" sign or signs in
the area, the police officer shall (i) inform such persons that they are
engaged in loitering which is prohibited in that area, (ii) order all such
persons to disperse and remove themselves from within sight and hearing of
the place at which the order was issued, and (iii) inform those persons that
they will be subject to arrest if they fail to obey the order promptly or
engage in further such loitering within sight or hearing of the place at
which the order was issued during the next six (6) hours.



(Ord. 07-009, § 2, 4-17-07)



Sec. 15-133.  Penalties.



   (a)   A person who violates this article shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or by imprisonment for
term not exceeding sixty (60) days.



   (b)   A second or subsequent offense shall be punishable by a
mandatory minimum sentence of not less than five (5) days imprisonment.



(Ord. 07-009, § 2, 4-17-07)



ARTICLE XIII: PROHIBITION OF CONVERSION THERAPY ON MINORS



Sec. 15-134.   Intent.



   The Intent of this article is to protect the physical and psychological
well-being of minors, including but not limited to lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and/or questioning youth, from exposure to the serious harms and
risks caused by conversion therapy or reparative therapy by licensed
providers, including but not limited to licensed therapists. These provisions
are exercises of police power of the City for the public safety, health, and
welfare; and its provisions shall be liberally construed to accomplish that
purpose.



(Ord. No. 17-003, § 2, 1-3-17)



Sec. 15-135.   Definitions.



   Conversion therapy or reparative therapy means, interchangeably, any
counseling, practice or treatment performed with the goal of changing an
individual's sexual orientation or gender identity, including, but not
limited to, efforts to change behaviors, gender identity, or gender
expression, or to eliminate or reduce sexual or romantic attractions or
feelings toward individuals of the same gender or sex. Conversion therapy
does not include counseling that provides support and assistance to a person
undergoing gender transition or counseling that provides acceptance, support,
and understanding of a person or facilitates a person's coping, social
support, and development, including sexual orientation-neutral interventions
to prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices, as long as
such counseling does not seek to change sexual orientation or gender identity.



   Minor means any person less than eighteen (18) years of age.



   Provider means any person who is licensed by the State of Florida to
provide professional counseling, or who performs counseling as part of his or
her professional training under Chapters 456, 458, 459, 490 or 491 of the
Florida Statutes, as such chapters may be amended, including but not limited
to, medical practitioners, osteopathic practitioners, psychologists,
psychotherapists, social workers, marriage and family therapists, and
licensed counselors. A Provider does not include members of the clergy who
are acting in their roles as clergy or pastoral counselors and providing
religious counseling to congregants, as long as they do not hold themselves
out as operating pursuant to any of the aforementioned Florida Statutes
licenses.



(Ord. No. 17-003, § 2, 1-3-17)



Sec. 15-136.   Conversion therapy prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any provider to practice conversion therapy
efforts on any individual who is a minor regardless of whether the person
receives monetary compensation in exchange for such services.



(Ord. No. 17-003, § 2, 1-3-17)



Sec. 15-137.   Enforcement and civil penalties.



   Violations of this article may be enforced as follows:



   (1)   The City Code Enforcement Special Master shall have
jurisdiction to hear and decide cases in which violations of this Chapter are
alleged, or



   (2)   The City may enforce the provision of this Code by
supplemental Code or Ordinance enforcement procedures as provided by Part 2
of Chapter 162, Florida Statutes, or



   (3)   The City may prosecute violations by issuance of Notices to
Appear for violation of a City Ordinance, in which case, the penalty for each
violation shall be $500.00, or



   (4)   The City Attorney, with authorization from the City
Commission, may bring suit on behalf of the City to enjoin any violation of
this article.



(Ord. No. 17-003, § 2, 1-3-17)



Chapter 16
PARKS AND RECREATION*



Art. I.    In General, §§ 16-1—16-17



Art. II.   City Parks and Benches, §§ 16-18—16-92



   Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 16-18—16-37



   Div. 2.   Conduct Regulated, §§ 16-38—16-68



   Div. 3.   Traffic and Parking Regulations, §§ 16-69—16-92



Art. III.    Boats and Boating, §§ 16-93—16-95



   *Cross references-Enclosure of swimming pools, § 5-125; recreational
vehicles, boats and boat trailers, Ch. 20; parks and recreational areas in
subdivisions, App. C, Art. IX, § 8 .



 


Notes

App. C, Art. IX, § 8 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 16-1.  Board created; appointment, terms, qualifications.



   There is hereby established a Recreation and Parks Board, hereinafter
referred to as “Board”, which Board shall consist of seven (7) members.
The City Commission shall appoint the members of said Board. Two (2) members
shall serve for a term of one (1) year from the date of appointment; three
(3) members shall serve for a term of two (2) years from the date of
appointment; two (2) members shall serve for a term of three (3) years from
the date of appointment. Vacancies created after expiration of these terms
shall be filled by appointments for three-year terms. Members of the Board
shall be residents and electors of the city.



(Code 1958, § 2-51; Ord. No. 83-18, § 1, 5-17-83; Ord. No. 85-25, § 1,
4-2-85; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-2.  Removal of Board members; vacancies.



   Members of the Board may be removed by a majority vote of the total
members of the City Commission. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled by the
City Commission.



(Code 1958, § 2-52; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-3.  Chair and Vice Chair of Board.



   The City Commission will appoint a Chair and Vice Chair of the Board.
The appointments will be by motion of the Commission. The Chair and Vice
Chair will hold their respective appointments until the Commission appoints a
successor Chair or Vice Chair.



(Code 1958, § 2-53; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-4.  Meetings of Board.



   (a)   In the performance of their duties set forth in this article,
the Board shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. Special
meetings may be called by the Board Chair or the Recreation and Parks
Department upon prior notification.



   (b)   Minutes shall be kept during all meetings.



   (c)   The Recreation and Parks Department shall prepare an agenda
for each meeting and shall contact the Chair of the Board regarding the
agenda.



   (d)   Four (4) members in attendance shall constitute a quorum
before an official meeting is declared in session.



(Code 1958, § 2-53; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-5.  Powers and duties of Board.



   Subject to the control and direction of the City Commission, the Board:



   (a)   Shall act in an advisory capacity (non-administrative) to the
Recreation and Parks Department, to assure representation of ideas of
citizens who are interested in promoting better recreation and park
facilities and programs for the city. Such advice shall include but not be
limited to site locations, development, supervision and maintenance of public
recreation and parks of the city.



   (b)   May acquire by gift or donation, any property for public
recreation or park purposes. Any gifts or donations acquired shall go through
the  Recreation and Parks Department and shall become the property of the
city, and title of any real property so acquired shall be taken in the name
of the city.



   (c)   Shall make recommendations to the City Manager and City
Commission, through the Recreation and Parks Director, concerning the
purchase of property by the city for public recreation and park purposes,
concerning the establishment, maintenance, and supervision of public
recreation and parks, and concerning expenditures of the recreational and
park fund hereinafter established.



   (d)   Shall keep records and accounts of all the activities of the
Board and make reports through the Recreation and Parks Department to the
City Commission and City Manager whenever requested to do so.



   (f)   In exercising their powers and performing their duties as 
specified in this article, the Board shall act through a majority of its
members and the Chair of the Board is requested to sign all papers and
documents requiring the signature of the Recreation and Parks Board.



(Code 1958, § 2-54; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-6.  Reserved.



   Editor’s note—Recreation and Park Fund was repealed by § 2 of Ord.
15-021, passed September 3, 2015.



Sec. 16-7.  Use of portion of Boynton Canal and abutting property prohibited.



   All fishing, swimming, diving, trespassing, parking or loitering in or
about that certain portion of the Boynton Canal and abutting property owned
by the South Florida Water Management District, lying east of the easterly
right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 1 (State Road No. 5), more particularly
described hereafter is hereby declared dangerous, a trespass, and a general
public nuisance and such actions by any person are hereby prohibited.



      Commence at the intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of
U.S. Highway No. 1 and the northerly right-of-way line of the Boynton Canal;
thence proceed easterly along the northerly right-of-way line of the Boynton
Canal to the southwest corner of Lot 62, Coquina Cove, Plat Book 24, Page 14,
public records of Palm Beach County, Florida; thence proceed southeasterly
across the right-of-way line of the Boynton Canal to the northwest corner of
Lot 41, Harbor Estates, Plat Book 21, Page 98, public records of Palm Beach
County, Florida; thence proceed westerly along the south right-of-way line of
the Boynton Canal to its point of intersection with the easterly right-of-way
line of U.S. Highway No. 1; thence proceed northerly along the easterly
right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 1 to the point of beginning.



(Code 1958, § 19-23.1; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Secs. 16-8—16-17. Reserved.



ARTICLE II. CITY PARKS AND BEACHES



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 16-18.  Definitions.



   As used in this article:



   Director means the Recreation and Parks Director of the city.



   Mooring means the act, or a means, of fastening a ship/vessel.



   Park means land owned by the city, and intended for current or future
active or passive recreation.



   Vehicle means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered,
animal-drawn, or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of
any size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and
vehicles in the service of the city parks.



(Code 1958, § 19-1; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15; Ord. No. 19-016, § 2,
5-21-19)



Sec. 16-19.  Hours and activity fees.



   The Director shall establish hours that the park or beach shall be open
for public use as may be deemed reasonable and such opening and closing time
shall be posted for public information.



   The City Commission may by resolution establish activity fees for
specific activities within any city developed or undeveloped park.



(Code 1958, § 19-2; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-20.  Interference with permittees.



   No person at any beach or park shall disturb or interfere unreasonably
with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity
under the authority of a permit.



(Code 1958, § 19-3; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-21.  Showing of permits upon request.



   Every person at a beach or park shall produce and exhibit any permit
from the Director he or she claims to have, upon request of any authorized
person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing
compliance with any ordinance or rule.



(Code 1958, § 19-4; Ord. No. 15-021, § 3, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-22.  Enforcement of regulations.



   (a)   The Director and park or beach attendants shall, in connection
with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this
article. The Director and any park attendant shall have the authority to
eject from the park or beach any person acting in violation of this article,
and shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or
device in the park or beach used in violation of this article. Administrative
authority is hereby granted to the City Manager and/or his or her designee to
designate and post specific areas in city parks as “Quiet Zones.”



   (b)   Penalties for violation of this section shall be pursuant to
the City Code of Ordinances Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article 1, Section
1-6.



(Code 1958, § 19-5) (Ord. No. 02-001, § 2, 1-15-02; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2,
9-3-15)



Sec. 16-23.  Permit required to erect structure or run utility.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or erect any building
or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character,
or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across any beach or
park, except on special written permit issued hereunder.



(Code 1958, § 19-19; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-24.  Removal of sand or soil, shrubs, trees, etc.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or remove any beach sand,
whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants,
down-timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means or agency upon any beach or park within
the city.



(Code 1958, § 19-18; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-25.  Damaging trees, plants, grass.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, cut, carve, or
transplant any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds
of any tree or plant in any beach or park. Nor shall any person attach any
rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. No person shall dig in
or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the
natural beauty or usefulness of any beach or park.



(Code 1958, § 19-20; Ord. No. 15-021, § 3, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-26.  Pollution of waters.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discharge or otherwise
place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake,
stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or beach, or
tributary stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any
substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the
pollution of said waters.



(Code 1958, § 19-22; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



   Cross references-Throwing refuse into bodies of water, § 10-24;
littering generally, § 15-26 et seq.



Sec. 16-27.  Structures to afford open view; guy wires, braces prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, use or occupy
on or in any beach or bathing area any tent, shelter or structure of any kind
unless there shall be an unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or
structure from at least two (2) sides; nor shall any guy wire, rope or
extension or exterior brace or support be connected or fastened from any such
structure to any other structure, stake, rock or other object outside thereof.



(Code 1958, § 19-40; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-28.  Bounce houses.



   The use of "bounce houses" and other inflatable playground equipment is
prohibited at city-owned property unless the company operating the equipment
has received prior approval from the city's Recreation and Parks Director, or
their designee, to operate such equipment.  The notice of approval shall be
posted at the location the equipment is installed during the time that the
equipment is being operated in order to allow the appropriate city
representative to verify that the operator received prior approval from the
city.  Any  equipment installed on city-owned property without prior
approval shall be immediately deflated and/or disconnected by the authorized
city representative.  The provisions of this section shall be enforced by
the city's code enforcement officers, as well as the city's law enforcement
officers.  Regulations regarding the placement, use, insurance, and
supervision requirements shall be developed and published by the city's
Recreation and Parks Department. 



(Ord. No. 05-002, § 2, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Secs. 16-29—16-37. Reserved.



DIVISION 2. CONDUCT REGULATED



Sec. 16-38.  Alcoholic beverages permitted only at designated places; sale;
drunkenness.



   No person shall drink nor possess alcoholic beverages at any time at
any beach or park except at specifically designated recreation centers
pursuant to a Facility/Field Use Application, or at a beach or park pursuant
to a Special Event Permit issued by the city. The sale or possession of
alcoholic beverages by a concessionaire, or pursuant to a Special Event
Permit or a Facility/Field Use Application, will be subject to the strict
regulation and control of the Director. Sales of alcoholic beverages shall be
served for consumption on the immediate premises. No person shall become
drunk or be under the influence of intoxicating beverages. The City
Commission may approve of certain holidays whereby the prohibition on
consuming or possessing alcohol at the beach or a park is waived.



(Code 1958, § 19-6; Ord. No. 05-065, § 2, 11-1-05; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2,
9-3-15)



Sec. 16-39.  Animals prohibited.



   No person shall have, or be permitted to have, any dog or other
domestic animals on any designated beach or park area at any time whether
muzzled, leashed or not, except as authorized in Section 4-33.  Animals used
by law enforcement or service animals, trained to aid persons with
disabilities, shall be exempt from this section.



(Code 1958, § 19-7; Ord. No. 07-017, § 2, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 2014-007, § 3,
6-3-14; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-40.  Fireworks or explosives.



   No person at any park or beach shall bring in or have in his or her
possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn,
any firecracker, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives or
inflammable materials, or discharge them or throw them into any such area
from land or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any
substance, compound, mixture or article that in conjunction with any other
substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing
standpoints.



   This section shall not prohibit fireworks displays where permitted
under the provisions of section 15-5.



(Code 1958, § 19-8; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-41.  Use of facilities provided for opposite sex.



   No person at any park or beach shall occupy any seat or bench, or enter
into or loiter or remain in any pavilion or other park structure or section
thereof which may be reserved and designated by the Director for the use of
the opposite sex. Exception is made for children under four (4) years of age.



(Code 1958, § 19-9; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-42.  Soliciting prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful at any beach or park for any person to solicit
alms or contributions for any public or private purpose.



(Code 1958, § 19-10; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-43.  Fires, permitted only in designated areas; dropping inflammable
material.



   No person shall build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas
and under such regulations as may be designated by the Director. No person
shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or
cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material, within any park area or
on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.



(Code 1958, § 19-12; Ord. No. 15- 021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-44.  Gambling.



   Gambling, or the participation therein or the abetting thereof, is
prohibited at any beach or park.



(Code 1958, § 19-13; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-45.  Entering, using closed area.



   No person shall enter an area on a beach or park posted as “Closed to
the Public” nor shall any person use or abut the use of any area in
violation of posted notices.



(Code 1958, § 19-14; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-46.  Sleeping, lounging; disorderly conduct generally.



   No person shall at any beach or park sleep or protractedly lounge on
the seats or benches or other areas, or engage in loud, boisterous,
threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any
disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.



(Code 1958, § 19-15; Ord. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-47.  Cooperation in keeping rest rooms clean.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to cooperate in maintaining
rest rooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition.



(Code 1958, § 19-17; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-48.  Climbing trees; standing or sitting on fixtures.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to climb any tree, or walk, stand
or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences or gun carriages or
upon any other property on any beach or park which is not designated or
customarily used for such purposes.



(Code 1958, § 19-21; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-49.  Refuse and trash.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring in or dump, deposit or
leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish,
waste, garbage or refuse or other trash on any beach or park. No such refuse
or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or beach,
or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all
such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park or beach by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.



(Code 1958, § 19-23; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-50.  Swimmers to conform to regulations.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in a park or beach to swim, bathe,
or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park or beach,
except in such waters and at such places and during such hours as are
provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set
forth or may be hereafter adopted. Nor shall any person frequent any waters
or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or
congregate thereat when such activity is prohibited by the Director upon a
finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise
inadvisable. 



(Code 1958, § 19-39; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-51.  Undeveloped park sites.



   Undeveloped park sites are not open for recreational use unless the
use, and the portion of the site where it may occur, is specifically posted.



(Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-52.  Dressing and undressing.



   No person shall dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet
or other place except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided
for that purpose.



(Code 1958, § 19-41; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-53.  Hunting; weapons; shooting.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at
any time on any beach or park; nor shall any person use, carry or possess
air-rifles,  spring-guns, bow and arrows, slings or any other forms of
weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety,
excluding firearms, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank
cartridges, or any kind of trapping device.



(Code 1958, § 19-42) (Am. Ord. 11-028, passed 10-18-11; Ord. No. 15-021, §
2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-54.  Place for picnics; regulation authorized.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to picnic or lunch on any beach or
park in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants
shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when
necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort
and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to
achieve this end. 



(Code 1958, § 19-43; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-55.  Use of fireplaces and picnic areas.



   The use of the individual fireplaces together with tables and benches
follows generally the rule of “first come, first served.”



   No person shall use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the
buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities
for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.



(Code 1958, § 19-44; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-56.  Duties when leaving picnic area.



   No person shall leave a picnic area before the fire is completely
extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans,
bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where
provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash
shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly
disposed of elsewhere.



(Code 1958, § 19-45; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-57.  Camping.



   No person shall camp in any park in other than permanent cabins for
organized camping, provided by the Director and used by groups of persons
under adequate supervision. No person shall set up tents, shacks or any other
temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person
leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle
to be used or that could be used for such purpose, such as a house trailer,
camp trailer, camper, camp wagon or the like.



(Code 1958, § 19-46; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-58.  Games allowed only in designated areas.



   No person shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving
thrown or other propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or
model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The
playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball
and quoits is prohibited except on the fields and courts or areas provided
therefor. Roller skating shall be confined to those areas specifically
designated for such pastime.



(Code 1958, § 19-47; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-59.  Overnight boat docking prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any persons to camp overnight on the grounds
of Harvey E. Oyer, Jr. Park or to dock their boats on the shorelines or ramp
area of said Harvey E. Oyer, Jr. Park either overnight or on a permanent
docking basis.



(Ord. No. 82-21, § 1, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 11-025, § 2, 10-4-11; Ord. No.
15-021, § 2, 9-3-15; Ord. No. 16-006, § 2, 3-1-16)



Sec. 16-60.  Establishing hours of use at Harvey E. Oyer, Jr. Park.



   (a)   The Harvey E. Oyer, Jr. Park shall be closed at 10:00 p.m. to
all persons, except:



      (1)   Fishermen;



      (2)   Boaters actively engaged in fishing or boating or
preparation thereof; and



      (3)   Official permit holders utilizing the boat club building.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for anyone, except the enumerated
persons, to enter the Park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and dawn of the
next day.



   (c)   The Harvey E. Oyer, Jr. Park shall not be used for storage of
any kind, including but not limited to, storage of vessels, vehicles and
trailers.



   (d)   The docks in the lagoon at the park are intended for loading
and unloading boats. The loading/unloading docks shall not be used for
storage or mooring and all persons who use the loading/unloading docks must
clear the docks as quickly and efficiently as possible. No boats, personal
property, or other objects shall occupy or obstruct the loading/unloading
docks for more than thirty (30) minutes at a time.



   (e)   No tether, lock or other personal property shall be
permanently attached to any  fixtures, trees or other objects on the Harvey
E. Oyer, Jr. Park premises.



   (f)   Any decal holder actively engaged in fishing, boating or
preparation thereof for a period of three (3) days or more shall notify the
city in writing in advance. The city shall tag the trailer and/or vehicle of
any such decal holder as an “Extended Stay” vehicle. Any vehicle or
trailer that remains in the Park for three (3) days or more without prior
permission from the city shall be removed, towed or otherwise disposed of at
the owner’s expense.



   (g)   Vehicles without a trailer may only park in areas designated
for single vehicles. (Ord. No. 82-21, § 2, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 09-041, § 2,
9-14-09; Ord. No. 11-025, § 2, 10-4-11; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15; Ord.
No. 16-006, § 3, 3-1-16; Ord. No. 19-016, § 3, 5-21-19)



Sec. 16-61.  Boat launching and trailer parking user fee at the Harvey E.
Oyer, Jr. Park.



   (a)   The purpose of this section is to establish an annual and
daily boat launching and trailer parking user fee for the Harvey E. Oyer, Jr.
Park, and to establish rules and regulations related to the use of the Park.



   (b)   The city shall charge a fifty dollar ($50.00) annual decal
fee. On weekends and holidays, those who do not have an annual decal may pay
a ten dollar ($10.00) daily fee. There is no daily fee for non-decal holders
during the weekdays (Monday through Friday).



   (c)   The city shall not differentiate between residents and
non-residents of the county or the state while processing decal applications.



   (d)   (1)   Decals will be issued to an applicant on an annual
basis, October 1 to September 30, upon satisfactory completion of appropriate
application forms, commencing October 1, 2001. All decals shall  be
permanently affixed on the passenger side of the trailer (on a conspicuous
part of the winch post; alternately the tongue, as close as possible to the
ball). Decals placed on a trailer other than the one for which it was
originally issued shall be construed to be void.



      (2)   In the event that the trailer to which the permanent
decal was issued has been sold or otherwise changed ownership and/or in the
event a properly issued decal is mutilated and can be identified, the decal
will be replaced for a charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), provided the
holder can return an identifiable portion of the mutilated decal to the city.
In the event the holder of a lost or mutilated decal cannot provide an
identifiable portion or part of the decal, the charge for a replacement decal
will be the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00).



   (e)   Boats, vessels and trailers that do not have a lawfully issued
decal shall be subject to a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine.



(Ord. No. 00-72, §§ 1-8, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 02-048, § 2, 9-3-02; Ord. No.
09-041, § 2, 9-14-09; Ord. No. 11-025, § 2, 10-4-11; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2,
9-3-15)



Sec. 16-62.   Enforcement.



   The City Police Department is hereby given the power and duty to
enforce this article, and shall have the power to make lawful arrests for the
violation of the provisions hereof. Anyone found to have violated any
provision of this article shall be punished as provided for in this chapter
or as otherwise provided by law.



(Ord. No. 09-041, § 3, 9-14-09; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Secs. 16-63—16-68. Reserved.



DIVISION 3. TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS



Sec. 16-69.  Compliance required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person at any beach or park to fail to
comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws
in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles together with such
regulations as are contained in this code.



(Code 1958, § 19-24; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-70.  Authority to direct traffic; obedience required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey all traffic
officers and park or beach employees, such persons being hereby authorized
and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks
and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in
accordance with the provisions of these regulations and such supplementary
regulations as may be issued subsequently by the Director.



(Code 1958, § 19-25; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-71.  Observance of traffic signs.



   It shall be unlawful for any person on any beach or park to fail to
observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution,
stopping or parking, and all others posted for proper control and to
safeguard life and property.



(Code 1958, § 19-26; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-72.  Speed limit.



   It shall be unlawful for any person on any beach or park to ride or
drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding ten (10) miles an hour, except
upon such roads as the Director may designate by posted signs for speedier
travel.



(Code 1958, § 19-27; Ord. No. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-73.  Driving in prohibited areas.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any beach or
park area except upon paved roads or parking areas or such areas as may be
designated as temporary parking areas by the Director.



(Code 1958, § 19-28; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-74.  Parking to be in parking areas; obedience to regulations.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any beach or
park in other than an established or designated parking  area and such use
shall be in accordance with the posted directions thereat and with the
instructions of any attendant who may be present.



(Code 1958, § 19-29; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-75.  Night parking.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a vehicle standing or
parked at night on any beach or park without lights clearly visible for at
least seventy-five (75) feet from both front and rear on any driveway or road
area except in legally established parking areas.



(Code 1958, § 19-31; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-76.  Notice of vehicle breakdown.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to immediately notify an
attendant of a vehicle breakdown on any beach or park requiring assistance of
a tow truck, mechanic or any person.



(Code 1958, § 19-32; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-77.  Double parking.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to double park any vehicle on any
road or parkway on any beach or park unless directed by a park official.



(Code 1958, § 19-33; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-78.  Where bicycles permitted.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle in any beach or
park on other than a paved vehicular road or path designated for that
purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand
over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for
pedestrian use.



(Code 1958, § 19-35; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-79.  Bicycles to keep to right, single file; manner of riding
generally.



   All persons riding bicycles in any beach or park shall ride such
bicycles on the right-hand side of the road paving as close as conditions
permit, and bicycles shall be kept in single file when two (2) or more are 
operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at all times operate their machines
with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the
right of any vehicle they are overtaking and pass to the right of any
vehicles they may be meeting.



(Code 1958, § 19-36; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-80.  Passengers on bicycles; manner of parking or leaving.



   It shall be unlawful for any person on any beach or park to ride any
other person on a bicycle, or to leave a bicycle in a place other than a
bicycle rack when such is provided and there is a space available, or to
leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, so set against trees, or in
any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by
them. (Code 1958, § 19-37; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-81.  Headlights, reflectors on bicycles.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, on any beach or park to ride a
bicycle on any road between thirty (30) minutes after sunset or before thirty
(30) minutes before sunrise without an attached headlight plainly visible at
least five hundred (500) feet in front of the bicycle, and without a red tail
light or red reflector plainly visible from at least six hundred (600) feet
from the rear of such bicycle.



(Code 1958, § 19-38; Ord. No. 85-45, Attach. (b), 8-20-85; Ord. No. 15-021,
§ 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-82.  Rules, regulations controlling parking of vehicles at municipal
beach property located within the Town of Ocean Ridge.



   The City Manager is hereby directed to implement subject procedures at
the earliest possible date. (Said regulations are set out below.)



POLICY NO. 1. PARKING PERMITS



   Parking permits will be issued on an annual basis (October 1 through
September 30) each year to residents (see “Definitions”) of the City of
Boynton Beach, for a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each decal issued
to a resident vehicle, upon satisfactory completion of appropriate
application forms. Applicants will be required to establish proof of
residency in the City of Boynton Beach (see “Definitions”) and to present
their official state motor vehicle tag registration certificate for each
decal purchased.



   Lost or mutilated parking permits. In the event that the vehicle to
which the permanent decal was issued has been sold or otherwise changed
ownership and/or in the event a properly issued parking decal is mutilated
and can be identified, such decal will be replaced for a charge of fifteen
dollars ($15.00), provided the holder can return an identifiable portion of
the mutilated parking decal to the city. In the event the holder of a lost or
mutilated parking permit cannot provide an identifiable portion or part of
such parking decal, the charge for a replacement decal will be the sum of
fifty dollars ($50.00).



   Qualified nonresidents: Qualified nonresidents may obtain beach decals
that permit parking annually. The cost for such permit as set forth herein:



      The permit fee for qualified nonresidents shall be two hundred
dollars ($200.00) each.



Definitions.



   City employees: All city employees, classified,  nonclassified and
retired, regardless of residency,shall be eligible to receive one (1) parking
permit. Proof of employment shall be established through the Personnel
Department of the city. Persons who terminate (not retired) their employment
with the city and who are not city residents shall be required to scrape off
their stickers and return remains to the issuing office.



   Resident: Anyone owning real estate and/or leasing, renting or
occupying real estate or living accommodations within the City of Boynton
Beach for a time period of at least six (6) consecutive months each calendar
year, as well as members of their immediate family residing with them;
provided, however, for purposes of this section, the term “City of Boynton
Beach” shall include all property within the corporate limits of the Town
of Ocean Ridge. Proof of residency shall be established by some suitable
means, such as utility bill, tax bill, property deed or lease agreement.



   Qualified nonresident: Anyone who is not a resident but who resides in
the agricultural reserve area of unincorporated Palm Beach County bounded on
the south by lateral Canal No. 30, bounded on the north by Hypoluxo Road, and
bounded on the west by the Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge.



POLICY NO. 2. PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF PARKING PERMITS



   (1)   Ensure that applicants are residents as defined in Policy No.
1.



   (2)   Request proof of residency. Proof established in accordance
with Policy No. 1.



   (3)   Request separate vehicle registration for each parking permit
to be issued.



   (4)   Residents leasing automobiles should provide contract
documents establishing the lease agreement or arrangement or company car
assignment.



   (5)   Issuing authority shall complete parking permit application by
listing separate permit numbers opposite the make, model and year of each
vehicle.



   (6)   All parking permits shall be permanently affixed upon the
lower, left-hand side (driver’s side) of the front windshield of such
vehicle. Decals placed on a vehicle other than the one for which it was
originally issued shall be construed to be void.



   (7)   Parking permits issued to motorcycles, motor bikes, and motor
scooters shall be displayed on the left front fork of such vehicle or other
visible location in the area of the left front.



PARKING FEES FOR MOTOR VEHICLES



   A daily parking fee is hereby established for all motor vehicles
parking at the public beach, except those hereinafter excepted, in accordance
with the following rates and charges.



May 1—November 15



   Weekdays (Monday - Friday)   $5.00



   Weekends (Saturday & Sunday)



      and holidays   $10.00



November 16—April 30   $10.00



   Exceptions:



   (1)   Vehicle having affixed thereto a parking permit issued in
accordance with the rules and regulations of Policies 1 and 2.



   (2)   Official state, county and city vehicles entering the park in
the performance of governmental functions.



   (3)   The vehicles of public utility companies, workmen, tradesmen,
or salesmen when engaged in official park business.



   (4)   School buses transporting Florida school, college or
university students in a group or body for a field trip for educational
purposes. This exception shall not apply to vehicles transporting such groups
to the park for recreational purposes.



      Florida school groups, as mentioned in exception (4), must make
prearrangements with the Director of Recreation and Parks, or his or her
designee, by submitting a letter from the school principal certifying that
the trip is a part of the school curriculum.



   Parking permits will be available to all city residents as outlined in
Policies 1 and 2. Vehicles not exhibiting the permit will be required to pay
the parking fee in accordance with this policy.



PARKING AREAS FOR MOTOR VEHICLES



   Trucks, buses and trailers shall park in the lower level spaces of the
parking area at the public beach.



PENALTY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS



   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsify information in the
process of applying for a parking permit, for any person to sell a parking
permit, for any person to transfer a parking permit to a nonresident, or for
any person to fail to follow the rules and regulations pertaining to the use
of the parking facilities at the public beach. (Code 1958, § 19-38.1; Ord.
No. 79-21, Art. I, 7-17-79; Ord. No. 80-42, § 1, 10-21-80; Ord. No. 80- 47,
§ 1, 12-16-80; Ord. No. 82-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 82-23, § 1,
8-3-82; Ord. No. 84-30, §§ 1, 2, 8-7-84; Ord. No. 86-6, § 1, 4-15-86; Ord.
No. 86-32, § 1, 9-3-86; Ord. No. 89-33, § 1, 9-26-89; Ord. No. 89-37, § 1,
11-7-89; Ord. No. 90-45, § 1, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 90-56, § 1, 12-4-90; Ord.
No. 91-13, §§ 1, 2, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 93-32, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 93-34,
§ 1, 9-21-93; Ord. No. 00-46, § 1, 9-6- 00; Ord. No. 05-046, § 2, 8-16-05;
Ord. No. 09-020, § 2, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Secs. 16-83—16-92. Reserved.



ARTICLE III. BOATS AND BOATING*



   *Cross reference-Parking of boats and boat trailers, Ch. 20.



   State law references-Regulation of boats generally, F.S. § 371.011 et
seq.; local regulation, F.S. § 371.59.



Sec. 16-93.  Speed causing harmful wake.



   It shall be unlawful to operate any boat, vessel or other watercraft
upon any waterway or body of water within the corporate limits of the city at
a rate of speed which causes waves to damage docks, wharves, seawalls or
boats moored or tied to a dock or wharf along such waterways.



(Code 1958, § 4A-1; Ord. No. 93-15, § 1, 6-15-93; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2,
9-3-15)



Sec. 16-93.1.  Boats, watercraft, personal watercraft; speed restriction on
C-16 Canal (Pioneer Park).



   (a)   No person shall operate a motorboat or personal watercraft as
further defined by Florida Statutes or permit a motorboat or personal
watercraft to be operated in the C-16 Canal idle speed no wake zone at any
speed greater than idle speed no wake. The C-16 Canal idle speed no wake zone
is hereby established to be all waters two hundred (200) feet east and west
of the boat launch area of the C-16 Canal (Pioneer Park).



   (b)   The C-16 Canal idle speed no wake zone shall be marked on the
canal with uniform waterway regulatory markers in accordance with applicable
state and federal laws and regulations.



   (c)   A violation of any provision of this section shall be punished
pursuant to Section 327.73, Florida Statutes.



(Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-94.  Mufflers required.



   It shall be unlawful to operate any watercraft with outboard motor or
inboard motor not having properly muffled exhaust within the city, in such
manner as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person or
persons in any dwelling, hotel, motel or any other type of residence, or of
any person in the vicinity.



(Code 1958, § 4A-2; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



   State law reference-Similar provisions, F.S. § 371.56.



Sec. 16-94.5.  Mooring, docking, fueling or refueling of water craft
prohibited.



   (a)   No person shall at any park or beach fuel or refuel any water
craft. For purposes of this section water craft shall include but is not
limited to motorized boats and jet skis. Furthermore, as  used in this
section jet skis shall mean any personal water craft designed for riding
enjoyment of person(s), being propelled by a jet pump with a fully enclosed
impeller.



   (b)   Anyone found to have violated any provision of this section
shall be punished as provided for in this chapter or as otherwise provided by
law.



(Ord. No. 84-20, § 1, 4-17-84; Ord. No. 91-9, § 1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 97-23,
§ 1, 7-1-97; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Sec. 16-95.  Enforcement.



   The Police Department of the city is hereby given the power and duty of
enforcing the provisions of this article and shall have the power to make
lawful arrests for the violation of the provisions hereof; and to prosecute
offenders.  In case a violation is not committed in the presence of a member
of the Police Department or cannot be detected by observation of such member,
he or she may require an affidavit of any complaining person with assurance
that such complaining witness will appear to testify at the trial before
making any arrest.



(Code 1958, § 4A-3; Ord. No. 15-021, § 2, 9-3-15)



Chapter 17
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*



Art. I.    In General, §§ 17-1—17-12



Art. II.    Solicitors and Canvassers, §§ 17-13—17-33



Art. III.    Charitable Solicitations, §§ 17-34—17-45



1    *Cross references-License tax for itinerant or transient merchants,
§ 13-22(197)(f); license tax for peddlers, § 13-22(225); license tax for
solicitors and canvassers, § 13-22(250).



 


Notes

1 
These cross references do not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 17-1.  Registration, photo and fingerprints required.



   Every nonresident person employed as a house-to-house salesman or
peddler, all persons soliciting magazine subscriptions and all persons
soliciting charitable contributions are hereby required to register before
beginning their employment, or if already employed, to register in a
registration book to be kept by the chief of police. The registrant shall
also be fingerprinted and furnish the chief of police with a photograph of
such size as may be designated by the chief of police.



(Code 1958, § 20-1; Ord. No. 85-45, Attach. (b), 8-20-85)



Sec. 17-2.  Identification card required; re-registration; fee.



   An identification card shall be issued to each person registering under
section 17-1 and such identification card shall be carried by the employee at
all times. In the event such registration card shall be lost or cannot be
produced upon reasonable notice, such person shall promptly re-register and
secure a new card from the chief of police.



   A fee of twenty-five cents ($0.25) shall be charged for the issuance of
each identification card or renewal thereof.



(Code 1958, § 20-2)



Secs. 17-3—17-12. Reserved.



ARTICLE II. SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS



Sec. 17-13.  Defined.



   A canvasser or solicitor is defined as any individual, whether resident
of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck,
or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or
from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods,
wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future
delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether
or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the
subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such
sales or not. Such definition shall also include any person who, for himself,
or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building,
structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment,
shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting
samples and taking orders for future delivery.



(Code 1958, § 20-4)



Sec. 17-14.  Permit and license required.



   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser as defined in
section 17-13 to engage in such business within the city without first
obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this
article. Such solicitor or canvasser shall also obtain a license if one is
required by Chapter 13 of this Code.



(Code 1958, § 20-3)



Sec. 17-15.  Application for permit.



   Applicants for permits under this article must file with the city clerk
a sworn application in writing (in duplicate) which shall give the following
information:



   (a)   Name and description of the applicant;



   (b)   Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;



   (c)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the
goods to be sold;



   (d)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together
with credentials establishing the exact relationship;



   (e)   The length of time for which the right to do business is
desired;



   (f)   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or
orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such
goods or products are located at the time said application is filed, and the
proposed method of delivery;



   (g)   A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days
immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture
shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders of
the applicant in a clear and distinguishable manner;



   (h)   The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least
two (2) reliable property owners of Palm Beach County, Florida, who will
certify as to the applicant's good character and business respectability, or,
in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the
good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an
investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility;



   (i)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance,
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; and



   (j)   A statement by a reputable physician of the city dated not
more than ten (10) days prior to submission of the application, certifying
the applicant to be free of contagious, infectious, or communicable disease.



(Code 1958, § 20-5)



Sec. 17-16.  Application fee.



   At the time of filing the application for a permit hereunder, a fee of
two dollars ($2.00) shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of
investigation of the facts stated therein.



(Code 1958, § 20-5)



Sec. 17-17.  Investigation and action on application.



   (a)   Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be
referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the
applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for
the protection of the public good.



   (b)   If as a result of such investigation, the applicant's
character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief
of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons
for the same, and return the said application to the city clerk, who shall
notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit
will be issued.



   (c)   If as a result of such investigation, the character and
business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the
chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a
permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied
for and return said permit, along with the application, to the city clerk,
who shall upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the
applicant his permit. Such permit shall contain the signature and seal of the
issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of said
permittee, the class of permit issued and the kind of goods to be sold
thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of
time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other
identifying description of any vehicle used in such soliciting or canvassing.
The chief of police shall keep a file of all applications after permits shall
have been issued thereupon by the city clerk.



(Code 1958, § 20-6)



Sec. 17-18.  Permit duration.



   Permits issued hereunder shall be good only for the time specified
therein, which shall not exceed three (3) months.



Sec. 17-19.  Exhibition of permit.



   Solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit their permits at the
request of any citizen.



(Code 1958, § 20-10)



Sec. 17-20.  Duty of police to enforce.



   It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any
person seen soliciting or canvassing, and who is not known by such officer to
be duly permitted to produce his solicitor's or canvasser's permit, and to
enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be
violating the same.



(Code 1958, § 20-11)



Sec. 17-21.  Reports, records of violations.



   The chief of police shall report to the city clerk all convictions for
violations of this article and the city clerk shall maintain a record for
each permit issued and record the reports of violation therein.



(Code 1958, § 20-12)



Sec. 17-22.  Permit revocation.



   (a)   Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be
revoked by the city clerk after notice and hearing, for any of the following
causes:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained
in the application for a permit;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the
course of carrying on his business as solicitor or as canvasser;



      (3)   Any violation of this article;



      (4)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude; or



      (5)   Conducting the business of soliciting, or of canvassing,
in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of
the public.



   (b)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be
given in writing, setting forth specifically the ground of complaint and the
time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing.



(Code 1958, § 20-13)



Sec. 17-23.  Appeals.



   Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city
clerk in the denial of a permit as provided in section 17-17 or in the
revocation of a permit as provided in section 17-22, shall have the right of
appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the
city council, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained
of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time
and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be
given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in section 17-22 for
notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the city council
on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.



(Code 1958, § 20-14)



Sec. 17-24—17-33. Reserved.



ARTICLE III. CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS*



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, enacted Jan. 20, 1981, repealed
Art. III of Ch. 20 of the 1958 Code from which Art. III, §§ 17-34—17-42,
of this Code was derived, and enacted in lieu thereof new provisions included
herein as Art. III, §§ 17-34—17-45.



   Cross reference-Special permits for nonprofit enterprises, § 13-9.



Sec. 17-34.  Applicability.



   The provisions of this article shall govern all charitable
solicitations within the City of Boynton Beach.



(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-20-81)



Sec. 17-35.  Purpose.



   Any person(s) or organization(s) desiring to exercise their
constitutional rights of freedom of speech and freedom of religion by
soliciting for funds within the City of Boynton Beach shall be protected in
such activities providing they do not interfere with the free flow of traffic
or attempt to perpetrate a fraud on members of the public. This article is
hereby declared to be necessary for the accomplishment of the following:



   (a)   To insure that religious and charitable organizations are
permitted to proselytize or solicit funds within the city.



   (b)   To insure that persons seeking to exercise constitution al
freedoms of expression can effectively communicate within the city.



   (c)   To insure adequate nearby police facilities for the protection
of persons exercising their constitutional freedoms.



   (d)   To protect persons within the city from fraudulent
solicitations.



   (e)   To insure the free and orderly flow of traffic within the city.



(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-20-81)



Sec. 17-36.  Definitions.



   Whenever used in this article, the following words shall have the
meanings herein ascribed unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context:



   (a)   Charitable means and includes the words “benevolent,”
“church,” “educational,” “fraternal,” “philanthropic,”
“religious” or “welfare,” either actual or purported.



   (b)   Contributions means and includes the words “clothing,”
“food,” “money,” “pledge,” “property,” “subscription” or
anything of value and also donations under the guise of loans of money or
property.



   (c)   Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
company, association, society, organization or league, and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative.



   (d)   Solicitation means the request, directly or indirectly of
money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value or the
representation that same will be used for a charitable purpose. A
solicitation shall be deemed to have taken place when the request is made,
whether or not the person making same receives any contribution referred to
in this ordinance. These words shall also mean and include the following
methods of securing same:



      (1)   Any oral or written request;



      (2)   The sale of, offer to sell or attempt to sell, any
article, service, tag, tickets, emblem, publication, advertisement,
subscription, membership or other thing, whether or not of value, in whole or
in part, for charitable purposes;



      (3)   The making of any announcement to or through the local
press or other media of public communication, concerning an appeal, drive or
campaign to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any
charitable purposes connected therewith.



(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-20-81)



Sec. 17-37.  Permit required; exception.



   No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable purposes
within the city without a permit pursuant to this article authorizing such
solicitation; provided, however, that the provisions of this article shall
not apply to any established organization operating wholly or partially for
religious or charitable purposes, if the solicitations are conducted only
among the members of such organization by other members or officers thereof,
voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or if the
solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular
assemblies or services of such established organizations.



   No permit shall be required where a solicitation is conducted solely on
a property owned or leased by the organization conducting the solicitation
and a sign is posted in a prominent place at each entrance to the area where
the solicitation is being held, stating the name of the organization
conducting the solicitation and the purpose for the solicitation.



(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 81-11, § 1, 4-21-81)



Sec. 17-38.  Application for permit.



   Application for a permit required by this article shall be made to the
city clerk upon the appropriate forms. Such application shall be sworn to or
affirmed and filed with the city clerk and shall contain the following:



   (a)   The name and address of the principal office of the person
applying for the permit, including both local and nonlocal offices.



   (b)   If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses
of the applicant's principal officers and board of directors or equivalent.



   (c)   The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made.



   (d)   A list of all fund raising events to be held during the thirty
(30) day period, which thirty (30) day period shall run for the thirty (30)
day period from the date of the application.



   (e)   A list of the names and addresses of the person or persons who
will be directly managing these fund-raising events.



   (f)   The use or disposition to be made of any funds raised and the
name of the person or persons who decide or control how and for what purpose
said funds shall be used or disposed of, and how funds previously raised or
collected in the City of Boynton Beach were used or disposed of.



   (g)   A description of the method or methods to be used in
conducting the solicitations.



   (h)   The dates and hours when such solicitations will be made.



   (i)   A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of
any funds collected for charitable purposes by the applicant, said statement
giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it,
and the final distributions thereof.



   (j)   A statement of the extent of the charitable work being done or
to be done by the applicant.



   (k)   A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will
not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or by any
department or officer thereof.



   (l)   Proof that applicant is operated not for profit. A tax exempt
certificate issued by the State of Florida or federal government shall be
deemed sufficient proof that the applicant is not operated for profit.



(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 10-17-95)



Sec. 17-39.  Fees.



   (a)   At the time of filing an application for a permit, a
nonrefundable fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the city clerk to
cover the cost of investigating the application and for administrative costs.



   (b)   For each solicitation badge requested there will be an
additional identification badge fee of twenty-five cents ($0.25).



   (c)   There will be no fee required for amending an approved
application.



(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 95-39, § 2, 10-17-95)



Sec. 17-40.  Granting a permit.



   Within five (5) days of the application, the city clerk shall issue a
permit to the applicant.



   A permit may only be withheld where the following is determined to
exist:



   (a)   That one or more of the statements on the application is
incorrect; provided that the applicant has been given the opportunity to
correct or amend his application and refuses to do so.



   (b)   The applicant has refused to provide the information requested
in the application.



(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-20-81)



Sec. 17-41.  Appeal from refusal to grant permit.



   Should a permit be withheld for any reason the applicant may appeal to
the city council by requesting the same in writing to the city clerk.



   The council shall hold a hearing within fourteen (14) days of the
appeal.



   The information provided for under (a)(1) and (a)(2) shall be
considered as an amendment to the approved application.



(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-20-81)



Sec. 17-42.  Contents of permits; terms; expiration; nontransferable.



   (a)   Permits issued pursuant to this article shall state the name
and address of the person to whom the permit is issued, the number of the
permit, the date issued and the dates within which the permit holder may
solicit.



   (b)   No permit shall have a term in excess of thirty (30) days from
the date of issuance by the city clerk. This term shall run from the date of
the application for a thirty (30) day period.



   (c)   Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall not be
transferable or assignable.



   (d)   Said permit shall contain a complete list of the dates and
times of solicitation and a complete list of the names and addresses of the
person or persons who will be managing these solicitations. These permits
will be valid only for said events and said individuals.



   (e)   Each solicitor, including managers, shall be required to
obtain an identification badge from the Boynton Beach Police Department. Such
badge shall contain the name of the solicitor as well as the name and address
of the organization he represents and state that the application for permit
is on file in the city clerk's office. Solicitors representing organizations
who provide identification cards or packets which include the name of the
solicitor, the name of the organization, the address of the organization, and
the phone number of the organization will not be required to obtain a badge
from the Boynton Beach Police Department or to pay the fee indicated in
section 17-39(b). Such organization identification will be approved by the
city clerk.



(Ord. No. 81-1, § I, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 86-35, § 1, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 95-39,
§ 3, 10-17-95)



Sec. 17-43.  Amendments to application; additional solicitation.



   When an applicant has previously received a permit for all planned
solicitation during the thirty (30) day period and desires to schedule an
additional solicitation which has not been considered, he has two (2)
alternatives:



   (a)   Provided that the managers of this added solicitation were
considered on the original application, said solicitation can be approved by
submitting the dates, times and method of solicitation to the city clerk who
will accordingly amend the permit.



   (b)   If the managers of said solicitation were not considered on
the original application, the applicant must submit the names and addresses
of the person or persons who will be managing said solicitation, the dates,
times and method of solicitation to the city clerk.



(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 95-39, § 4, 10-17-95)



Sec. 17-44.  Restrictions on behavior.



   In conducting solicitations:



   (a)   Each solicitor shall wear an identification badge issued by
the city. Each solicitor shall wear or clearly display an identification
badge issued by the city or by the soliciting organization meeting the
special conditions in section 17-42(e).



   (b)   No solicitor may in any way obstruct, delay or interfere with
vehicular traffic within the city.



   (c)   There shall be no residential door to door solicitation
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.



(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-20-81; Ord. No. 86-35, § 2, 10-7-86)



Sec. 17-45.  Penalty.



   Failure to comply with any section of this article shall be deemed a
violation of the City Code punishable by up to a five hundred dollar
($500.00) fine and/or sixty (60) days in the county jail.



(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-20-81)



Chapter 18
PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT



Art. I.     Social Security, §§ 18-1—18-54



   Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 18-1—18-18



   Div. 2.   For Policemen, §§ 18-19—18-36



   Div. 3.   For Firemen, §§ 18-37—18-54



Art. II.    Employees' Pension Plan, § 18-55—18—163



   Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 18-55—18-73



   Div. 2.   Membership and Service, §§ 18-74—18-92



   Div. 3.   Contributions and Funding, §§ 18-93—18-110



   Div. 4.   Retirement and Retirement Benefits, §§ 18-111—18-134



   Div. 5.   Administration of the Plan, §§ 18-135—18-163



Art. III.    Municipal Police Officers’ Retirement Trust Fund, §§
18-164—18-178



Art. IV.   Pensions for Firefighters, §§ 18-179—18-194



Art. V.     Deferred Compensation Plan for Unclassified Personnel, §§
18-195, 18-196



Art. VI.   Flexible Benefit Plan, §§ 18-197—18-199



Art. VII.   Eligible Rollover Distributions, §§ 18-200—18-220



Art. VIII.    Investment Policies, §§ 18-221, 18-222



Art. IX.     Early Retirement Incentive Program Program, §§
18-223—18-230



Art. X.    Pension Plan for Elected Officials, § 18-240



ARTICLE I. SOCIAL SECURITY



DIVISION I. GENERALLY



Sec. 18-1.  Benefits accepted; personnel covered.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to
extend effective as of January 1, 1955, to the employees and officials
thereof, not excluded by law, nor excepted herein, the benefits of the system
of Old Age and Survivor’s Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social
Security Act and amendments thereto and by Chapter 650, Florida Statutes, as
amended; and to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment
as defined in Section 650.02, Florida Statutes, performed in the employ of
said city by employees and officials thereof, except:



   (a)   Service of an emergency nature;



   (b)   Service in any class or classes of positions the compensation
for which is on a fee basis;



   (c)   Service performed by a student for the school in which he or
she is enrolled.



(Code 1958, § 21-1)



Sec. 18-2.  Personnel excluded.



   There is hereby excluded from the benefits provided by section 18-1 any
authority to include in any agreement entered into under section 18-3 hereof
any service, position, employee or official now covered by or eligible to be
covered by an existing retirement system.



(Code 1958, § 21-2)



Sec. 18-3.  Agreements authorized.



   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary
agreements and amendments thereto with the Florida Industrial Commission, as
state agency, or its successor, for the purpose of extending the benefits
provided by such system of Old Age and Survivor’s Insurance to the
employees and officials of this city as provided in sections 18-1 and 18-2,
which agreements shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan
by such city as are found by the state agency to be necessary and proper, and
shall be effective with respect to services  in employment covered by such
agreement performed on and after the first day of January, A.D. 1955.



(Code 1958, § 21-3)



Sec. 18-4.  Withholdings authorized.



   Withholdings from salaries, wages or other compensation of employees
and officials for the purpose provided in section 18-1 are hereby authorized
to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be
paid over to the state agency designated by such laws or regulations to
receive such amounts.



(Code 1958, § 21-4)



Sec. 18-5.  Appropriations authorized.



   There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from general
revenue, such amounts, at such times, as may be required to pay promptly the
contributions and assessments required of the city as employer by applicable
state or federal laws or regulations, which shall be paid over to the
lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by
law and regulation.



(Code 1958, § 21-5)



Sec. 18-6.  Records, reports, adherence to regulations required.



   The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall adhere
to the regulations of the state agency.



(Code 1958, § 21-6)



Sec. 18-7.  Federal act adopted.



   The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements,
reservations, benefits, privileges and other conditions thereunto
appertaining, of Title II of the Social Security Act as amended, for and on
behalf of all officers and employees of its departments and agencies to be
covered under the agreement.



(Code 1958, § 21-7)



Sec. 18-8.  Custodian, withholding and reporting agent designated.



   The Treasurer of the city is hereby designated the custodian of all
sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the
appropriated funds for the contribution of the city, and the Treasurer of the
city is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the
duty of maintaining personnel records for the purposes of this division.



(Code 1958, § 21-8)



Sec. 18-9.  Pension administrator; duties.



   (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein all administrative duties
associated with the maintenance of the pension accounts created by this
chapter including the preparation of records and reports, shall be performed
by the pension administrator hired from time to time by the city.



   (b)   Nothing herein shall diminish or alter the responsibility of
the City Clerk to act as custodian of the official minutes of the pension
boards.



   (c)   The pension administrator shall act as secretary to all
pension boards established by this chapter and shall provide the original
minutes of said meetings to the city clerk.



(Ord. No. 93-23, § 1, 8-3-93)



Secs. 18-10—18-18. Reserved.



DIVISION 2. FOR POLICEMEN



Sec. 18-19.  Benefits accepted; personnel covered.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to
extend effective as of January 1, 1958, to employees and officials thereof in
the position of policeman and not excluded by law nor excepted herein, the
benefits of the system of Old Age and Survivors Insurance as authorized by
the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, and by Chapter 650,
Florida Statutes, as amended; and to cover by such plan all of their services
which constitute employment as defined in Section 650.02, Florida Statutes,
performed in the employ of said city.



(Code 1958, § 21-9)



Sec. 18-20.  Agreements authorized.



   The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary
agreements and amendments thereto with the state agency, and to request the
governor to authorize an employee referendum, for the purpose of extending
the benefits provided by said system of Old Age and Survivors Insurance to
the employees and officials of said city as specified in section 18-19,
hereof, which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of
the plan by the city as are found by the state agency to be necessary and
proper, and, subject to employee referendum, shall be effective with respect
to services in employment covered by such agreement performed on and after
the first day of January, A.D., 1958.



(Code 1958, § 21-10)



Sec. 18-21.  Withholdings authorized.



   Withholdings from salaries, wages or other compensation of employees
and officials for the purpose provided in section 18-19 hereof are hereby
authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as
may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall
be paid over to the state agency designated by said laws or regulations to
receive such amounts.



(Code 1958, § 21-11)



Sec. 18-22.  Appropriations authorized.



   There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from general
fund revenue, such amounts, at such times, as may be required to pay promptly
the contributions, assessments, and referendum costs required of the city as
applicant or employer by state or federal laws or regulations, which shall be
paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the
manner provided by law and regulation.



(Code 1958, § 21-12)



Sec. 18-23.  Records, reports, adherence to regulations required.



   The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws and regulations, and shall
adhere to the regulations of the state agency.



(Code 1958, § 21-13)



Sec. 18-24.  Federal act adopted.



   The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements,
reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto
appertaining, of Title II of the Social Security Act as amended, for and on
behalf of all its officers and employees to be covered under the agreement.



(Code 1958, § 21-14)



Sec. 18-25.  Custodian, withholding and reporting agent designated.



   The treasurer of the city is hereby designated the custodian of all
sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the
appropriated funds for the contribution of the city, and the treasurer of
said city is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with
the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purposes of this division.



(Code 1958, § 21-15)



Sec. 18-26.  Referendum required.



   In the event that a majority of the eligible employees, as the term
“eligible employee” is defined in Section 212(d)(3) of the Social
Security Act, at a referendum held pursuant to the authority of this
division, do not vote in favor of making applicable the coverage authorized
herein, then the effect of this division shall immediately cease and
determine, and moneys withheld, if any, pursuant to section 18-21 hereof
shall be refunded.



(Code 1958, § 21-16)



   Editor's note-Participation was in fact approved at the referendum
required by the above section.



Secs. 18-27—18-36. Reserved.



DIVISION 3. FOR FIREMEN



Sec. 18-37.  Benefits accepted; personnel covered.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to
extend effective as of January 1, 1958, to employees and officials thereof in
the position of fireman and not excluded by law nor excepted herein, the
benefits of the system of Old Age and Survivors Insurance as authorized by
the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, and by Chapter 650,
Florida Statutes, as amended; and to cover by such plan all of their services
which constitute employment as defined in Section 650.02, Florida Statutes,
performed in the employ of said city, except volunteers.



(Code 1958, § 21-17)



Sec. 18-38.  Agreements authorized.



   The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary
agreements and amendments thereto with the state agency, and to request the
governor to authorize an employee referendum, for the purpose of extending
the benefits provided by said system of Old Age and Survivors Insurance to
the employees and officials of said city as specified in section 18-37
hereof, which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of
the plan by said city as are found by the state agency to be necessary and
proper, and, subject to employee referendum, shall be effective with respect
to services in employment covered by such agreement performed on and after
the first day of January, A.D., 1958.



(Code 1958, § 21-18)



Sec. 18-39.  Withholdings authorized.



   Withholdings from salaries, wages or other compensation of employees
and officials for the purpose provided in section 18-37 hereof are hereby
authorized to be made, and shall be made in the amounts and at such times as
may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall
be paid over to the state agency designated by said laws or regulations to
receive such amounts.



(Code 1958, § 21-19)



Sec. 18-40.  Appropriations authorized.



   There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from general
fund revenue, such amounts, at such times, as may be required to pay promptly
the contributions, assessments, and referendum costs required of the city as
applicant or employer by state or federal laws or regulations, which shall be
paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the
manner provided by law and regulation.



(Code 1958, § 21-20)



Sec. 18-41.  Records, reports, adherence to regulations required.



   The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall adhere
to the regulations of the state agency.



(Code 1958, § 21-21)



Sec. 18-42.  Federal act adopted.



   The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements,
reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto
appertaining, of Title II of the Social Security Act as amended, for and on
behalf of all its officers and employees to be covered under the agreement.



(Code 1958, § 21-22)



Sec. 18-43.  Custodian, withholding and reporting agent designated.



   The treasurer of the city is hereby designated the custodian of all
sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the
appropriated funds for the contribution of the city, and the treasurer of
said city is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with
the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purposes of this division.



(Code 1958, § 21-23)



Sec. 18-44.  Referendum required.



   In the event that a majority of the eligible employees, as the term
“eligible employee” is defined in section 218(d)(3) of the Social
Security Act, at a referendum held pursuant to the authority of this
division, do not vote in favor of making applicable the coverage authorized
herein, then the effect of this division shall immediately cease and
determine, and moneys withheld, if any, pursuant to section 18-39 hereof,
shall be refunded.



(Code 1958, § 21-24)



   Editor's note-Participation was in fact approved at the referendum
required by the above section.



Secs. 18-45—18-54. Reserved.



ARTICLE II. EMPLOYEES' PENSION PLAN



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 18-55.  Definitions.



   The following words and phrases, as used in this article, unless a
different meaning is plainly required by the context, shall have the
following meanings, and the same and similar terms when used in connection
with any civil service system or any other ordinance of the city shall not
necessarily apply to the members of the retirement system hereby created
except when specifically adopted:



   Actuarial equivalent. A benefit of equal value or equal cost when
computed on the basis of such interest rates, mortality, and other actuarial
tables as are in effect under the plan.  For plan years beginning after
December 31, 2002 for purposes of Code Section 415(b), the mortality table is
the table used under Code Section 417(e) as prescribed by the Secretary of
the Treasury in Rev. Rul. 2001-62.



   Annuity. Annual payments for life to be paid in equal monthly
installments with the first payment made as of the first day of the month in
which retirement occurs and continuing until death with the last payment made
as of the first day of the month in which death occurs.



   Annual earnings. Gross earnings received by the employee as
compensation for services to the city, including overtime pay. Bonuses shall
be excluded. Flexible benefits shall be excluded. Effective June 18, 2013
overtime included in pensionable compensation is limited to 300 hours per
member per year.  Prior to June 18, 2013 all overtime is included in the
definition of pensionable compensation. No hours of unused accumulated sick
and vacation leave earned after June 18, 2013 shall be considered annual
earnings.  However, members may include all unused hours earned prior to
June 18, 2013 provided that amount of hours is cashed in at retirement. 
Beginning with annual earnings after December 31, 2008, and pursuant to
Internal Revenue Code Section 414(u)(7), the definition of annual earnings
includes amounts paid by the city as differential wages to members who are
absent from employment while in qualified military service.



   Beneficiary. Any person in receipt of, or entitled to, an annuity,
retirement allowance, or other benefit as provided by this article.



   Board of Trustees. For the purposes of this article, “Board of
Trustees,” “Board” or “Trustees” shall be construed to mean the
members of the City Council, unless the said Council, by resolution,
designates additional or substitute individuals to perform the duties and
functions of such Board of Trustees.



   Charter. The charter of the city, as amended.



   City. The City of Boynton Beach, Florida.



   City’s contribution. The annual contribution needed to fund
actuarially the liability for annuities credited to employees on the basis of
actuarial methods and assumptions approved by the Council.



   Code.  The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.



   Creditable service. Service in the employment of the city for which
credit is allowed under the terms of this article. Such service shall be
computed to the nearest whole month of completed service but not including
any fractional parts of a month.



   Effective date of the plan. The date on which the operation of the plan
is to commence for the purpose of determining eligibility, benefits and
related matters, which is hereby fixed as the first day of April, 1968.



   Employee. All full-time persons employed by the city and so classified
under rules and regulations and personnel records of the city, including
“probational” or permanent employees. Any appointed officer shall only be
qualified under this plan under one office and that office being the one from
which he receives the largest annual salary, compensation or remuneration.
Independent contractors are excluded.



   Fund or pension fund. All sums of money paid into the plan by the city,
and all gifts and contributions to the fund, accepted from other sources,
together  with earnings and appreciation of the same, less disbursements
made from said money, in accordance with the plan, or less any losses or
depreciation, as asset value.



   Gender. The masculine pronoun shall include the feminine pronoun.



   General employee. A general employee shall include all employees, as
defined in section 18-55 herein, other than policemen or firemen who have not
elected to become members of this pension plan under the provisions of
section 18-76.



   Member. Any person employed by the city who is included in the
membership of the plan as either an original member or a new member. However,
a member shall be limited and restricted to the definition of employee.



   Membership service. Service rendered as a full- time permanent employee
since last becoming a member of the plan. Such service shall be computed to
the nearest full month of completed service but not including any additional
fractional parts of a month.



   New member. Any permanent employee who becomes a member of the plan
after the effective date of the plan.



   Normal retirement date. The normal retirement date of a member shall be
his or her normal retirement date as determined in accordance with the terms
of the plan.



   Original member. Any permanent employee of the city who becomes a
member as of the effective date of the plan.



   Past service. Continuous service rendered as a full-time employee from
his or her date of employment to the effective date of the plan.



   Permanent employee. An employee who has completed his or her
probationary period, been approved for permanent status by the department
head under whom he or she is employed, or the city council, if approved by
it, and has been certified by the City Clerk or City Manager as a permanent
employee, or according to the personnel records of the city pertaining to
such employee. Certification or approval for permanent status shall be
subject to the  rules of the career service system of the city.



   Plan, pension plan or employees’ pension plan. The system of
retirement benefits provided under this article.



   Plan year. A period of 12 consecutive months measured on the basis of
the fiscal year, or from any anniversary thereof. The fiscal year will
commence October 1 of each year and end September 30 of each year.



   Retirement. Withdrawal from active employment by the city with
retirement income granted under the provisions of this plan.



   Retirement annuity option. An optional form of retirement annuity as
described in section 18-118.



   Social Security option. An optional form of retirement annuity as
described in section 18-119.



   Spouse. The spouse of a member who was married to the member throughout
the two-year period ending on the date of the member’s death.



   Total and permanent disability. Includes any disablement caused by
sickness or accident which prevents the member from working at any job for
wage or profit and which will continue for the remainder of the member’s
life. The determination of whether or not a member is totally and permanently
disabled shall be made by the city’s Long Term Disability Company.



   Treasurer. The treasurer of the plan is the city finance officer.



(Code 1958, § 21-25; Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 90-41, § 2,
9-18-90; Ord. No. 99-14, passed 6-1-99; Ord. No. 10-006, § 2, 2-16-10; Ord.
No. 10-028, § 2, 11-3-10; Ord. 11-034, § 2, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 13- 035, § 2,
12-3-13; Ord. No. 15-008, § 2, 3-2-15)



Sec. 18-56.  Establishment of system.



   A pension and retirement system for full-time permanent employees in
the service of the city is hereby established to provide retirement benefits
as provided by this article. It shall be known as the Employees’ Pension
Plan of the City of Boynton Beach, Florida.  This system is intended to be a
tax qualified plan under Code Section 401(a) and meet the requirements of a
governmental plan as defined in Code Section 414(d).



(Code 1958, § 21-26; Ord. No. 10-028, § 3, 11-3-10)



Sec. 18-57.  Future changes in the operation of plan.



   It is contemplated, and all original and new members of the plan shall
be deemed to have notice, that the city commission of this city may in the
future decide that it is in the best interests of the city and the members of
the plan to modify or terminate trust agreements or contracts entered into
with an insurance company or companies, to exercise options available to the
city under the terms of such trust agreements or contracts, or to select
another insurance company, trust, or other financial institution, as the
depository for pension funds.



(Code 1958 § 21-27)



Sec. 18-58.  Power to amend or terminate.



   The city commission shall have continuous power to amend this article
as provided by its Charter, including the power to suspend or discontinue
contributions or to terminate the plan, provided that no such amendment shall
(a) revest any part of the pension fund of the city, or (b) make possible the
diversion of the pension fund, or any part thereof, to any person other than
the exclusive benefit of the members of the plan.



(Code 1958, § 21-28)



Sec. 18-59.  Discontinuance of contributions.



   If the city permanently discontinues its contributions to the plan
without terminating the plan, the assets of the pension fund, as of the last
day of the plan year in which such discontinuance becomes effective, shall be
deemed to be vested in the members of the plan on such date in the manner
described in section 18-60, except that no distribution of assets shall be
made in accordance with such vested right until the member entitled thereto
retires or terminates his employment with the city. For the purposes of this
section, the city shall be deemed to have permanently discontinued
contributions if as of the last day of any plan year the unfunded liability
is determined to be greater than the sum of its unfunded liabilities as of
the effective date of the plan and any additional unfunded liabilities due to
subsequent plan amendment or change in actuarial assumptions.



(Code 1958, § 21-28.1)



Sec. 18-60.  Termination of plan.



   In the event the plan is terminated, the board of trustees shall cause
the assets of the plan to be valued as of the date of termination.  Upon
termination of the plan, all of the members are 100% vested in their accrued
benefit. Such assets shall be allocated to active employees first to the
extent of their individual contributions to the plan. Any assets in excess of
employee contributions shall then be allocated to retired employees in the
proportion that such assets bear to the actuarial value of the benefit which
the retired employees are receiving. If after such allocation, any assets
then remain, such additional assets shall be allocated to active employees in
the ratio that the liability for benefits accrued by such employee which is
in excess of their individual contribution bears to the aggregate liability
for all such employees.



(Code 1958, § 21-28.2; Ord. No. 10-028, § 4, 11-3-10)



Sec. 18-61.  City contribution irrecoverable.



   It shall be impossible for any contributions made by the city under
this plan to be used for or diverted to purposes other than the exclusive
benefit of the members and their beneficiaries; except that if after all
liabilities of the plan have been paid, any balance shall remain in the trust
fund due to erroneous actuarial computations, such balance may be returned to
the city.  Additionally, contributions made due to a good faith mistake of
fact may be returned to the city.



(Code 1958, § 21-28.3; Ord. No. 10-028, § 5, 11-3-10)



Sec. 18-62.  Fraud and deceit prohibited; penalty.



   Whosoever with intent to deceive shall make or cause to be made any
statement, report, certificate, election, notice, claim or other instrument,
authorized or required under this article, whether of the enumerated classes
or otherwise, which shall be untrue, or who shall cause to be falsified any
record comprising any part of the operation or administration of the plan
contemplated by this article, shall be punished by a fine, not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such violation shall also be
punishable as provided under the laws of the State of Florida.



(Code 1958, § 21-29)



Sec. 18-63.  Temporary limitations.



   Until April 1, 1978, but not thereafter, unless the full current costs
of the plan have not been met as of April 1, 1978, in which event the
provisions of this section will be continued until the first date thereafter
when the full current costs have been met, the provisions of this plan, shall
be subject to the following limitations with respect to any of the
twenty-five (25) highest paid employees of the city as of April 1, 1968,
whose prospective retirement benefits exceed $1,500.00 per year:



   (a)   If the plan is terminated the benefits shall not exceed those
provided by the city's contributions equal to the greater of the following
amounts:



      (1)   $20,000.00.



      (2)   The amount computed by multiplying twenty per cent (20%)
of such member's average annual compensation (not exceeding $50,000.00)
received from the city for five (5) years preceding the date of termination
by the number of years intervening between April 1, 1968, and such
termination.



   (b)   If a member retires from the city's employ, the amount of the
benefits provided by the plan shall be paid to him only so long as the city
continues to meet the full current costs of the plan; otherwise the benefits
available to such member in any year, beginning with the year in which the
city first fails to meet the full current costs of the plan shall be limited
to the annual benefits which could have been provided under the plan with an
amount equal to the sum to which he would then be entitled under paragraph
(1) of subsection (a) of this section had this plan then terminated, plus his
pro-rata share of all supplemental payments made by the city in such year, or
in any later year or years, for all members affected by this paragraph;
provided, however, that the total amount of such supplemental payments in any
year shall not exceed the aggregate employer contributions already made under
the plan in the year then current.



   (c)   If the employment of a member with the city is terminated for
reasons other than death or retirement, benefits which thereupon may be
distributed or made available to him shall not exceed the amount to which
such member would then be entitled under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of
this section if the plan were then terminated. Any excess benefits to which
such member would otherwise have been entitled may also be distributed or
made available to him in the next succeeding year or years provided (1) the
city has met the full current costs of the plan, and (2) the benefits
distributed or made available in any succeeding year shall not exceed an
amount which when added to the amounts previously distributed to him pursuant
to this subsection will not exceed the amount to which he then would be
entitled under said paragraph (1) if this plan were then terminated.



   For the purposes of this section the full current costs of the plan
shall be deemed to have been met as of any date if the city shall have
contributed to the trustee sums sufficient so that the initial deficit, if
any, in the pension fund shall not have increased.



(Code 1958, § 21-29.1)



§ 18-64  Limitation on compensation.



   Compensation in excess of the limitations set forth in Section
401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be disregarded. The limitation
on compensation for “eligible employees” shall not be less than the
amount which was allowed to be taken into account under the Plan as in effect
on July 1, 1993. For this purpose, an ”eligible employee” is an
individual who was a member of the Pension Plan before the first plan year
beginning after September 30, 1996.



(Ord. No. 96-36, § 1, 7-16-96)



Secs. 18-65—18-73. Reserved.



DIVISION 2. MEMBERSHIP AND SERVICE



Sec. 18-74.  Original members.



   All full-time, permanent city employees on the effective date of the
plan who do not currently participate in either the pension plan for firemen
or the pension plan for policemen in Boynton Beach may elect to become
original members of the plan. Eligible employees who do not elect to become
original members of the plan will not become original members.



(Code 1958, § 21-30)



Sec. 18-75.  New members.



   New, full-time, general city employees will participate in the plan on
the first day of their becoming a full-time general city employee. Full-time,
permanent employees who do not elect to become original members of the plan
may elect to become new members of the plan as of any anniversary of the
effective date of the plan by giving written notice to the City Manager at
least one month before such anniversary date.



(Code 1958, § 21-31)



Sec. 18-76.  Reserved.



Sec. 18-77.  Creditable service.



   Creditable service for the purpose of calculating benefits for general
employees shall consist of the member’s service rendered by the employee
since he last became a member, plus past service, rendered continuously since
the employee’s last date of employment as defined in section 18-78 to the
date of his or her separation from service by reason of death, disability,
termination of employment or retirement. Creditable service shall also
include any credit granted for military service pursuant to section 18-81,
Military and related service.



(Code 1958, § 21-33; Ord. No. 79-20, Art. I, § 4, 4-17-79; Ord. No. 80-51,
§ 4, 12-16-80; Ord. 10-006, § 4, 2-16-10)



Sec. 18-78.  Service before effective date of plan.



   Credit will be given original members for continuous service to the
city from their dates of employment (or most recent date of employment if
service has not been continuous) to the effective date of the plan, with the
exception as outlined in section 18-77.



(Code 1958, § 21-34)



Sec. 18-79.  Termination of membership.



   (a)   Should any member separate from the service of the city for
any reason except his or her  retirement, death or termination after having
completed five years of credited service or after total and permanent
disability he or she shall thereupon cease to be a member of the plan and his
or her credited service at that time shall be forfeited by him or her except
as provided by section 18-117 of this article.



   (b)   No distributions under this section shall be made until after
the member separates from employment.



(Code 1958, § 21-35; Ord. No. 78-15, § 1, 4-4-78; Ord. No. 78-30, § 1,
8-1-78; Ord. No. 78-38, § 1, 9-5-78; Ord. No. 00-75, § 2, 1-2-01; Ord. No.
10-028, § 6, 11-3-10)



Sec. 18-80.  Leaves of absence.



   Any member who has been granted a leave of absence (except for
vacations, extended vacations, sick leave, extended sick leave, or leaves of
absence of benefit to the city and approved by the City Manager) shall be
allowed service credit earned prior  to the start of leaves of absence, and
with service credit to resume upon return to employment.



(Code 1958, § 21-36)



Sec. 18-81.  Military and related service.



   (a)   When any member is inducted or enlists into any of the Armed
Forces of the United States, or enlists in any reserve component, enlists in
the United States Coast Guard, or in any other reserve component, or enters
upon active duty in the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States
Coast Guard, or the United States Public Health Service in response to an
order or call to active duty, and is subsequently reemployed by the city as a
full-time permanent general city employee under such circumstances that he or
she thereby becomes entitled to return to work for the city within the time
that reemployment rights are granted to him or her by law, he or she shall
again become a member of the plan and shall be given service credit for the
credited service he or she had accumulated before entering military or
related service and shall again accumulate additional credited service
commencing with the date of his or her reemployment by the city.  If
approved by the Board such member may also be granted service credit for the
period of time spent in military or related service.



   (b)   Effective December 12, 1994, the member will at all times be
entitled to the rights granted by the Internal Revenue Code Section 414(u),
including:



      (1)   The member will not have break in service as a result of
the military service.



      (2)   The right to purchase such service under the provisions
of Section 414(u)(8).



   (c)   Effective January 1, 2007, members who die or become disabled
while serving on active duty military service which intervene’s the
member’s employment shall be entitled to the rights of this section even
though such member was not re- employed by the city. Members who die or
become disabled while on active duty military service shall be treated as
though re-employed the day before the member became disabled or died, was
credited with the service they would have been entitled to under this
section, and then either died a non-duty death while employed or became
disabled from a non-duty disability.



(Code 1958, § 21-37; Ord. No. 10-006, § 5, 2-16-10; Ord. No. 10-028, § 7,
11-3-10)



Sec. 18-82.  Reemployment.



   When any former employee of the city is reemployed, he or she will
become a member of the plan upon reemployment as a full-time permanent
general city employee. When a former employee of the city is reemployed and
said employee had withdrawn contributions previously made to the plan, he or
she may have forfeited credited service reinstated upon satisfaction of each
of the following conditions:



   (1)   The break in city employment is not more than sixty (60)
months; and



   (2)   The plan is paid the total amount previously withdrawn
(consisting of accumulated member contributions plus any interest previously
paid by the plan on those contributions).  This total amount is brought
forward with interest for the total number of months from the date of
withdrawal to the date of repayment, calculated to the nearest month.  This
calculated amount equals the amount to be repaid to the plan in a lump sum. 
The interest to bring forward the total amount will be at the equivalent
compound monthly rate derived from the earning rate assumed by the actuary in
the most recent actuarial valuation submitted to the Division of Retirement
pursuant to F.S. Chapter 112, part VII.



   (3)   Repayment of withdrawn contributions, interest thereon, and
administrative processing fee, must be made no later than one (1) year from
the date the fund’s actuary delivers a repayment calculation to the
employee.



   (4)   The application is made within one (1) year of reemployment by
the city. Should a member fail to make application within one (1) year of
reemployment for the purchase of prior city time, then the member may within
five (5) years of reemployment by the city request the purchase of the prior
city time. This time may be purchased at the full actuarial impact of the
purchase of service, plus the cost of the actuarial services to calculate the
buyback.



   When a former employee of the city is reemployed and said employee had
previously terminated his or her employment with a vested right to a deferred
annuity, provided he or she had not withdrawn contributions previously made
to the plan, he or she will again become a member of the plan as of the date
of his or her reemployment as a full- time permanent general city employee.
The credited service which such reemployed member had accumulated as of the
date of his or her prior termination of employment shall be reinstated and he
or she shall accrue additional credited service from the date of his or her
reemployment. Any benefits to which such reemployed member subsequently
becomes entitled shall be based on the sum of his or her credited service
prior to his or her previous termination of employment plus credited service
subsequently to his or her reemployment.



(Code 1958, § 21-38; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1, 3-5-96;  Ord. No. 98-02, § 1,
1-20-98; Ord. No. 98-12, § 1, 4-21-98; Ord. No. 15-008, § 3, 3-2-15)



Secs. 18-83—18-92. Reserved.



DIVISION 3. CONTRIBUTIONS AND FUNDING



Sec. 18-93.  Pension fund designated.



   The City of Boynton Beach Employees' Pension Fund shall be the fund in
which shall be accumulated all contributions made for the Employees' Pension
Plan of the City of Boynton Beach and from which shall be paid benefits and
other payments in accordance with this article.



(Code 1958, § 21-39)



Sec. 18-94.  Employee contributions required.



   Subject to the limitations imposed in section 18-95, employees who are
members of the plan shall contribute 7% of monthly earnings to the fund for
that month.  Pursuant to Code section 414(h)(2), the city shall pick up the
member contributions required by this section. The contributions so picked up
shall be treated as employer contributions in determining tax treatment under
the Code.  The city shall pick up the member contributions from funds
established and available for salaries, which funds would otherwise have been
designated as member contributions and paid to the Fund.  Member
contributions picked up by the city pursuant to this subsection shall be
treated for purposes of making a refund of members' contributions, and for
all other purposes of this and other laws, in the same manner and to the same
extent as member contributions made prior to the effective date of this
section.



(Code 1958, § 21-40; Ord. No. 79-20, Art. I, § 2, 7-17-79; Ord. No. 80-51,
§ 2, 12-16-80; Ord. No. 88-43, § 2, 9-21-88; Ord. No. 00-75, § 3, 1-2-01;
Ord. No. 10-028, § 8, 11-3-10)



Sec. 18-95.  Deduct contributions from pay.



   The Director of Finance shall cause contributions provided for in
section 18-94 of this article to be deducted from the compensation of each
member on each and every payroll for each and every payroll. A member’s
contribution provided for herein shall be made notwithstanding that the
minimum compensation provided by law for any member shall be changed thereby.
Each member shall be deemed to consent and agree to the deduction made and
provided for herein and payment of his compensation less said deduction shall
be full and complete discharge of all claims and demands whatsoever for the
service rendered by said member during the period covered by such payment,
except as to the benefits provided by this plan. The Director of Finance
shall cause the amount to be deducted from the compensation of each member
for each and every payroll as authorized by this article and when deducted
shall be paid into the fund of the plan and shall be credited to the
individual member from whose compensation said deduction was made.



(Code 1958, § 21-41; Ord. No. 79-20, Art. I, § 3, 7-17-79; Ord. No. 80-51,
§ 3, 12-16-80; Ord. No. 10-006, § 6, 2-16-10)



Sec. 18-96.  Return of accumulated employee contributions.



   (a)   Should any member cease to be an employee of the city for any
reason except his or her retirement, disability or death, he or she shall be
paid all of his or her accumulated contributions standing to his or her
credit in the fund, as he or she shall demand on forms furnished by the City
Commission in accordance with section 18-117.



   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this plan, upon the death of a
member, his or her accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in
the Pension Fund, at the time of his or her death, shall be paid to such
person or persons as he or she shall nominate by written designation duly
executed and filed with the City Commission. If there shall be no such
designated person or persons surviving the said member, his or her said
accumulated contributions shall be paid to his or her estate.



   (c)   No distributions under this section shall be made until after
the member separates from employment.



(Code 1958, § 21-42; Ord. No. 78-15, § 2, 4-4-78; Ord. No. 10-028, § 9,
11-3-10)



Sec. 18-97.  Gifts to fund.



   All gifts, devises and bequests to the plan shall be credited to the
pension fund. The city may accept gifts, devises, bequests, or appropriations
for the fund from any source, but shall have the right to reject same if they
are so conditioned as to conflict with the Charter or this article, or to
make the administration of the same unreasonably difficult.



(Code 1958, § 21-43)



Sec. 18-98.  City to bear costs in excess of contributions and gifts.



   All costs of the pension plan in excess of sums received through
employee contributions, gifts, devises, bequests, and from other sources,
will be borne by the city.



(Code 1958, § 21-44)



Sec. 18-99.  City's contribution.



   The city shall pay into the fund amounts required in addition to funds
received from employee contributions, gifts, devises, and so forth, to
provide the benefits under the plan, as shall be determined by an actuarial
investigation as provided in Division 5.



(Code 1958, § 21-45)



Sec. 18-100.  Financial management.



   Employee contributions, gifts, bequests, devises and appropriations to
the fund shall be received by the Director of Finance who shall be liable for
the safekeeping of the funds under his or her bond. The Director of Finance
shall transfer to the Pension Fund all pension funds appropriated by the City
Commission. The Director of Finance shall be responsible for making all
payments and disbursements from the pension fund.



(Code 1958, § 21-46)



Secs. 18-101—18-110. Reserved.



DIVISION 4. RETIREMENT AND RETIREMENT BENEFITS



Sec. 18-111.  Normal retirement.



   (a)   An employee who retires on or after January 1, 1977, but
before January 2, 2001, will normally retire on the first day of the month
following his or her sixty-second birthday or the first day of the month
following ten years of completed service with the city, whichever is later.



   (b)   An employee who retires prior to January 1, 1977, will
normally retire on the first day of the month following his or her
sixty-fifth birthday or the first day of the month following ten years of
completed service with the city, whichever is later.



   (c)   On or after January 2, 2001, an employee will be eligible to
retire on the first day of the month following his or her fifty-fifth
birthday and the completion of 25 years of services, or his or her
sixty-second birthday and the completion of five years of services, or the
completion of 30 years of services regardless of age.



   (d)   In the event of normal retirement, the retiring employee shall
be entitled to and shall be paid an annuity payable monthly beginning with
the month of retirement and continuing until death. The amount of annuity to
which the retiring employee will be entitled will be calculated as follows:



      (1)   An employee who retires prior to October 6, 1988, shall
be eligible to receive a monthly benefit computed in accordance with the
provisions of the plan as in effect as of the date of his or her retirement;
provided, however, that with respect to those employees who retired prior to
January 1, 1977, effective as of January 1, 1977 the retirement benefit
payable to each such individual was increased by 25% as of that date; and,
provided further, that effective as of October 6, 1988, the monthly benefit
payable to each individual who retired before such date shall be increased by
2% of each such individual’s current benefit times the number of full years
between each such individual’s most recent retirement date and October 6,
1988.



      (2)   An employee who retires prior to October 6, 1988, shall
be eligible to receive a monthly benefit computed in accordance with the
provisions of the plan as in effect as of the date of his or her retirement.
An employee who retires on or after October 6, 1988, but before January 2,
2001, shall be entitled to, and shall be paid, an annuity payable monthly
beginning with the month of retirement and continuing until death. The amount
of the annuity to which the retired employee will be entitled will be equal
to 50% of his or her final average monthly compensation plus 75% of the
excess over $825 of such final average monthly compensation; provided,
however, the employee has completed at least 25 full years of credited
service at his or her normal retirement date. If the employee’s credited
service at normal retirement date is less than 25 full years, the aforesaid
amount shall be reduced for the shorter service by multiplying it by a
fraction, the numerator of which is the employee’s full years and fractions
thereof in months of credited service at normal retirement date and the
denominator of which is 25 years.



      (3)   An employee who retires on or after January 2, 2001,
shall be entitled to and shall be paid an annuity in the amount of 3% times
the number of years of his or her service to the city times his or her final
average monthly compensation, subject in any event to a maximum of 75% of his
or her final average monthly compensation.



      (4)   “Final average monthly compensation,” for the
purposes of this section, shall mean the monthly average of the employee’s
annual earnings during the highest 60 consecutive calendar months occurring
in the 120 calendar months immediately preceding his or her normal retirement
date if such date falls on or after January 1, 1979, and based upon
compensation immediately preceding actual retirement date if normal
retirement date preceded January 1, 1979, or he or she elected to continue to
contribute after normal retirement date as provided in section 18-95.
“Annual earnings” as used in the above sentence shall mean gross earnings
received by the employee as compensation for service to the city as provided
for in Section 18-55.



      (5)   Elective benefits.  The city may, from time to time,
offer elective benefits to employees, which benefits would be funded solely
by employees contributions and would not result in any additional cost to the
city.  These benefits are provided for in section 18-128 of the plan.



   (e)   Commencing October 1, 2001, in lieu of receiving a cost of
living increase, retirees may be eligible to receive a supplemental pension
distribution payable by the following July 1, the amount of which shall be
determined as of September 30 of each year. The amount of the distribution is
equal to the amount the net investment return exceeds the assumed rate of 
investment return divided equally among all participants whose benefit was in
pay status as of the previous October 1. The amount of the distribution shall
be the same for all eligible retired members regardless of years of service,
age, years retired, or amount of monthly benefit. In no event shall the
supplemental benefit exceed the average monthly benefit of those retirees
receiving a monthly benefit calculated as of the previous October 1.



      (1)   The actuary for the pension fund shall determine the
rate of investment return on the pension fund assets during the 12-month
period ending each September 30, and shall be the rate reported in the most
recent actuarial report.



      (2)   The actuary for the pension fund shall, as of September
30, determine the actuarial present value of future pension payments to
current retirees.



      (3)   The supplemental benefit shall not be paid in any year
that the present value of such benefits does not exceed the net actuarial
experience accumulated from all sources of gains and losses since this
benefit was enacted.



      (4)   If there shall be a supplemental distribution,  Board
of Trustees shall authorize a supplemental pension distribution, unless the
administrative expenses of distribution exceed the amount available for
distribution.



      (5)   The eligible persons to receive a supplemental
distribution are retirees, including participants in the DROP, and their
beneficiaries.



      (6)   For members who participate in the DROP, as provided in
§ 18-127 of the plan, the supplemental pension distribution, if distributed,
shall be deposited in the member's DROP account during their term of the
participation in the DROP.



   (f)   An employee's right to his or her normal retirement benefit is
non-forfeitable upon attainment of normal retirement age.



(Code 1958, § 21-47; Ord. No. 79-20, Art. I, § 5, 7-17-79; Ord. No. 80-51,
§ 5, 12-16-80; Ord. No. 88-43, § 3, 9-21-88; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 5-19-98;
Ord. No. 00-75, § 4, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 02-026, § 2, 6-18-02; Ord. No.
06-079, § 2, 10-17-06; Ord. No. 10-028, § 10, 11-3-10; Ord. No. 13-035, §
3, 12-3-13)



Sec. 18-112.  Minimum benefit.



   In no event shall an employee's monthly retirement benefit determined
under sections 18-111, 18-113, 18-114 or 18-117 be less than the monthly
retirement benefit which such employee would have received based on his
accrued benefit as of April 30, 1975, under the provisions of the plan as in
effect immediately prior to May 1, 1975.



(Code 1958, § 21-48)



Sec. 18-113.  Delayed retirement.



   Any employee who does not desire to retire on his or her normal
retirement day may delay retirement.



(Code 1958, § 21-49; Ord. No. 79-20, Art. I, § 1, 7-17-79; Ord. No. 80-51,
§ 1, 12-16-80; Ord. No. 10-006, § 7, 2-16-10)



Sec. 18-114.  Retirement prior to normal retirement date.



   (a)   The early retirement date of an employee shall be the first
day of any month prior to his or her normal retirement date and following, or
coinciding with, the date of actual retirement, provided (s)he has then
completed less than thirty (30) years of service, but at least: (a) ten (10)
years of credited service and has attained his or her fifty-fifth (55th)
birthday; or (b) twenty-five (25) years of service and has attained fifty-two
(52) years of age.  An employee who retires on an early retirement date
shall be entitled to a deferred annuity payable beginning at his or her
normal retirement date or, if (s)he so elects, to an immediate annuity
beginning at his or her early retirement date. The amount of the deferred
annuity will be equal to a benefit determined as for normal retirement under
the provision of section 18-111, but based on the employee's final average
monthly compensation as of his or her early retirement date and his or her
credited service as of such early retirement date.  If the retiring employee
elects to receive an immediate annuity commencing at his or her early
retirement date, the amount of such immediate annuity shall be the deferred
annuity described in the preceding sentence, less one-quarter of one percent
(.25%) times the number of months preceding his or her normal retirement date.



   (b)   Prior to January 2, 2001, if the employee retires after
achieving fifty-two (52) years of age and twenty-five (25) years of service,
the immediate annuity shall be the actuarial equivalent of the immediate
annuity received had the employee retired at fifty-five (55) years of age
with twenty-five (25) years of service.



(Code 1958, § 21-50; Ord. No. 88-43, § 4, 9-21-88; Ord. No. 095.01, § 1,
2-21-95; Ord. No. 00-75, § 5, 1-2-01)



Sec. 18-115.  Death before retirement date.



   (a)   Prior to January 2, 2001, in the event of death of an employee
prior to the receipt by such employee of any of the benefits under the
provisions of this article, then the total amount of contributions by said
employee to the fund, up to the time of his death, shall be paid to the
beneficiary of the deceased employee, together with interest thereon at the
rate of three per cent (3%) per annum to January 1, 1977, and five per cent
(5%) thereafter, computed in the manner provided in section 18-117, unless
the employee has reached normal retirement age and the retirement annuity
option provided in section 18-118 has been elected by the employee, in which
case pension payments will be made as though the employee had retired on the
date before he died.



   (b)   On or after January 2, 2001, in the event of the death of an
employee prior to the receipt by such employee of any of the benefits under
the provisions of this article, then the beneficiary of the deceased employee
who was not vested, may receive the total amount of contributions by said
employee to the fund, up to the time of his or her death, together with the
interest thereon at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum thereafter,
computed in the manner provided in section 18-117.  The beneficiary of an
employee who became vested prior to their death may receive the pension
benefit earned by the employee as though the employee had retired on the date
before (s)he died, payable either as an immediate lump sum payment or as a
monthly survivor benefit for the remainder of the survivor's life.



      (1)   The immediate lump sum payment is equal to the greater
of the employee's contributions, together with the interest thereon at the
rate of five percent (5%) per annum, or the lump sum value of the actuarial
calculation of the employees' accrued pension payable at the earliest date
the employee could have retired.



      (2)   The monthly survivor benefit would be the actuarial
calculation of the employee's accrued pension starting at the earliest date
the member could have retired. If the beneficiary's age is more than fifteen
(15) years less than the employee's age at the time of death, then the
monthly benefit will be reduced as though the beneficiary was fifteen (15)
years younger than the employee. The monthly survivor benefit is payable at
the earliest date the employee could have retired.



      (3)   If the earliest date that the employee could have
retired is before the normal retirement date, then the accrued death benefit
will be subject to the early retirement penalty of three percent (3%) for
each year prior to what would have been the employee's normal retirement date.



      (4)   If the beneficiary selects to receive the monthly
survivor benefit but predeceases the date such payments commence, the
employee's estate shall receive a refund of the employee's estate shall
receive a refund of the employee's contributions, together with the interest
thereon at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum.



(Code 1958, § 21-51; Ord. No. 00-75, § 6, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 02-027, § 2,
6-18-02)



Sec. 18-116.  Death after retirement date.



   In the event of the death of a retired employee prior to the receipt by
said employee of benefits under this article in an amount equal to the total
amount contributed by such employee to the pension fund, together with
interest thereon at the rate of three per cent (3%) per annum to January 1,
1977, and five per cent (5%) per annum thereafter computed to the date of the
employee's retirement as provided in section 18-117, then the excess of such
contribution plus interest to the date of retirement over the amount of the
benefits received by such employee under this section shall be paid to the
beneficiary of such deceased employee unless the retired employee has elected
the retirement annuity option provided in section 18-118 in which event
benefits will be paid in accordance with such option. The designated
beneficiary of an employee who retired prior to January 1, 1977, but who dies
subsequent thereto, shall be eligible to receive benefits computed in
accordance with the provisions of the plan in effect as of the date of such
employee's retirement.



(Code 1958, § 21-52)



Sec. 18-117.  Termination of services prior to eligibility for retirement.



   In the case of voluntary resignation or discharge of any member of the
plan, the total amount contributed by said employee to the fund up to the
time of his resignation or discharge (together with interest at the rate of
three per cent (3%) per annum to January 1, 1977, and five per cent (5%) per
annum thereafter compounded from the end of the year in which contributions
are made to the date of termination of service) shall be returned and said
employee shall immediately cease to be a member of the plan and shall not be
entitled to any other benefits from the plan unless the member has completed
five (5) years of credited service under the plan or is totally and
permanently disabled. If he has completed five (5) or more years of credited
service or is totally and permanently disabled he shall be fully vested and
entitled to a deferred annuity commencing at his or her otherwise expected
early or normal retirement date. The monthly amount of such deferred annuity
shall be an amount computed in the same manner as the deferred annuity
described for early retirement in section 18-114. For the purpose of such
calculation, the member’s date of termination of employment shall be
considered as his early retirement date.



   An employee who is entitled to a deferred annuity under the provisions
of this section 18-117 may waive his right to such deferred annuity and
accept in lieu thereof the total amount he has contributed to the pension
fund (together with interest thereon as described above) up to the time of
his resignation or discharge.



   In the event of resignation or discharge of any member as described in
this section 18-117, any contributions theretofore made by the city relating
to such member, with accruals thereon, which have not vested in accordance
with the provisions of this section 18-117, shall be used to reduce
contributions to be made thereafter by the city and shall not be used to
increase the benefits of any member.



(Code 1958, § 21-53; Ord. No. 00-75, § 7, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 13-035, § 4,
12-3-13)



Sec. 18-118.  Retirement annuity option.



   (a)   At any time prior to or upon the date of normal retirement, a
member may elect to receive annuity benefits payable under the plan with the
approval of the pension board in the form of a joint and survivor annuity
instead of the normal annuity form, which shall be the actuarial equivalent
of the annuity which he would normally receive. A member may rescind such
election at any time prior to his or her normal retirement date. Under the
joint and survivor annuity, two-thirds (2/3) of the retirement annuity income
continues to the surviving contingent annuitant, until his or her death. The
election of a joint and survivor annuity shall be deemed to be automatically
cancelled in the event of the death of the joint annuitant prior to the
member’s actual retirement.



   (b)   If a retired member has elected an option with a joint
annuitant or beneficiary and his or her retirement income benefits have
commenced, he or she may thereafter change the designated joint annuitant or
beneficiary with the approval of the Board of Trustees and the joint
annuitant or beneficiary being removed. The retiree is required to provide
proof of the good health of the joint annuitant or beneficiary being removed,
and the joint annuitant or beneficiary being removed must be living. Any
retired member who desires to change his or her joint annuitant or
beneficiary shall file with the Board of Trustees a notarized notice of such
change. Upon Board approval of a completed change of joint annuitant form or
such other notice, the Board of Trustees shall adjust the retiree’s monthly
benefit by the application of actuarial tables and calculations developed to
ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the present value
of the retiree’s current benefit and there is no impact to the Plan. The
actuarial calculation will include a five (5) year age adjustment to keep the
cost actuarially neutral. The Board will pay for the cost of the first
recalculation of the benefit by the actuary; the retiree will be responsible
for the cost of any subsequent recalculations. In the event that no joint
annuitant or designated beneficiary survives the retiree, there is no benefit
payable unless the retiree has not received benefit which total or exceed the
amount of contributions made by the retiree. No retiree’s current benefits
shall be increased as a result of the change of joint annuitant or
beneficiary.



(Code 1958, § 21-54; Ord. No. 85-46, § 1, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 14-021, § 2,
9-16-14)



Sec. 18-119.  Social Security option.



   An employee who retires before he is entitled to receive monthly
benefits under the Federal Social Security system may elect to receive
increased pension plan benefits before Social Security benefits begin, and
decreased pension plan benefits thereafter to obtain, insofar as practical, a
level total yearly retirement income from two (2) sources. The amounts he
will receive, both before and after he becomes eligible for Social Security
payments, shall be the actuarial equivalent of the benefits to which he would
have been entitled had he not selected this option.



(Code 1958, § 21-55)



Sec. 18-120.  Member records; status statements; beneficiary designations.



   (a)   A separate record of account shall be maintained for each
member and among other things shall show his service record, his accumulated
contributions to the plan, his exact age, his designation of beneficiary,
together with any such information as is necessary for an active and
comprehensive determination of his status under this plan.



   (b)   A member of the plan shall complete and file with the board a
designation of beneficiary which names the person who is to receive any death
benefits that may become payable under sections 18-115 and 18-116 other than
benefits paid to a surviving spouse. Such designation of beneficiary is to be
completed by the employee at the time he initially becomes a member of this
plan. An employee who has failed to designate a beneficiary at the time of
his initial membership in this plan may file a designation of beneficiary at
any time thereafter. A member may change his designation of beneficiary at
any time by filing a new designation of beneficiary form. If a member has
failed to file a designation of beneficiary, any death benefits which would
normally be paid to a designated beneficiary shall be paid in full to the
first class of the following relative which has a member(s) (on a pro rata
basis, if there is more than one member):



      (1)   The spouse married to the member on date of death;



      (2)   Dependent children of the member;



      (3)   The living parents of the member; or



      (4)   The estate of the member.



   This payment operates as a complete discharge of all obligations of the
fund under the plan and shall not be subject to review but shall be final,
binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder.



(Code 1958, § 21-56; Ord. No. 13-035, § 5, 12-3-13)



Sec. 18-121.  Benefits unassignable and not subject to process.



   The right of any member or any beneficiary to any benefits under the
plan or any other right accrued or accruing to any persons under the
provisions of the article shall not be subject to execution, garnishment,
attachment, the operation of any bankruptcy or insolvency law or any other
process of law whatever, and shall not be subject to assignment, pledge  or
hypothecation unless expressly authorized in this article.



(Code 1958, § 21-57)



Sec. 18-122.  Errors, corrections and adjustments.



   Should any change or error in the records of the plan be discovered, or
any error in any calculation be made resulting in any member or beneficiary
receiving from the plan more or less than he was entitled to receive, the
council shall have the power to correct such error, and so far as possible to
adjust the payments thereafter to be made in such a manner that the actuarial
equivalent of the benefit to which such member or beneficiary was correctly
entitled, be paid.



(Code 1958, § 21-58)



Sec. 18-123.  No interest in the fund.



   No member, employee, beneficiary or other persons shall have any
interest in, or right in, or to the fund or any part thereof, or any assets
comprising the same, except only as to the extent expressed and provided in
this article.



(Code 1958, § 21-59)



Sec. 18-124.  Payments in case of legal or other disability.



   Whenever and/or as often as a person entitled to payments hereunder
shall be under legal disability, or, in the sole judgment of the board, shall
otherwise be unable to apply such payments to his best interests and
advantage, the board in the exercise of its discretion may direct that all or
any portion of the benefits of such members payable in any one or more of the
following ways:



   (a)   Directly to such person;



   (b)   To his legal guardian or conservator;



   (c)   To his spouse, or to any person to be expended for his benefit.



   The decision of the board shall, in each case, be final and binding on
all persons including the affected member of the plan.



(Code 1958, § 21-60)



Sec. 18-125.  Re-employment of members receiving benefits or full vested who
leave the city.



   The city may at its option employ any person receiving benefits under
this chapter, except for disability benefits.



   (1)   Re-employment full-time: A person who leaves the employ of the
city after vesting or receiving a pension from any one of the city's pension
plans can be re-employed at the option of the city on a full-time basis,
provided they are no longer a member of the plan they are or will be
receiving benefits from. A person who is re-employed shall be entitled to
participate in the city's pension plan for his/her position provided he/she
is otherwise eligible to join that plan pursuant to the plans' provisions.



   (2)   Re-employment on a part-time basis: Said part-time employment
shall not exceed one thousand six hundred (1,600) hours per year. During this
period of part-time employment, the employee shall not be allowed to make
contributions to the pension fund nor shall such period of service count
toward credit for the employee's credible service nor in figuring the average
final compensation of the employee.



(Ord. No. 80-52, § 1, 12-16-80; Ord. No. 93-31, § 1, 9-7-93)



Sec. 18-126. Disability retirement benefits.



   (a)   Any member with less than 10 years of service who receives a
medically substantiated injury, disease or disability, which injury, disease
or disability totally and permanently disabled him/her to the extent that, in
the opinion of the Long Term Disability Company, he/she is unable to perform
all the material duties of his/her occupation, and in the event of recovery
prior to the otherwise normal retirement date, and return to full-time
employment with the City of Boynton Beach, credit for service during the
period of disability shall be granted for purposes of subsequent retirement
benefits.



   (b)   For purposes of this plan, if the employee is found to be
totally and permanently disabled by the city’s Long Term Disability
Company, the employee will be deemed to be totally and permanently disabled
under the Plan.  If the employee disagrees with the Long Term Disability
Company’s determination, an appeal must be made to the Pension Board in a
timely manner.  The Board shall conduct a preliminary determination as to
whether the member is permanently and totally disabled based upon the written
documentation presented.  If the Board does not grant the application based
on the written documentation,  it shall inform the member in writing of the
reasons for the denial of the application. The member may, within 30 days of
receipt of the Board’s preliminary denial, request a full evidentiary
hearing before the Board.  Said hearing will be conducted consistent with
the principles of due process and the rules of evidence generally applicable
to administrative proceedings shall apply. The Board shall have the power to
issue subpoenas compelling the attendance of witnesses.  At said hearing the
applicant may present such oral and written evidence as the applicant deems
necessary to establish its burden of proof.  The Board may appoint special
counsel as an advocate to cross-examine witnesses and to offer argument in
opposition to the application.  The attorney for the Board shall not serve
both as advocate and as advisor to the Board in the same proceeding.  The
applicant and the Board shall have the right to examine and cross-examine all
witnesses.  The decision of the Board shall be based solely upon the
evidence presented and the law applicable to this plan.  Following the
conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall render an opinion in writing
setting forth the reasons for the grant or denial of the benefit.  In the
event the disability is denied, the applicant shall have the right of
judicial review by complaint for common law certiorari in the Circuit Court
of Palm Beach County. The Board may prescribe rules of procedure to implement
the provisions of this plan relating to the conduct of disability hearings.



   (c)   Disability exclusions.  No member shall be granted a
disability pension upon a showing to the satisfaction of the Board:



      1.   That the disability resulted from an intentionally
self-inflicted wound, injury or ailment, or



      2.   That the disability resulted from the use of narcotics,
drugs or alcoholic beverages, or



      3.   That the disability resulted from a member’s
participation or involvement in riot, insurrection or unlawful assembly, or



      4.   That the disability resulted from a member’s
participation or involvement in the commission of a crime or unlawful act, or



      5.   That the disability resulted from injury or disease
sustained by the member while serving in any armed forces. This exclusion
does not affect members who have become disabled as a result of intervening
military service under the federal Heroes Earnings Assistance and Relief Tax
Act of 2008 (H.R. 6081; P.L. 110-245).



(Ord. No. 99-14, § 2, 6-1-99; Ord. No. 10-006, § 8, 2-16-10)



Sec. 18-127.  Deferred retirement option plan.



   (a)   A deferred retirement option plan (“DROP”) is hereby
created.



   (b)   Eligibility to participate in the DROP is based upon
eligibility for normal service retirement in the plan.



   (c)   Participation in the DROP must be exercised within the first
30 years of employment; provided, however, that participation in the DROP,
when combined with participation in the retirement plan as an active member
may not exceed 35 years. The maximum period of participation in the DROP is
five years. An employee’s election to participate in the DROP plan shall be
irrevocable and shall be made by executing a resignation notice on a form
prescribed by the city.



   (d)   Upon exercising the right to participate in the DROP, an
employee’s creditable service, accrued benefits and compensation
calculation shall be frozen and shall utilize the average of the five highest
of the ten years immediately preceding participation in the DROP as the
compensation basis. Accumulated, unused sick and vacation leave shall be
included in the compensation calculation as provided for and limited by the
definition of annual earnings; provided, however, that a minimum balance of
120 hours of sick leave and 120 hours of vacation leave shall be maintained
by the employee and excluded from this calculation. The retained leave
balance, including any additions, shall be distributed at the conclusion of
DROP participation and separation from service.  In accordance with the
definition of annual earnings, the accumulated sick and vacation leave that
is includable in the compensation calculation will phase out but hours may
still be transferred up to the maximum permitted by the Code, provided the
minimum number of sick and vacation leave remains on the books.



   (e)   Payment shall be made into the employee’s DROP account as if
the employee had terminated employment in the city in an amount determined by
the employee’s selection of the payment option.



   (f)   An employee’s account in the DROP program shall earn
interest in one of three ways.  The selection of the earnings program shall
be made prior to the first deposit in the DROP account and may be modified
once each year by the participant during their participation in the DROP. 
The investment method may be changed each year effective January 1, however,
the method must be elected prior to January 1 on a form provided by the Board
of Trustees.  The options are:



      (1)   Gain or lose interest at the same rate as the plan;



      (2)   At an annual fixed rate of 7%; or



      (3)   A percentage of the DROP account will be credited with
interest gains or losses at the same rate earned by the pension plan and the
remaining percentage will be credited with earnings at a guaranteed rate of
7%. The actual percentage shall be selected by the member on a form provided
by the Board of Trustees.  The total of the two percentages must equal 100%.



The participant’s DROP accounts will be assessed an administrative fee that
is based upon the ratio that the participant's DROP account bears to the fund
as a whole.



   (g)   An employee shall terminate service with the city at the
conclusion of five years in the DROP.



   (h)   All interest shall be credited to the employee’s DROP
account on the last day of the month in which the member separates from
service. In the event that a member dies while in the DROP, interest shall be
prorated to the last business day of the month preceding the death of the
member.



   (i)   Upon termination with the city, an employee may receive
payment within 45 days of the member requesting payment or may defer payment
until a time not later than the latest date authorized by Section 401(a)(9)
of the Internal Revenue Code at the option of the member.



   (j)   Payments from the DROP may be received as a lump sum
installment payment or annuity, provided, however, that at all times, the
DROP shall be subject to the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code.



   (k)   No payment may be made from the DROP until the employee
actually separates from service with the city.



   (l)   If an employee shall die during participation in the DROP, a
survivor benefit for the monthly pension amount shall be payable in
accordance with the form of benefit chosen at the time of entry into the
DROP. An employee entering into the DROP or a member participating in the
DROP post employment may designate a beneficiary(ies) to receive payment of
the DROP balance in a lump sum upon his or her death in accordance with
sections 18-118 and 18-120.  In the absence of the designation of a
beneficiary, the remaining balance shall be paid in full to the first class
of the following relative which has a member(s) (on a pro rata basis, if
there is more than one member): the spouse married to the member on date of
death; dependent children of the member; the living parents of the member; or
the estate of the member. This payment operates as a complete discharge of
all obligations of the Fund under the Plan and shall not be subject to review
but shall be final, binding, and conclusive on all persons ever interested
hereunder.



   (m)   Upon commencement of participation in the DROP, the member
shall no longer be eligible for disability retirement from the pension
plan.  If a member becomes disabled during the DROP period, the member shall
be treated as if he or she retired on the day prior to the date of disability.



   (n)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 18-125 of this
plan.  Participants in the DROP must terminate employment and participation
in the DROP before any re-employment may occur.



(Ord. No. 00-75, § 8, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 02-028, § 2, 6-18-02; Ord. No.
04-053, § 2, 8-3-04; Ord. No. 13-035, §§ 6-7, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 14-021, §
3, 9-16-14)



Sec. 18-128.  Elective benefits.



   (a)   Effective February 16, 2010, members will no longer be able to
enroll in elective benefits. Elective benefits were offered to the members of
this plan and were voluntary elections, the costs of which are borne entirely
by the member through payroll deductions during their employmentwith the
city.  Such deductions are taxable dollars at the time the deduction is
made. Members who were enrolled in elective benefits as of February 16, 2010
may continue to participate in these benefits or elect to cancel
participation.  The employee contributions used to purchase such elective
benefits shall be accounted for separately and are non-forfeitable.



   (b)   Open enrollment. A member may elect to  cancel an elective
benefit only during the open enrollment period as provided by the Board of
Trustees. Contributions shall be reimbursed to the member on cancellation of
the elective benefit and shall only be refunded for the elective benefit
canceled. No interest earnings will be  applicable to the premiums
contributed or to the refunded amount.  The cancellation of such elective
benefit is  irrevocable.



   (c)   Costs. The costs for all elective benefits are borne by the
member through payroll deductions during employment with the city.



   (d)   In the event of death before retirement of any participant,
all premiums paid shall be refunded to the beneficiary. If the employee was
eligible for normal retirement and the retirement annuity option had already
been selected by the employee, the deceased member’s earned pension amount
will be actuarially reduced to a joint and survivor form and two-thirds of
this amount will be paid to the survivor for his or her lifetime.  For the
25-year retirement at any age benefit option, the retirement factor used
shall be the factor which provides the most benefit to the employee.



   (e)   Elective benefits.  There were four elective benefits
options. The elective benefit options were as follows:



      (1)   Option 1A - health insurance subsidy.



         a.   The health insurance subsidy will provide a monthly
benefit up to $200 per month upon normal retirement.  In the event of death
prior to retirement, where the member is eligible for normal  retirement and
the retirement annuity option has been elected by the  employee, the $200
per month will be actuarially reduced to a joint and survivor form of benefit
and two-thirds of this amount will  be paid to the survivor for his or her
lifetime.



         b.   The amount to be received for the health insurance
subsidy at retirement is based on years of contributions by the employee. The
full benefit of $200 per month is based upon 25 years of employees
contributions.  A prorated benefit will be provided for years of
contributions less than 25 years.



Illustration for prorated health insurance subsidy:



      Member age @ hire      30



      Member age @ retirement   55



      Years of premium payment   5



                  (5yrs/25yrs = 20%)



      Monthly benefit      $40



                  ($200 subsidy x 20%)



   Based upon this illustration, the employee contributed for five years
which represents 5/25, or 20% of the full benefit calculated period. 
Therefore, the health insurance subsidy at normal retirement would be 20% of
$200, or $40.



      (2)   Option 1B - health insurance subsidy with 2% per year
COLA.



         (a)   The health insurance subsidy with 2% cost of
living adjustment (“COLA”) will provide an initial monthly benefit up to
$200 per month at normal retirement in 1999.  In the event of death prior to
retirement, where the member is eligible for normal retirement, and the
retirement annuity option has been selected, the $200 per month will be
actuarially reduced to a joint an survivor form of benefit and two-thirds of
this amount will be paid to the survivor for his or her lifetime. The $200
per month will beindexed by 2% per year, compounded for all affected members.



         (b)   The amount to be received for the health
insurance  subsidy with 2% COLA at retirement is based upon years of
contributions by the employee.  The full benefit of the indexed insurance
subsidy per month is based upon 25 years of employee contributions.  A
prorated benefit will be provided for years of employee contributions less
than 25 years.



Illustration for prorated health insurance subsidy with 2% COLA:



      Member age @ hire      30



      Member age @ retirement   55



      Years of premium payment   8



                  (8yrs/25yrs = 32%)



      1st year monthly benefit   $64



                  ($200 subsidy x 32%)



      2nd year monthly benefit   $65.28



                  ($204 subsidy x 32%)



      (3)   Option 2 – Cost-of-Living Adjustment (“COLA”). The
cost of living adjustment (“COLA”) provides a 5% deferred COLA 
commencing five  years after retirement and compounded with additional 5%
increases every three years thereafter.  Spouse benefits, if elected, would
also be eligible for the COLA, but the actuarial equivalent factors at
retirement for conversion to the joint and two-third  survivor benefit 
would need to be updated.  A prorated benefit will be provided for years of
employee contributions less than 25 years.



Illustration of the Cost-of-Living Adjustment (COLA):



      Member age @ hire      50



      Member age @ retirement   62



      Years of premium payment   12



                  (12yrs/25yrs = 48%)



      COLA Benefit         2.4%



                  (5% COLA x 48%)



   An employee that made full contributions for this elective benefit
option would receive a 5% COLA.  Since the illustrated employee contributed
12 years toward the COLA it has been prorated to 2.40% which represents 48%
of the fully contributed percentage.



      (4)   Twenty-five-year service requirement (any age).  The
25-year service requirement (any age) would allow the employee to retire with
25 years of service, regardless of age.  This option will provide an
increase in the early retirement factors based upon years contributed.  The
cost will be actuarially adjusted on an annual basis.  A prorated benefit
will be provided for years of employee contributions less than 25 years. 
The factors used for retirement based upon years of service are as follows:



      25 years   72.51% of calculated benefit



      26 years   76.91% of calculated benefit



      27 years   81.81% of calculated benefit



      28 years   87.36% of calculated benefit



      29 years   93.41% of calculated benefit



      30 years   100.00% of calculated benefit



Illustration of the 25-year service requirement (any age):



      Member age at hire         20



      Member age at retirement      45



                     (25 yrs of service)



      Years of premium payment      5



                     (5 yrs/25yrs = 20%)



      Average pay while contributing   $29,700



      Percentage cost per year      1.89%



      Aggregate premium         $2,807



      ER factor            72.51%



      Adjusted ER factor         78.01%



                     (27.49 diff (@ 20%)



      (Adjusted factor of 72.51% + Differential of (100.00-72.51) x 20%)



(Ord. No. O06-027, § 2, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 10-006, § 9, 2-16-10; Ord. No.
10-028, § 11, 11-3-10)



Secs. 18-129—18-134. Reserved.



DIVISION 5. ADMINISTRATION OF THE PLAN



Sec. 18-135.  Board of Trustees.



   (a)   Composition of the Board.  The composition and terms of the
seven members of the Board of Trustees of the Employees’ Pension Plan of
the city are hereby established as follows:



      (1)   The Mayor.



      (2)   The City Manager, or his or her designee.  The
appointment of a City Manager designee by the City Manager shall be ratified
by the City Commission.



      (3)   Two individual citizens who shall be appointed by the
City Commission to serve for four-year staggered terms.



      (4)   One employee representative member shall be elected
at-large by the members of the plan to serve a four-year term.



      (5)   One employee representative member shall be elected to
serve a four-year term by all members of the plan from the general membership
of the plan, provided the member is a member of a bargaining unit of the city.



      (6)   One employee representative member shall be elected to
serve a four-year term by all members of the plan from the general membership
of the plan, provided the member is not a member of a bargaining unit of the
city.



      (7)   Employee representatives on the Board must be actively
employed at the city to be elected to the Board.  An employee who enters the
DROP as provided in section 18-127, may continue to serve out the remainder
of their term on the Board, but an employee representative may not be elected
to the Board if they have already entered into the DROP prior to the election.



      (8)   The terms of the employee representatives on the Board
shall be staggered.



   (b)   Vacancies.



      (1)   If an elective seat on the Board is vacated for any
reason, an election to fill the vacated position shall be conducted. 
However, if an elected Board member retires before the expiration of their
term, such Board member may continue to hold such elective seat for the
balance of their elected term.



      (2)   If an appointive seat on the Board is vacated for any
reason, the seat shall be filled by appointment by the appointing body.



      (3)   A replacement member shall serve on the Board for the
unexpired term of the person replaced.



   (c)   Conduct of elections.



      (1)   The Board of Trustees shall be elected by a per capita
vote of all employees, retirees and individuals who are on approved
disability leave.  The candidate(s) receiving 50% plus one of the votes
shall be declared elected and shall take office as soon thereafter as
qualified.



         a.   Such election shall be conducted by first class
mail.  Such mailing shall include:



            1.   A letter of instruction written in a manner
calculated to be understood by the average recipient;



            2.   A ballot approved by the Board;



            3.   A Board approved form which contains a
description of each candidates’ profile or description of qualifications
which has been submitted to the pension office by the candidate no later than
30 days prior to an election; and



            4.   A postage paid return envelope.



         b.   Mail ballots must be received in the return
envelope by the deadline provided by the Board.



         c.   All ballots shall be received and counted under the
supervision of the Pension Administrator or other designee(s) of the Board.



         d.   Only one ballot per member shall be permitted.



      (2)   The Board may rely on the address maintained by the
city’s Human Resource Department as accurate and current with respect to
persons entitled to vote for the purposes of notice and mailing ballots.



      (3)   Notice of the election shall be provided to all
qualified persons entitled to vote in person, by mail and by notice posted on
city bulletin boards and included with members paychecks and pension or
disability checks 90 days in advance of an election. Candidates may register
to run for a position on the Board 60 days prior to the conduct of the
election.  The ballots shall be mailed out 30 days prior to the election
date.



      (4)   The results of the election shall be placed on the next
Board agenda immediately following the election for certification of the
election results.



(Ord. No. 06-026, § 2, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 07-022, § 2, 9-4-07; Ord. No.
10-006, § 10, 2-16-10)



Sec. 18-136.  Compensation of Board.



   The members of the Board shall serve without compensation for their
services.



(Code 1958, § 21-62)



Sec. 18-137.  Meetings of Board; quorum, vote required.



   This plan or any matter herein may be considered and disposed of at any
Board meeting. A majority of the membership shall constitute a quorum and all
decisions, acts and resolutions of the Board shall be by affirmative vote of
at least three members.



(Code 1958, § 21-63)



Sec. 18-138.  Administrative regulations authorized; distribution.



   The board by resolution may promulgate written rules and regulations
not in conflict with the expressed terms of this article or the Charter to
cover the operation of any phase or part of the plan as provided by this
article. Copies of such rules and regulations shall be furnished to any
member of the plan upon request and at least one copy thereof shall be kept
available in the office of the city clerk for examination by any interested
persons at any time during ordinary business hours. Otherwise, a copy of this
article shall fully meet the provisions herein.



(Code 1958, § 21-64)



Sec. 18-139.  Board to interpret plan.



   The board has the power to construe all terms, rules, conditions and
limitations of the plan, and its construction made in good faith shall be
final and conclusive upon all parties' interests.



(Code 1958, § 21-65)



Sec. 18-140.  Agents and employees.



   The board shall have the power to select, employ and compensate, or
cause to compensate from time to time such consultants, actuaries,
accountants, attorneys, investment counsel and other agents and employees as
they may deem necessary and advisable in the proper and efficient
administration of the plan.



(Code 1958, § 21-66)



Sec. 18-141.  Powers and duties not exclusive.



   The powers and duties of the board or of any other persons as set out
herein are not intended to be complete or exclusive but each such body or
persons shall have such powers and duties as are reasonably implied under the
terms of this article. Where not in conflict with this article, or the
Charter, the trust agreement or contract entered into with the insurance
company, shall govern.



(Code 1958, § 21-67)



Sec. 18-141.1.  Application for benefits; procedure.



   Any party who seeks benefits under the provisions of this chapter shall
initiate his or her request by filing a written application with the
secretary of the Board of Trustees of the pension plan.



(Ord. No. 80-53, § 1, 12-16-80)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 80-53, § 1, amended 1958 Code by adding
provisions designated § 21-67.5 which provisions have been included herein
as § 18-141.1.



Sec. 18-142.  Secretary of board designated.



   The city clerk or deputy clerk shall be secretary to the board under
this plan.



(Code 1958, § 21-68)



Sec. 18-143.  Duties of the secretary.



   It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep accurate minutes and
records of the acts of the board under this plan separate and apart from the
regular minutes of city council meetings. This provision is made for the
express purpose of having all proceedings in connection with this plan in one
set of books, thereby saving going through all of the minutes of the various
board meetings. They shall be available to the public, city officials and
employees under this plan at all times.



   It shall be further the duties of the secretary to receive all
applications for benefits under this chapter from the applicants, to maintain
files on said application and to give reasonable written notice to the
applicant of all meetings and hearings of the pension board on any party's
request for benefits pursuant to this chapter.



(Code 1958, § 21-69; Ord. No. 80-53, § 2, 12-16-80)



Sec. 18-143.1.  Consideration of application for benefits.



   Upon receipt of an application for benefits, pursuant to this chapter,
the secretary of the board shall set the matter for an initial determination
by the board of a party's eligibility for benefits pursuant to this chapter.
The party seeking benefits shall be given reasonable notice of this meeting
and shall have an opportunity to present any relevant information to the
board at that time. The board may either award benefits at that time, seek
further information, or make an initial determination that benefits pursuant
to this chapter shall be denied. If the board makes an initial determination
of denial it shall instruct the city attorney to inform the applicant, in
writing, of the reasons for said denial, and give the applicant thirty (30)
days to request a full hearing before the board to determine the applicant's
eligibility for benefits under this chapter.



   The board shall hold a full hearing within thirty (30) days of a
request for the same by the applicant. All relevant evidence shall be
received by the board at the time of the hearing. At the close of the full
hearing the board shall make a final determination of the applicant's
eligibility for benefits under the chapter.



   Any party grieved by the board's decision shall have thirty (30) days
to file a petition for writ of certiorari with the court.



(Ord. No. 80-53, § 3, 12-16-80)



   Editor's note-Section 18-143.1 is derived from Ord. No. 80-53, § 3
which amended Code 1958 by adding provisions designated § 21-69.5.



Sec. 18-144.  Preservation of records; notices to trustee.



   All notices, elections, designations and changes of beneficiaries and
similar writings pertaining to the operation of the plan shall be made and
preserved in writing on such forms as the Board may direct. The secretary
shall maintain all records in segregated files pertaining to the plan and
they shall not be inter- mingled with other files of the city. Whenever there
is any notice, election, designation, complaint, ruling or other written
proceedings relating to a particular employee, the secretary shall furnish
the trustee or the insurance company, when necessary, with a copy of same, as
well as the employee.



(Code 1958, § 21-70)



Sec. 18-145.  City of Boynton Beach Investment Policy for General Employees'
Pension Fund.



   (a)   General. The Board of Trustees of the Boynton Beach General
Employees’ Pension Fund has established this Statement of Investment
Policy. This policy has been identified by the Board as having the greatest
expected investment return, and the resulting positive impact on asset
values, funded status, and benefits, without exceeding a prudent level of
risk. The Board determined this policy after evaluating the implications of
increased investment return versus increased variability of return for a
number of potential investment policies with varying commitments to stocks
and bonds.



   (b)   Purpose.  The purpose to this section is to:



      (1)   Provide the investment manager a more accurate
understanding of the trustees’ investment objectives; and



      (2)   Indicate the criteria by which the investment
manager’s performance will be evaluated.



   (c)   Investment manager responsibilities.



      (1)   Within the guidelines and restrictions set forth herein,
it is the intention of the Board to give the investment manager full
investment discretion, with respect to assets under its management. The
investment manager shall discharge its responsibilities in the same manner as
it would if the fund were governed by the fiduciary, responsibility
provisions of the Employee-Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA).
Although the fund trustees acknowledge that ERISA does not apply to a
governmental fund, it hereby imposes the fiduciary provisions of ERISA upon
the investment manager whose performance shall conform to the statutory
provisions, rules, regulations, interpretations, and case law of ERISA. The
investment manager shall acknowledge, in writing, that it is a named
fiduciary of the fund.



      (2)   The investment manager is expected to provide any
reasonable information requested by the Board of Trustees. At a minimum, each
manager shall provide a quarterly report detailing their investment activity,
the portfolio’s current value, and any changes in investment philosophy or
strategy. The firm’s investment manager is expected to meet with the Board
of Trustees at least once per year. A designated representative will meet
with the Board of Trustees, at least quarterly. A designated representative
of a mutual fund company is not required to attend meetings with the Board of
Trustees.



      (3)   Unless otherwise provided by the custodian, the
investment manager will monitor portfolio activity to minimize uninvested
cash balances.



      (4)   The investment manager shall be responsible only for
those assets under its management.



      (5)   It will be the responsibility of the investment manager
to review the monthly valuations provided by the custodian and to note, in
writing, any significant discrepancies from the valuations provided in their
own reports.



   (d)   General objectives.



      (1)   The primary investment objective of the Boynton Beach
General Employees’ Pension Fund is the preservation of invested capital. 
The secondary objective is to achieve moderate long-term real growth (after
inflation) while minimizing the volatility of returns.



      (2)   To achieve these objectives, the Board seeks to create a
well-diversified and balanced portfolio of high quality equity, fixed income
and money market securities.  The Board has determined that one or more
outside investment managers shall be retained to assure that all investments
are managed in both a prudent and professional manner and in compliance with
the state investment guidelines.



   (e)   Investment objectives.



      (1)   Investment objectives are intended to provide
quantifiable benchmarks to measure and evaluate portfolio return and risk. 
Most investment styles require a full market cycle to allow an investment
manager to demonstrate his or her abilities. A full market cycle is generally
defined as a three to five  year period.  As a result, performance
objectives will be measured over three to five year periods.  Monitoring
shorter periods may be used to determine the trend of performance premiums or
deficiencies.



      (2)   The specific objectives of the Boynton Beach General
Employees' Pension Fund are as follows:



         a.   Primary objective:



            1.   To earn an average rate of return over the
long term (three to five years) which exceeds the return of a Target Index. 
The Target Index for the Boynton Beach General Employees’ Pension Fund is
defined as a 55% investment in the Russell 1000 Stock Index, a 10% investment
in the Russell 2000 Stock Index, a 20% investment in the MSCI Europe
Austrailasia and Far East Stock Index (EAFE), a 10% investment in the NCREIF
Property Index, and a 25% investment in the Barclays Capital Aggregate Bond
Index.



            2.   In addition, it is expected that the total
rate of return earned will rank above average when compared to a
representative universe of other, similarly managed portfolios.



         b.   Secondary objective: A further goal of the Boynton
Beach General Employees’ Pension Fund shall be to achieve an average annual
rate of return greater than the absolute return of 8%, over the longer
term.  This absolute return objective will be evaluated in the context of
the prevailing investment market conditions.



         c.   Volatility: The volatility of the fund’s total
returns is expected to be similar to that of the Target Index and will be
evaluated accordingly.



      (3)   The investment objectives set forth herein have been
established for the entire Boynton Beach General Employees’ Pension Fund. 
The specific investment objectives for each investment manager will be
outlined in separate documents which will be addenda hereto and incorporated
herein to this overall statement of investment policy.



   (f)   Investment guidelines.



      (1)   The Board of Trustees has established the following
target asset allocation for the entire Boynton Beach General Employees’
Pension Fund:



 





 

Target
Allocation
(at market)

 

Target
Range
(at market)




Equity securities

 


 





    Domestic equity

 

45%

 

30% - 60%




    Foreign equity

 

20%

 

5% - 25%




Fixed income & equivalents

 


 





    Fixed income

 

25%

 

20% - 70%




    Direct real estate

 

10%

 

5% - 15%




Cash equivalents

 

0%

 

0% - 10%





 



      (2)   To implement this strategy, the Board has chosen to hire
one or more professional investment managers. Specific assignments and
additional guidelines for each investment manager will be outlined in addenda
to this section. The following guidelines and restrictions apply to all fund
investments.



      (3)   In accordance with the policies established by the Board
of Trustees, the assets of the Boynton Beach General Employees’ Pension
Fund shall be invested in a diversified portfolio of fully negotiable,
equity, fixed income, and money market securities, provided they meet the
following criteria:



         a.   Equity securities:



            1.   Investments in equity securities shall be
limited to no more than 75% at market valuation or 65% at cost valuation of
the fund’s total asset value;



            2.   All equity investments shall be limited to
fully and easily negotiable equity securities;



            3.   No more than 5% at cost value of an
investment manager’s equity portfolio may be invested in the shares of a
single corporate issuer;



            4.   Investments in stocks of foreign companies
shall be limited to 25% (at market) of the total investment portfolio.
American Depository Receipts (ADRs) and foreign ordinary securities traded on
domestic exchanges are United States dollar-denominated securities listed and
traded on a United States exchange and are considered part of the ordinary
investment strategy of the Board. These securities are not considered foreign
securities;



            5.   Investment in those corporations whose stock
has been publicly traded for less than one year are limited to 15% of the
equity portfolio; and



            6.   Equities may be managed through the purchase
of open-end, no-load mutual funds, exchange traded funds, or commingled
funds. Those securities/funds purchased directly by investment advisors are
expected to adhere to the guidelines herein.  The Board implicitly accepts
the policy of a mutual or commingled fund when it makes a direct investment.



         b.   Fixed income securities:



            1.   The fixed income portfolio shall comply with
the following guidelines:



               (A)   The average credit quality of the
fixed income portfolio shall be rated “A” or higher; and



               (B)   The duration of the fixed income
portfolio should be less than 135% of the duration of the market index. The
market index is defined as the Barclays Capital Aggregate Bond Index.



            2.   Investments in all corporate fixed income
securities shall be limited to:



               (A)   Those securities rated “BAA” or
higher by Moody’s or by Standard & Poor’s rating services. Fixed income
securities, which are downgraded below the minimum rating, shall be sold at
the earliest beneficial opportunity;



               (B)   Securities issued by a corporation
organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized
territory of the United States, or the District of Columbia; and



               (C)   No more than 10% at cost of an
investment manager’s total fixed income' portfolio shall be invested in the
securities of any single corporate issuer.



            3.   Investments in Collateralized Mortgage
Obligations (CMOs) shall be limited to 15% of the market value of the
investment manager’s total portfolio and shall be restricted to issues
which meet all of the following criteria:



               (A)   All issues must be backed by mortgage
securities issued, guaranteed, or fully insured by the Government National
Mortgage Association (GNMA), the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
(FHLMC), the Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA) or that are rated
“Aaa” by Moody’s or “AAA” by Standard & Poor’s rating services.



            4.   There is no limit imposed on investments in
fixed income securities issued directly by the United States government or
any agency or instrumentality thereof.



            5.   Fixed income securities may be managed
through the purchase of open-end, no-load mutual funds or commingled funds.
Those securities/funds purchased directly by investment advisors are expected
to adhere to the guidelines herein.  The Board implicitly accepts the policy
of a mutual or commingled fund when it makes a direct investment.



         c.   Cash equivalent securities:



            1.   The investment manager may invest only in the
following short-term investment vehicles:



               (A)   The money market or STIF provided by
the plan’s custodian;



               (B)   Direct obligations of the United
States government with a maturity of one year or less;



               (C)   Commercial paper with a maturity of
270 days or less that is rated A-1 or higher by Standard & Poor’s or P-1 or
higher by Moody’s; and



               (D)   Bankers acceptances issued by the
largest 50 banks in the United States (in terms of total assets).



      (4)   Prohibited investments.  Investments in interest only
or principal only CMOs, precious metals, limited partnerships of any kind,
direct investment in real estate, repurchase agreements, venture capital,
futures contracts, options contracts, municipal bonds, trading on margin and
short selling are prohibited. Investments not specifically addressed in this
section are considered prohibited investments.



      (5)   Review of policy. It is the intention of the Board of
Trustees of the Boynton Beach General Employees’ Pension Fund to review
this statement of investment policy and its addenda periodically to amend it
to reflect any changes in philosophy or objectives. However, if at any time
the investment manager believes that the specific objectives defined herein
cannot be met or that these guidelines unnecessarily constrict performance,
the Board shall be so notified in writing.



(Code 1958, § 21-71; Ord. No. 80-16, § 1, 4-1-80; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1,
1-3-95; Ord. No. 00-74, § 3, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 04-069, § 2, 8-3-04; Ord. No.
10-006, § 11, 2-16-10)



Sec. 18-145.1.  Reserved.



Sec. 18-146.  Annual reports by trustee or insurance company.



   The trustee or insurance company or companies with which a trust
agreement or contract or contracts are entered into for the administration of
the plan shall submit a statement of the condition of the funds on deposit to
the credit of the plan at least once yearly, and may be required to supply
copies of such statements to an actuarial consultant designated by the board.
The original shall be retained among the records of the secretary of the
Board.



(Code 1958, § 21-72)



Sec. 18-147.  Actuarial review and services.



   The Board shall employ an actuary to review the operation of the plan
at intervals of not more than two years, and to make his or her
recommendations to the Board as to the actuarial solvency of the plan, the
amount of the city’s contributions to the fund which in his or her opinion
is necessary to be made from the current operation of the plan, what benefits
the plan can afford to pay on the basis of accumulated contributions to the
plan, and current rates of contribution, and such other information as the
Board may require. The actuary’s report shall be submitted in writing and
copies thereof shall be available to members of the plan upon request. The
Board may also retain said actuary or some other actuary as a consultant, and
provide for compensation for services.



(Code 1958, § 21-73)



Sec. 18-148.  Adoption of tables.



   In making any actuarial computation provided in this article, the
tables, charts and other statistical information shall be selected by the
Board from standard sources in common use by other annuity and pension plans,
including but not limited to those operated by governmental bodies in the
United States of America, or by the United States Internal Revenue Service.



(Code 1958, § 21-74)



Sec. 18-149.  Responsibilities of members and beneficiaries.



   Each member or beneficiary or other interested member shall be
responsible for advising the Board of his or her current mailing address, and
promptly advising the Board relating to any error, in whosoever’s favor, in
connection with the payment of benefit or any other payment under or in
connection with the plan.



(Code 1958, § 21-75)



Sec. 18-150.  Interest on delayed payments.



   Pension payments, although not promptly paid for any reason, and any
other payments to be made out of the fund, although not paid promptly for any
reason, shall not bear interest unless so ordered by the Board, who shall
have discretion to fix the rate and calculate any such interest, and in such
event, the interest to be paid shall not exceed the then current rates of
interest being returned on the funds on deposit with the trustee or the
insurance company, or other financial institution.



(Code 1958, § 21-76)



Sec. 18-151.  Personal liability.



   Each member of the Board shall use ordinary care and diligence in the
performance of his or her duties and shall not be liable for any loss unless
resulting from his or her own gross negligence, or his or her willful
misconduct; nor shall such members be personally liable upon or with respect
to any agreement, act, transaction or omission executed, committed himself or
herself as one or a member of said body or by any other member, agent,
representative, or employee of any body; moreover said bodies and members and
agents thereof shall each be fully protected in relying on the advice of the
city attorney or his or her assistants, or upon any other attorney employed
by the city, or said bodies, or either of them insofar as legal matters are
concerned, or any accountant similarly employed insofar as accounting matters
are concerned, and of any actuaries similarly employed so far as actuarial
matters are concerned. Any person having any claim under the plan shall look
solely to the assets of the fund for the satisfaction of such claims.



(Code 1958, § 21-77)



Sec. 18-152.  Small annuities; lump sum payments.



   (a)   Whenever any retirement annuities shall be less than $10 per
month, the Board may elect to have payments made quarterly. If the annuity
payable at quarterly intervals shall be less than $10, the Board may elect to
pay the commuted value of the same, calculated at regular interest, in one
lump sum. Such election shall be made within six months after the member’s
retirement unless he or she consents in writing to a subsequent election by
the Board under this section.



   (b)   In the event of a mandatory distribution pursuant to
subsection (a) is in excess of $1,000 and the member does not elect to
receive the distribution directly then the Board shall make a transfer to an
individual retirement plan of the Board's choosing and shall notify the
member in writing of such transfer.



(Code 1958, § 21-78; Ord. No. 10-028, § 12, 11-3-10)



Sec. 18-153.  “Filing” defined.



   Where any notice election or other instrument is required or permitted
by this article to be filed with the Board, the same may be filed with its
secretary.



(Code 1958, § 21-79)



Sec. 18-154.  Qualified pension fund.



   (a)   The city intends the pension fund to be a qualified plan under
Section 401 of the Code, as amended, and that the trust be an exempt
organization under Section 501 of the Code. The Board of Trustees shall
administer the pension fund so as to fulfill this intent.



   (b)   415(b) Internal Revenue Code Limits



   (1)   Basic Limitations.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
in this plan, the provisions of Section 415 and its regulations are hereby
incorporated by reference into this plan. Subject to the adjustments in Code
Section 415, the maximum amount of the actual annual retirement income paid
in any year with respect to a participant under this plan attributable to
employer provided benefits shall not exceed the dollar amount allowable for
any calendar year pursuant to Section 415(b) of the Code, as adjusted in such
calendar year for increases in the cost of living in accordance with
regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury under Section 415(d) of
the Code.  For purposes of applying the basic limitation, benefits payable
in any form other than a straight life annuity with no ancillary benefits
shall be adjusted, as provided by Treasury Regulations, so that such benefits
are the actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity.  For purposes of
this subsection Article, the following benefits shall not be taken into
account:



      (A)   Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to
retirement income benefits;



      (B)   Any other benefit not required under Section 415(b)(2)
of the Code and Treasury Regulations thereunder to be taken into account for
purposes of the limitation of Section 415(b)(1) of the Code.



   (2)   For purposes of applying the limitations of Code Section
415(b), compensation includes those items as set forth in Reg. 1.415-2(d).
This definition specifically includes the crediting of compensation while
absent from service for military duty; such crediting shall not exceed the
compensation that would have been credited under the System if System
services had continued.



   (c)   Should the Code Section 414(h)(2) member contributions or the
elective contributions made in accordance with plan section 18-128 be in
excess of the required contribution, then such contributions shall be
disbursed as a corrective disbursement pursuant to the requirements of Code
Reg. Section 1.415-6(b)(6)(iv). This provision applies to limitation years
prior to July 1, 2007.



   (d)   For distributions after December 31, 2002 for purposes of Code
Section 415(b), the mortality table is the table used under Code Section
417(e) as prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury in Rev. Ruling 2001-62.



   (e)   401(a)(9) Required Distributions



   (1)   Effective for distributions after December 31, 1996, in
accordance with IRC Section 401(a)(9), including the minimum distribution
incidental benefit requirements of section 1.401(a)(9)-2 and including the
incidental death benefit of Code Section 401(a)(9)(G), all benefits under
this plan will be distributed, beginning not later than the required
beginning date set forth below, over a period not extending beyond the life
expectancy of the member or the life expectancy of the member and a
beneficiary.



   (2)   Any and all benefit payments shall begin by the later of:



      A.   April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year
of the member's retirement date; or



      B.   April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year
in which the member attains age 70½.



   (3)   If an employee dies before his entire vested interest has been
distributed to him, the remaining portion of such interest will be
distributed at least as rapidly as provided for under this plan and will
comply with the incidental death benefit under Code Section 401(a)(9)(G).



   (4)   Notwithstanding any provisions of this plan to the contrary,
all distributions under this plan will be made in accordance with this
section. Code Section 401(a)(9) and the regulations thereunder (Reg. Sections
1.401(a)(9)-2 through 1.401(a)(9)-9), effective beginning January 1, 2003.



   (f)   401(a)(31) Rollovers



   (1)   Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions.



      A.   General.  This subsection applies to distributions made
on or after January 1, 1993.  Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to
the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this
subsection, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed
by the board of trustees, to have any portion of an eligible rollover
distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the
distributee in a direct rollover.



   (2)   Definitions.



      A.   Eligible rollover distribution" is any distribution of
all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee or an
alternate payee under a court order that complies with IRC Section 414(p)(2),
except that an eligible rollover does not include any distribution that is
one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently
than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or
the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the
distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of 10 years
or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under
section 401(a)(9) of the Code, excluding hardship distributions. For purposes
of a direct rollover, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an
eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of
after-tax employee contributions which are not includible in gross income.
However, such portion may be paid only to an individual retirement account or
annuity described in Code Section 408(a) or (b) of the Code, or to a
qualified defined contribution plan described in 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code
that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including
separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is
includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not
so includible.



      B.   Eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement
account described in section 408(a) of the Code, an individual retirement
annuity described in section 408(b) of the Code, a qualified trust, an
annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Code, an eligible deferred
compensation plan described in section 457(b) which is maintained by eligible
employer described in section 457(e)(1)(A) of the Code or an annuity contract
described in 403(b) of the Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible
rollover distribution and agrees to separately account for amounts
contributed into such plan from this plan.



      C.   Distributee includes an employee or former employee. In
addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the
employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse who is entitled to
payment under a domestic relations order determined to be qualified by
414(p)(2) of the Code and this Fund are distributees with regard to the
interest of the spouse or former spouse.



      D.   Direct rollover is a payment by the Plan to the eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee.



(Ord. No. 93-5, § 1, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 10-028, § 13, 11-3-10)



Sec. 18-155.  Forfeiture of retirement benefits.



   (a)   Notwithstanding any provisions of the Plan to the contrary,
any public officer or employee who is convicted of a specified offense
committed prior to retirement, or whose office or employment is terminated by
reason of his or her admitted commission, aid, or abetment of a specified
offense, shall forfeit all rights and benefits under this Plan, except for
the return of his or her accumulated contributions as of the date of
termination.



   (b)   DEFINITIONS.  As used in this section, unless the context
otherwise requires, the term:



      (1)   Conviction and convicted mean an adjudication of guilt
by a court of competent jurisdiction; a plea of guilty or of nolo contendere;
a jury verdict of guilty when adjudication of guilt is withheld and the
accused is placed on probation; or a conviction by the Senate of an
impeachable offense.



      (2)   Court means any state or federal court of competent
jurisdiction which is exercising its jurisdiction to consider a proceeding
involving the alleged commission of a specified offense.



      (3)   Public officer or employee means an officer or employee
of any public body, political subdivision, or public instrumentality within
the state.



      (4)   Specified offense means:



         A.   The committing, aiding, or abetting of an
embezzlement of public funds;



         B.   The committing, aiding, or abetting of any theft by
a public officer or employee from his or her employer;



         C.   Bribery in connection with the employment of a
public officer or employee;



         D.   Any felony specified in chapter 838, except ss.
838.15 and 838.16;



         E.   The committing of an impeachable offense;



         F.   The committing of any felony by a public officer or
employee who, willfully and with intent to defraud the public or the public
agency for which the public officer or employee acts or in which he or she is
employed of the right to receive the faithful performance of his or her duty
as a public officer or employee, realizes or obtains, or attempts to realize
or obtain, a profit, gain, or advantage for himself or herself or for some
other person through the use or attempted use of the power, rights,
privileges, duties, or position of his or her public office or employment
position; or



         G.   The committing on or after October 1, 2008, of any
felony defined in s. 800.04 against a victim younger than 16 years of age, or
any felony defined in chapter 794 against a victim younger than 18 years of
age, by a public officer or employee through the use or attempted use of
power, rights, privileges, duties, or position of his or her public office or
employment position.



   (c)   FORFEITURE DETERMINATION.



      (1)   If the Board receives notice or has reason to believe
that the rights and privileges of any person under the plan is required to be
forfeited, then the Board shall give notice and hold a hearing for the
purpose of determining whether such rights and privileges are required to be
forfeited. If the Board determines that such rights and privileges are
required to be forfeited, the Board shall order such rights and privileges
forfeited.



      (2)   Any order of forfeiture of plan rights and privileges is
appealable to the district court of appeal.



      (3)   The payment of retirement benefits ordered forfeited,
except payments drawn from employee contributions, shall be stayed pending an
appeal as to a felony conviction. If such conviction is reversed, no
retirement benefits shall be forfeited. If such conviction is affirmed,
retirement benefits shall be forfeited as ordered in this section.



      (4)   If any person's rights and privileges under the plan are
forfeited pursuant to this section and that person has received benefits from
the plan in excess of his or her accumulated contributions, such person shall
pay back to the system the amount of the benefits received in excess of his
or her accumulated contributions. If he or she fails to pay back such amount,
the board may bring an action in circuit court to recover such amount, plus
court costs.



(Ord. No. 10-028, § 14, 11-3-10)



Secs. 18-156—18-163. Reserved.



ARTICLE III. MUNICIPAL POLICE OFFICERS' RETIREMENT TRUST FUND*



   *Cross reference-Excise tax on casualty insurers for police retirement,
§ 23-2.



Sec. 18-164.  Creation and maintenance of fund and retirement system.



   (a)   There is hereby created a special pension fund for the Police
Officers of Boynton Beach, Florida, to be known as the Boynton Beach Police
Officers’ Pension Fund. All assets of every descriptionheld in the name of
the Boynton Beach Police Officers’ Retirement Trust Fund shall continue to
be held, but such fund shall hereafter be known as the Boynton Beach Police
Officers’ Pension Fund and shall be administered as set forth in this
article of Chapter 18 of the City of Boynton Beach Code.



   (b)   The fund shall be maintained in the following manner:



   (1)   By payment to the fund of the net proceeds of the .85% excise
tax which is imposed by the City of Boynton Beach upon certain casualty
insurance companies on their gross receipts of premiums from holders of
policies, which policies cover property within the corporate limits of the
City of Boynton Beach as authorized in F.S. Chapter 185, amended. These
amounts are to be deposited with the Board of Trustees within five days of
receipt by the municipality. F.S. Ch. 185. In November of 2017 and November
of 2018 only, $30,000.00 of the insurance premium excise tax provided for in
this subsection will be used by the City to offset the unfunded actuarial
liability of the fund. The remainder of the funds will be used as set forth
in Section 18-169(f) of the plan, which provides for a supplemental benefit
as defined in F.S. Section 185.02(22).



      (2)   By the payment to the fund of 7% of the salary of each
full time police officer duly appointed and enrolled as a member of the City
of Boynton Beach Police Department; which 7% shall be picked up, rather than
deducted, by the City of Boynton Beach from the compensation due to the
Police Officer and paid over to the Board of Trustees of the Boynton Beach
Police Officers’ Pension Fund on a bi-weekly basis. All pickup
contributions shall be treated as employer contributions for the purposes of
determining tax treatment under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended. All such pick up amounts shall be considered as employee
contributions for purposes of this plan. The percentage deducted from the
police officers’ salaries are to be deposited with the Board of Trustees
immediately. F.S. Ch.185, Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances Sec. 18-170.



      (3)   By all fines and forfeitures imposed and collected from
any police officer because of the violation of any rule and regulation
adopted by the Board of Trustees. F.S. Ch. 185.



      (4)   By mandatory payment at least quarterly by the City of
Boynton Beach a sum equal to the normal cost and the amount required to fund
any actuarial deficiency shown by an actuarial valuation as provided in F.S.
Chapter 112, Part VII.  F.S. Ch. 185. On an annual basis, the Board of
Trustees will evaluate the actuarial assumptions used.



      (5)   By all gifts, bequests, and devises when donated to the
fund. F.S. Ch. 185.



      (6)   By all accretions to the fund by way of interest or
dividends on bank deposits, or otherwise.  F.S. Ch. 185.



      (7)   By all other sources or income now or hereafter
authorized by law for the augmentation of the Boynton Beach Police
Officers’ Pension Fund. F.S. Ch. 185.



   (c)   Under no circumstances may the City of Boynton Beach reduce
the member contribution to less than 0.5% of salary.



(Ord. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10; Ord. No. 18-006, § 2, 5-15-18)



Sec. 18-165.  Definitions.



   (a)   The following words or phrases, as used in this article, shall
have the following meaning:



   Actuarial equivalence or actuarially equivalent. Any benefit payable
under the terms of this plan in a form other than the normal form of benefit
shall have the same actuarial present value on the date payment commences as
the normal form of benefit. For purposes of establishing the actuarial
present value of any form of payment, all future payments shall be discounted
for interest and mortality by using 8% interest and the 1983 Group Annuity
Mortality Table, blending 80% males and 20% females, with ages set ahead five
years in the case of disability retirees.



   Average final compensation.  The average total remuneration received
by a police officer during the best five years of service with the city
within the last ten. F.S. Ch. 185, Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances Section
18-168, as amended by Ord. No. 0 00-18 and 00-004.



   Compensation or salary.  The total cash remuneration including lump
sum payments for accumulated sick and vacation leave and “overtime” paid
by the primary employer to a police officer for services rendered, but not
including any payments for extra duty or a special detail work performed on
behalf of a second party employer paid directly to the police officer by the
second party employer and amounts paid to a police officer after December 31,
2008 as differential wages during any period of active duty military service
lasting more than 30 days. This definition also excludes severance pay and
other similar payments which are not for services rendered.  The member’s
compensation or salary contributed as employee-elective salary reductions or
deferrals to any salary reduction, deferred compensation, or tax-sheltered
annuity program authorized under the Internal Revenue Code shall be deemed to
be the compensation or salary the member would receive if he or she were not
participating in such program and shall be treated as compensation for
retirement purposes under this article. For any person who first becomes a
member in any Plan year beginning on or after January 1, 1996, compensation
for any Plan year shall not include any amounts in excess of section
401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code limitation (as amended by the Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993), which limitation of $150,000 shall be
adjusted as required by federal law for qualified government plans and shall
be further adjusted for changes in the cost of living in the manner provided
by section 401(a)(17)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. For any person who
first became a member prior to the first plan year beginning on or after
January 1, 1996, the limitation on compensation shall be not less than the
maximum compensation amount that was allowed to be taken into account under
the plan as in effect on July 1, 1993, which limitation shall be adjusted for
changes in the cost of living since 1989 in the manner provided by section
401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code. F.S. Ch. 185.



   Creditable service or credited service.  The aggregate number of years
of service and fractional parts of years of service of any police officer,
omitting intervening years and fractional parts of years when such police
officer may not have been employed by the municipality subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   No police officer will receive credit for years or
fractional parts of years of service if he or she has withdrawn his or her
contributions to the fund for those years or fractional parts of years of
service, unless the police officer repays into the Fund the amount he or she
has withdrawn, plus interest as determined by the board in accordance with
Section 18-172.



      (2)   A police officer may voluntarily leave his or her
contributions in the fund for a period of five years after leaving the employ
of the police department, pending the possibility of his or her being rehired
by the same department, without losing credit for the time he or she has
participated actively as a police officer. If he or she is not reemployed as
a police officer with the same department within five  years, his or her
contributions shall be returned to him or her without interest.



      (3)   In determining the creditable service of any police
officer, credit for up to five years of the time spent in the military
service of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be added to the years
of actual service, if:



         a.   The police officer is in the active employ of the
municipality prior to such service and leaves a position, other than a
temporary position, for the purpose of voluntary or involuntary service in
the Armed Forces of the United States.



         b.   The police officer is entitled to reemployment
under the provisions of the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment
Rights Act.



         c.   The police officer returns to his or her employment
as a police officer of the municipality within one year from the date of his
or her release from such active service except that effective January 1,
2007, police officers who die or become disabled while serving on active duty
military service shall be entitled to the rights of this section even though
such member was not re-employed by the city as a policy officer. Members who
die or become disabled while on active duty military service shall be treated
as through re-employed as a police officer the day before the member became
disabled or died, and then considered for entitlement for a death or
disability benefit. If the member’s death or disability arises out of the
member’s active service in the military, then the member is entitled to a
duty death or duty disability benefit. If the death or disability occurs
while the member is serving on active duty military service but does not
arise out of such service, then the member, if vested, is entitled to a
non-duty disability benefit.



      (4)   Continuous service with the employer shall not be broken
in the event of:



         a.   Absence on an approved leave of absence;



         b.   Absence from work because of occupational injury or
disease incurred in employment for which a police officer is entitled to
Workers’ Compensation payments;



         c.   Absence due to service in the Armed Forces of the
United States provided the officer shall re-enter employment with the city
within one year of discharge.



   Beneficiary.  Any person, including the estate of the member, who is
entitled to receive a pension benefit payable from the Boynton Beach Police
Officers’ Pension Fund upon the death of a member or participant. F.S. Ch.
185.



   Fund or Police Officers’ Pension Fund.  The Boynton Beach Police
Officers’ Pension Fund. F.S. Ch. 185.



   Plan year.  The fiscal year commencing October 1 and ending the
following September 30. Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances Section 18-171, Ord.
No. 90-23, § 1, 8-7-90.



   Police officer.  Any person who is elected, appointed or employed full
time by the City of Boynton Beach, who is certified or required to be
certified as a law enforcement officer in compliance with F.S. Section
943.1395, who is vested with authority to bear arms and make arrests, and
whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the
enforcement of the penal, criminal, traffic or highway laws of the state.
This definition includes all certified supervisory and command personnel
whose duties include, in whole or in part, the supervision, training,
guidance, and management responsibilities of full-time law enforcement
officers, part-time law enforcement officers or auxiliary law enforcement
officers as the same are defined in F.S. Section 943.10(6) and (8). F.S. Ch.
185.



   Retiree or retired police officer.  A police officer who has entered
retirement status. For the purposes of the deferred retirement option plan
(DROP), a police officer who enters the DROP shall be considered a retiree
for all purposes of the plan. F.S. Ch. 185.



   Retirement.  A police officer’s separation from city employment with
immediate eligibility for receipt of benefits under the plan. For purposes of
the DROP, retirement means the date a police officer enters the DROP. F.S.
Ch. 185.



   (b)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and words of the
singular with respect to persons include plural and vice versa.



(Ord. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10)



Sec. 18-166.  Board of Trustees created.



   (a)   Board of Trustees.  There is hereby created a Board of
Trustees of the Boynton Beach Police Officers’ Pension Fund which shall be
solely responsible for administering the pension fund. The Board of Trustees
shall be a legal entity, with the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every
kind, nature and description, and to the extent required to accomplish the
intent, requirements and responsibilities provided for in this article. The
Board shall consist of five Trustees as follows:



      (1)   Two legal residents of the city, who shall be appointed
by the City Commission. Effective for terms beginning after the effective
date of Ord. No. 10-005, passed 2-2-10, each city Trustee shall have a term
of four years but serves at the pleasure of the City Commission. Each city
Trustee may succeed himself or herself as a Trustee.



      (2)   Two police officer participants of the City of Boynton
Beach Police Officers Pension Fund, who are elected by a majority of the
police officer participants in the fund. Elections shall be held under such
rules and regulations as the Board of Trustees shall from time to time adopt.
Effective for terms beginning after the effective date of Ord. No. 10-005,
passed 2-2-10, each police officer Trustee shall serve as a Trustee for a
period of four years, unless he or she sooner ceases to be a police officer
in the employ of the Boynton Beach Police Department, whereupon their
successor shall be elected by a majority of the participants of the Boynton
Beach Police Officers’ Pension Fund. Each police officer Trustee may
succeed himself or herself as a Trustee.



      (3)   A fifth Trustee shall be chosen by the majority of the
other four Trustees. This fifth Trustee’s name shall be submitted to the
City Commission, which shall, as a ministerial duty, appoint such person to
the Board as a fifth Trustee. Effective for terms beginning after the
effective date of Ord. No. 10-005, passed 2-2-10, the fifth Trustee shall
serve as a Trustee for a period of four years, and may succeed himself or
herself as a Trustee.



   (b)   Board vacancies; procedures to fill same.  In the event a
Trustee provided for in Section 18-166(a)(2) ceases to be a police officer in
the employ of the City of Boynton Beach Police Department, he or she shall be
considered to have resigned from the Board of Trustees. In the event such a
Trustee shall resign, be removed, or become ineligible to serve as Trustee,
the Board shall, by motion, declare that office of Trustee vacated as of the
date of adoption of such motion. If such a vacancy occurs in the office of
Trustee within 90 days of the next succeeding election for Trustee, the
vacancy shall be filled at the next regular election for the unexpired
portion of the term; otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired
portion of the term at a special election called by the Board. In the event a
Trustee provided for in Section 18-166(a)(1) and (3) shall resign, be removed
or become ineligible to serve as Trustee, the Board shall, by motion, declare
that office of Trustee vacated as of the date of adoption of the motion. The
successor for the unexpired portion of the term shall be chosen in the same
manner as an original appointment.



   (c)   Board meetings: quorum: procedures.  The Board of Trustees
shall hold meetings regularly, at least once each quarter and shall designate
the time and place thereof. At any meeting of the Board, three Trustees shall
constitute a quorum. Each Trustee shall be entitled to one vote on each
question before the Board and at least three concurring votes shall be
required for a decision by the Board at any of its meetings. The Board shall
adopt its own rules and procedures and shall keep a record of its
proceedings. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. No
Trustee shall take part in any action in connection with their own
participation in the fund, and no unfair discrimination shall be shown to any
individual police officer participating in the fund.



      (1)   Board chairman and secretary.



         a.   The Board of Trustees shall, by majority vote,
elect from its members a chairman and a secretary.



         b.   The secretary of the Board shall keep:



            1.   A complete minute book of the actions,
proceedings or hearings of the Board;



            2.   A record of all persons receiving retirement
payments under the plan which includes the time when the pension is allowed
and when the pension shall cease to be paid; and



            3.   A list of all police officers employed by the
municipality which includes the name, address and dates of hire and
termination.



   (d)   Compensation. The Trustees of the Boynton Beach Police
Officers’ Pension Fund shall not receive any compensation for their
services as such, but may receive expenses and per diem when performing
official duties in administering the fund.



(Ord. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10)



Sec. 18-167.  Powers of the Board of Trustees.



   (a)   The Board of Trustees:



      (1)   May invest and reinvest the assets of the Boynton Beach
Police Officers’ Pension Fund in annuity and life insurance contracts of
life insurance companies in amounts sufficient to provide, in whole or in
part, the benefits to which all the participants in the Pension Fund shall be
entitled under the provisions of this article, and pay the initial and
subsequent premiums thereon from the integral part of the fund. If current
state contributions are adequate to fund minimum requirements of F.S. Chapter
185, additional state funds may be used to provide benefits that exceed
requirements of F.S. Chapter 185.



      (2)   Shall have the power and authority to invest and
reinvest the monies of the fund, and to hold, purchase, sell, assign,
transfer and dispose of any securities and investments held in the fund,
including the power and authority to employ counseling or investment
management services. The aim of the investment policies shall be to preserve
the integrity and security of fund principal, to maintain a balanced
investment portfolio, to maintain and enhance the value of the fund
principal, and to secure the maximum total return on investments that is
consonant with safety of principal; provided that such investments and
re-investments shall be limited only by the investments permitted by the
investment policy guidelines adopted by the Board in accordance with Florida
law, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 18-221 of the code. Further,
notwithstanding the foregoing, investments in foreign investments are limited
in accordance with F.S. Section 185.06(1)(b)4. The Board must discharge these
duties with respect to the plan solely in the interest of the participants
and beneficiaries and: (i) for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to
participants and their beneficiaries and defraying reasonable expenses of
administering the plan; (ii) with the care, skill, prudence and diligence
under the circumstances then prevailing, that a prudent person, acting in a
like capacity and familiar with such matters, would use in the conduct of an
enterprise of a like character and with like aims; and (iii) by diversifying
the investments of the plan so as to minimize the risk of large losses,
unless under the circumstances it is clearly prudent not to do so.



      (3)   May issue drafts upon the Boynton Beach Police Officers
Pension Fund pursuant to this article and rules and regulations prescribed by
the Board of Trustees. All such drafts shall be consecutively numbered and
shall be signed by the chairman and secretary of the Board or their designee
and shall state upon their faces the purpose for which the drafts are drawn.
The City Treasurer shall retain such drafts when paid, as permanent vouchers
for disbursements made, and no money shall be otherwise drawn from the fund.



      (4)   May convert into cash any securities of the Fund as it
may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the fund.



      (5)   Shall keep a complete record of all receipts and
disbursements, and of its acts and proceedings.



      (6)   May cause any investment in securities held by it to be
registered in or transferred into its name as Trustee, or into the name of
such nominee as it may direct, but the books and records shall at all times
show that all investments are part of the fund.



   (b)   The sole and exclusive administration of, and the
responsibilities for, the proper operation of the retirement fund and for
making effective the provisions of this chapter are vested in the Board of
Trustees.



   (c)   The Board of Trustees shall retain a professionally qualified
independent consultant who shall evaluate the performance of any existing
professional money manager and shall make recommendations to the Board of
Trustees regarding the selection of money managers, if necessary. The term
“professionally qualified independent consultant” shall have the meaning
as set forth in F.S. Section 185.06(5)(b).



   (d)   The Board of Trustees may employ such independent
professional, technical or other advisers as may be needed to fulfill the
Board’s responsibilities under this Pension Plan. These professionals
include but are not limited to: legal counsel, actuary and certified public
accountants. If the Board chooses to use the city’s legal counsel, actuary
or other professional, technical or other advisers, it must do so only under
terms and conditions acceptable to the Board.



   (e)   Notwithstanding anything else in this subsection and as
provided in F.S. Section 215.473, the Board of Trustees must identify and
publicly report any direct or indirect holdings it may have in any
scrutinized company, as defined in that section. Beginning January 1, 2010,
the Board must proceed to sell, redeem, divest, or withdraw all publicly
traded securities it may have directly in that company. The divestiture of
any such security must be completed by September 10, 2010. The Board and its
named officers of investment advisors may not be deemed to have breached
their fiduciary duty in any action taken to dispose of any such security, and
the Board shall have satisfactorily discharged the fiduciary duties of
loyalty, prudence, and sole and exclusive benefit to the participants of the
pension fund and their beneficiaries if the actions it takes are consistent
with the duties imposed by F.S. Section 215.473, as provided for in F.S.
Section 185.06(7) and the manner of disposition, if any, is reasonable as to
the means chosen. For purposes of determining which companies are scrutinized
companies, the Board may utilize the list of scrutinized companies as
developed by the Florida State Board of Administration. No person may bring
any civil, criminal, or administrative action against the Board of Trustees
or any employee, officer, director, or advisor of such pension fund based
upon the divestiture of any security pursuant to this subsection.



(Ord. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10)



Sec. 18-168.  Membership.



   All police officers who are participants in the fund as of the
effective date of this article shall be members of this retirement system.
Each police officer shall be included in this plan on the date of hire.



(Ord. No. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10)



Sec. 18-169.  Requirements for retirement- benefit amounts.



   (a)   Normal retirement.



      (1)   Normal retirement date. The normal retirement date of
each police officer will be the first day of the month coinciding with, or
next following, the date on which he or she has attained and completed 20
years of service, or the first day of the month coinciding with, or next
following, the date on which the police officer has attained age 55 and
completed ten years of service or age 50 and completed 15 years of service.
In the case of a retirement with 20 years of service, effective January 1,
2017, normal retirement age is the age a police officer has attained when
retired at 20 years of service.



      (2)   Normal retirement benefit.  The normal retirement
benefit payable to a police officer who retires on or after the normal
retirement date shall be an amount equal to the number of years of his or her
credited service multiplied by 3.5% of his or her average final compensation.
Effective [insert effective date], for all police officers hired on or after
October 1, 2015, the 3.5% multiplier provided for in the paragraph shall be
3.0%.



      (3)   Form of benefit.  A retired police officer’s
retirement benefit normally shall be payable in the form of a monthly life
annuity with 120 monthly payments guaranteed. This form of annuity provides
for a retirement benefit payable monthly to the retired employee during their
lifetimes with a guarantee that not less than 120 monthly retirement benefits
shall be paid, even if the retired employee dies prior to the receipt of 120
payments.



   (b)   Early retirement.



      (1)   Early retirement date.  An employee who has attained
age 50 and completed at least ten years of credited service may elect to
terminate employment and retire on an early retirement datewhich may be the
first day of any month after ten  years of service and attainment of age 50.



      (2)   Early retirement benefit.  The monthly amount of early
retirement benefits payable to a police officer who retires on the early
retirement date shall be determined in accordance with Section 18-169(a)
based on credited service to the early retirement date subject to an
actuarial reduction of 1.5% per year of service to take into account the
police officer’s younger age and the earlier commencement of retirement
benefits. The early retirement benefit shall be paid in accordance with
Section 18-169(a).



   (c)   Disability retirement.



      (1)   Service incurred. 



         a.   Any member who receives a medically substantiated
service connected injury, disease or disability which injury, disease or
disability totally and permanently disabled him or her to the extent that in
the opinion of the Board of Trustees, he or she is wholly prevented from
rendering useful and efficient service as a police officer shall receive a
monthly benefit equal to 66 2/3% of his or her basic rate of earnings in
effect on the date of disability.



            1.   Such benefit shall be payable on the first
day of each month, commencing on the first day of the month following the
latter to occur of the date on which the disability has existed for three
months and the date the Board of Trustees approved the payment of such
retirement income. A disability retiree may select from the optional forms of
benefits available to service retirees in accordance with Section 18-170.



            2.   In the event of recovery prior to the
otherwise normal retirement date, credit for service during the period of
disability shall be granted for purposes of  subsequent retirement benefits.
Subsequent retirement benefits will be actuarially reduced to account for the
benefits that were paid during the period of disability.



            3.   The amount of the disability benefit payment
from the fund shall be reduced by any amounts paid from worker’s
compensation and the federal social security system. The reduction for social
security benefits shall be in the amount of the primary insurance amount
(PIA) only, and future increases, if any, in the disabled member’s social
security disability benefits shall not serve to reduce any further the
disability benefit from the fund. The reduction for social security shall
terminate upon the attainment of age 65. The pension benefit may only be
reduced to the extent that the total of the benefits from this fund,
workers’ compensation and social security benefits exceed 100% of the
disabled member’s basic rate of earnings on the date of disability.
However, in all cases the benefit will be at least 42% of average final
compensation.



         b.   Terminated persons, either vested or non- vested,
are not eligible for disability benefits, except that those terminated by the
city for medical reasons may apply for a disability within 30 days after
termination.



         c.   Any condition or impairment of health of a member
caused by tuberculosis; hypertension, heart disease, hardening of the
arteries, hepatitis, or meningococcal meningitis resulting in total or
partial disability or death, shall be presumed to be accidental and suffered
in the line of duty unless the contrary be shown by competent evidence. Any
condition or impairment of health caused directly or proximately by exposure,
which exposure occurred in the active performance of duty at some definite
time or place without willful negligence on the part of the member, resulting
in total or partial disability, shall be presumed to be accidental and
suffered in the line of duty, provided that such member shall have
successfully passed a physical examination upon entering such service, which
physical examination including electrocardiogram failed to reveal any
evidence of such condition.



In order to be entitled to presumption in the case of hepatitis,
meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, the member must meet the
requirements of F.S. Section 112.181. The final decision whether a member
meets the requirements for duty disability pension rests with the board and
shall be based on substantial competent evidence on the record as a whole.



      (2)   Nonservice incurred.  Effective October 1, 2000, any
member with ten years of continuous service who receives a nonservice
incurred injury, illness, disease or disability, and which illness, injury,
disease or disability totally and permanently disables him or her to the
extent that, in the opinion of the Board of Trustees, he or she is wholly
prevented from rendering useful and efficient service as a police officer,
shall  receive from the fund in equal monthly installments an amount equal
to 3.5% of his or her average final compensation for each year of continuous
service until death or recovery from disability whichever shall first occur,
provided, however, the maximum benefit to which a member may become entitled
under this paragraph shall not exceed 60% of his or her average final
compensation during said period, but in all cases the benefit will be at
least 25% of average final compensation during said period. Such benefit
shall be payable on the first day of each month, commencing on the first day
of the month following the latter to occur of the date on which the
disability has existed for three months and the date the Board of Trustees
approved the payment of such retirement income. Effective [insert effective
date], for all police officers hired on or after October 1, 2015, the 3.5%
multiplier provided for in this paragraph shall be 3.0%. Terminated persons,
either vested or non-vested, are not eligible for disability benefits, except
that those terminated by the city for medical reasons may apply for a
disability within 30 days after termination.



      (3)   Medical Board.  Whenever it becomes necessary for the
Board to avail itself of the services of physicians in the case of an
application for disability retirement, the Board shall designate a Medical
Board to be composed of competent medical authorities and/or specialists, as
needed. The Medical Board shall arrange for and pass upon the medical
examinations required under the provisions of this section, shall investigate
all essential statements or certificates made by or on behalf of a member in
connection with an application for disability retirement and shall report in
writing to the Board its conclusions and recommendations upon all matters
referred to it. The payment for such services shall be determined by the
Board.



      (4)   Return to active duty from disability retirement.  In
the event a member who has been retired on a pension on account of permanent
and total incapacity regains his or her health and is found by the Medical
Board designated by the Board to be in such physical and mental condition as
to meet the requirements of the personnel department for service as a police
officer of the city, the Board shall order his or her pension discontinued,
and he or she shall be ordered to resume active duty in the city at the same
rate of compensation currently in effect for his or her  pay grade. The
Board shall review periodically, in its discretion, the condition of any
member receiving a pension for disability and if there is substantial
evidence that the retired member is capable of performing service acceptable
to the city as a police officer, he or she shall be ordered to resume active
duty and his or her pension shall be discontinued.



      (5)   Disability exclusions.  No member shall be granted a
disability pension upon a showing to the satisfaction of the Board:



         a.   That the disability resulted from an intentionally
self-inflicted wound, injury or ailment, or



         b.   That the disability resulted from excessive and
habitual use of narcotics, drugs, or intoxicants (alcoholic beverages);



         c.   That the disability resulted from an injury or
disease sustained by the police officer while willfully and illegally
participating in fights, riots, civil insurrections or while committing a
crime;



         d.   That the disability resulted from an injury or
disease sustained by the police officer while serving in any armed forces.
This exclusion does not affect members who have become disabled as a result
of intervening military service under the federal Heroes Earnings Assistance
and Relief Tax Act of 2008 (H.R. 6081; P.L. 100-245);



         e.   That the disability resulted from an injury or
disease sustained by the police officer after employment has been terminated;
or



         f.   That, in the case of a duty disability only, the
disability resulted from an injury or disease sustained by the police officer
while working for anyone other than the city and arising out of such other
employment.



      (6)   Further disability provisions.  Each member applying
for a service incurred disability benefit from this fund shall be required to
apply for disability benefits under social security, and, if applicable,
workers’ compensation. Furthermore, each person granted a service incurred
disability shall be required to submit to the Board, no later than March 1 of
each year, a statement showing the monthly amount of social security (PIA
only) and workers’ compensation benefits received by him or her as of March
1. Willful refusal by such persons to comply with these regulations shall be
grounds for the termination of or nonapproval of disability benefits from
this system. However, the Board shall exercise its discretion in each case.



   (d)   Death benefit.



      (1)   If any member shall die prior to retirement or other
termination of employment with the city and that death is found by the Board
of Trustees to have occurred in the line of duty regardless of the years of
service, a death benefit shall be payable to the deceased member’s spouse.
The benefit shall equal 3.5% of average final compensation for each year of
continuous service; provided, however, the benefit will be at least 30% of
average final compensation. It shall be payable in equal monthly installments
commencing the first day of the month following the date of death and ceasing
upon the death of the spouse. If there is no spouse, the deceased member’s
accrued benefit shall be payable to the designated beneficiary on file with
the Board of Trustees, payable as the contingent annuitant 100% survivor
benefit. If there is no spouse or designated beneficiaries, the benefit, if
any, will be paid to the deceased participant’s estate. Effective September
3, 2015, for all police officers hired on or after October 1, 2015, the 3.5%
multiplier provided for in this paragraph shall be 3.0%.



      (2)   If any member with at least ten years of continuous
service shall die prior to retirement or other termination of employment with
the city, a death benefit shall be payable to the deceased member’s spouse.
The benefit shall equal 3.5% of average final compensation for each year of
continuous service. It shall be payable in equal monthly installments
commencing the first day of the month following the date of death and ceasing
upon the death or remarriage of the spouse. If there is no spouse, the
deceased member’s accrued benefit shall be payable to the designated
beneficiary on file with the Board of Trustees, payable as the contingent
annuitant 100% survivor benefit. If there is no spouse or designated
beneficiaries, the benefit, if any, will be paid to the deceased
participant’s estate. Effective September 3, 2015, for all police officers
hired on or after October 1, 2015, the 3.5% multiplier provided for in this
paragraph shall be 3.0%.



      (3)   If a member dies before being eligible to retire, the
heirs, legatees, beneficiaries or personal representatives of such deceased
member shall be entitled to a refund of 100% of the contributions made by the
member to the fund, without interest.



   (e)   Separation from service.



      (1)   The vesting period for members hired on or after October
1, 2016, is ten years. The vesting period for members who were hired before
October 1, 2016, and terminated after October 1, 2020, is five years of
service. If a member leaves the service of the city before vesting, such
member shall be entitled to a refund of all of his or her contributions made
to the fund, without interest.



      (2)   Benefit commencement date for ten-year vesting. If any
member who had been in the service of the city for at least ten years elects
to leave his or her accrued contributions in the fund, such police officer
upon attaining age 50 years or more (without reaching what would have been 20
years of service had he or she not terminated his or her employment) may
receive an early retirement benefit at the actuarial equivalent of the amount
of such retirement income otherwise payable to him or her at early retirement
or upon attaining what would have been normal retirement had he or she not
terminated his employment, such police officer may receive his or her accrued
normal retirement benefit.



      (3)   Benefit commencement date for five-year vesting. If any
member who had been in the service of the city for at least five years elects
to leave his or her accrued contributions in the fund, the police officer
upon attaining age 55 with ten or more years of service (had he or she not
terminated employment) or reaching what would have been 20 years of service
(had he or she not terminated his or her employment), may receive the accrued
normal retirement benefit.  The member may receive the benefits payable in
the normal form or any option available under Section 18-170.



   (f)   Monthly supplemental benefits.



      (1)   Effective October 1, 2006, any eligible retiree,
including DROP participants, or beneficiary receiving pension benefits is
entitled to a monthly supplemental pension benefit. The benefit pool will be
funded by 100% of the annual earnings and 10% of the principal created by the
contributions set forth in subparagraph b. below.



         a.   Such benefit will be funded by a 1% contribution
from the members and a 1% contribution from the 185 monies. The member and
the 185 contributions shall be effective October 1, 2001. Employees will
contribute to this benefit through 20 years of service.



         b.   The distribution provided for in this paragraph
shall be divided among eligible retirees on a pro-rata basis in shares. The
shares shall be determined based upon the sum of an eligible retiree’s
years and partial years of credited service (maximum credit is 20 years) plus
the eligible retiree’s years and partial retirement years as of September
30 of the current year (maximum credit of 20 years). The share value shall be
determined by totaling all of the shares of eligible retirees divided into
the current years’ total distribution amount. An individual eligible
retiree’s distribution shall be equal to the number of the eligible
retiree’s shares multiplied by the share value.



         c.   This benefit shall be payable annually in a lump
sum as of October 1, of each year, beginning December 1, 2006. The benefit
shall be payable to the eligible retiree, including DROP participants, or any
beneficiary eligible to receive benefits as a result of the death of a
retiree. The benefit shall cease upon the death of the eligible retiree or
beneficiary, whichever is the last surviving pension recipient.



      (2)   Beginning October 1, 2003, 100% of the money received
pursuant to F.S. Chapter 185 (“185 money”) each calendar year in excess
of the base amount of $465,087, plus 1% of payroll annually to fund the
benefit as provided in paragraph (1), plus any 185 money held in reserve,
shall be distributed to all current eligible retirees, including DROP
participants, or beneficiaries receiving benefits. These supplemental benefit
payments will be distributed according to the formula set for in subparagraph
a. This distribution is in addition to the benefit provided for in paragraph
(1) which shall begin October 1, 2006.



         a.   The distribution provided for in this subparagraph
shall be divided among eligible retirees on a pro-rata basis in shares. The
shares shall be determined based upon the sum of an eligible retiree’s
years and partial years of credited service (maximum credit is 20 years) plus
the eligible retiree’s years and partial retirement years as of September
30 of the current year (maximum credit of 20 years). The share value shall be
determined by totaling all of the shares of eligible retirees divided into
the current years’ total distribution amount. An individual eligible
retiree’s distribution shall be equal to the number of the  eligible
retiree’s shares multiplied by the share value.



         b.   Allocations for surviving spouses and surviving
dependent children shall be based upon the formula in this subparagraph,
adjusted by the percentage of the optional form of benefit selected.



         c.   This benefit shall be payable annually in a lump
sum as of June 1 of each year, beginning June 1, 2004. The benefit shall be
payable to the eligible retiree, including DROP participants, or any
beneficiary eligible to receive benefits as a result of the death of a
retiree. The benefit shall cease upon the death of the eligible retiree or
beneficiary, whichever is the last surviving pension recipient.



      (3)   Definitions.



         a.   For purposes of this section only, “credited
service” means the number of years and partial years of service originally
used by the pension plan to determine pension benefits. For eligible retirees
who retired on a duty disability retirement, 20 years of service is credited
for this part of the monthly supplemental benefit calculation at the time
that the disability benefit begins. Non-duty disability retirees shall be
credited with actual years of credited service.



         b.   For purposes of this section only, “retirement
years” means the number of years and partial years that a retiree has
received a pension benefit to include the number of years and partial years
as a DROP participant. For eligible retirees who retired on a duty disability
retirement, no retirement years will be accumulated for this part of the
monthly supplemental benefit calculation until after the member would have
attained 20 years of credited service, had he not retired on a duty
disability retirement. Non-duty disability retirees shall be credited with
actual years in receipt of a pension benefit.



         c.   For purposes of this section only, “eligible
retirees” means current retirees who were retired as of September 30 of
each year, including DROP participants, or beneficiaries receiving benefits.



(Ord. No. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10; Ord. No. 15-014, § 2, 6-2-15; Ord. No.
15-022, § 2, 9-3-15; Ord. No. 18-006, §§ 3-5, 5-15-18)



Sec. 18-170.  Optional forms of benefits.



   (a)   Each member entitled to a normal, early or disability
retirement benefit shall have the right at any time prior to the date on
which the benefit begins to elect to have the benefit payable under any of
the options hereinafter set forth in lieu of the amount and form of benefits
provided above, and to revoke any such elections and make a new election at
any time prior to the actual commencement of payment.



   (b)   The value of optional benefits shall be the actuarial
equivalent of the value of benefits otherwise payable. The member shall make
an election by written request to the Board, such request being retained in
the Board’s files. The options available to the members of the fund are as
follows:



      (1)   Life annuity.  The member may elect to receive a
benefit payable for the member’s life only.



      (2)   Contingent annuitant (joint and survivor option).  The
member may elect to receive a benefit during the joint lifetime of the member
and a joint pensioner designated by the police officer, and following the
death of either of them, 100%, 75%, 662/3% or 50% of such monthly benefit
payable to the survivor for the lifetime of the survivor.



      (3)   Survivor annuity.  The member may elect to receive a
benefit during the member’s lifetime and then following the death of the
member, a reduced amount to a beneficiary. At the time of retirement, the
member may choose a survivor benefit of 100%, 75%, 662/3% or 50% of the
member’s monthly benefit. This amount will be payable to the beneficiary of
the lifetime of the beneficiary.



   (c)   The member upon electing any option of this section will
designate the joint pensioner or beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive
the benefit, if any, payable under the plan in the event of the member’s
death, and will have the power to change such designation from time to time
but any such change shall be deemed a new election and will be subject to
approval by the Pension Board. Such designation will name a joint pensioner
or one or more primary beneficiaries where applicable. If a member has
elected an option with a joint pensioner or beneficiary and his or her
retirement income benefits have commenced, he or she may thereafter change
the designated joint pensioner or beneficiary up to twice in accordance with
F.S. Section 185.341 without the approval of the Board of Trustees or the
current joint annuitant or beneficiary. The retiree is not required to
provide proof of the good health of the joint annuitant or beneficiary being
removed, and the joint annuitant or beneficiary being removed need not be
living. Any retired member who desires to change his or her joint annuitant
or beneficiary shall file with the Board of Trustees a notarized notice of
such change. Upon receipt of a completed change of joint annuitant form or
such other notice, the Board of Trustees shall adjust the member’s monthly
benefit by the application of actuarial tables and calculations developed to
ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the present value
of the member’s current benefit and there is no impact to the Plan. The
member shall also be responsible for the cost of the recalculation of the
benefit by the actuary. The consent of a member’s joint pensioner or
beneficiary to any such change shall not be required. Any subsequent requests
for changes in beneficiary will require Board of Trustees’ approval and the
joint pensioner being removed must be alive when the request for changes is
made. The Board of Trustees may request such evidence of the good health of
the joint pensioner that is being removed as it may require. In the event
that no designated beneficiary survives the member, such benefits as are
payable in the event of the death of the member subsequent to his or her
retirement shall be paid as provided in Section 18-171.



   (d)   Retirement income payments shall be made under the option
elected in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be
subject to the following limitations:



      (1)   If a member dies prior to his or her normal retirement
date or early retirement date, no benefit will be payable under the option to
any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under Section
18-169(d).



      (2)   If the designated beneficiary (or beneficiaries) or
joint pensioner dies before the member’s retirement under the plan, the
option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement income of the
normal form and amount will be payable to the member upon his or her
retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is
made in accordance with the provisions of this section or a new beneficiary
is designated by the member prior to his or her retirement.



      (3)   If both the member and the designated beneficiary (or
beneficiaries) die before the full payment has been effected under any option
providing for payments for a period certain and life thereafter, the Board of
Trustees may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the
remaining payments be paid in a lump sum.



      (4)   If a member continues beyond his or her normal
retirement date and dies prior to actual retirement and while an option made
pursuant to the provisions of this section is in effect, monthly retirement
income payments will be made, or a retirement benefit will be paid, under the
option to a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by the member in the
amount or amounts computed as if the police officer had retired under the
option on the date on which death occurred.



      (5)   A member may not make any change in retirement option
after the date of cashing or depositing the first retirement check.



(Ord. No. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10)



Sec. 18-171.  Beneficiaries.



   (a)   Each member may, on a form provided for that purpose which was
signed and filed with the Board of Trustees, designate a beneficiary (or
beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the
event of death; and each designation may be revoked by such member by signing
and filing with the Board of Trustees a new designation of beneficiary form.



   (b)   If a deceased member officer failed to name a beneficiary in
the manner prescribed above in subsection (a) of this section, or if the
beneficiary (or beneficiaries) named by the deceased member predeceases the
member, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the plan with
respect to such deceased police officer may be paid at the discretion of the
Board of Trustees to the estate of the deceased member, provided that the
Board of Trustees may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly
income payments be paid in a lump sum. Any payment made to any person
pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of all
obligations under the plan with regard to such deceased member and shall not
be subject to review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on
all persons ever interested hereunder.



(Ord. No. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10)



Sec. 18-172.  Buy back of service.



   (a)   Re-employment.  When any former police officer of the city is
re-employed, he or she will become a member of the plan upon re-employment as
a full time permanent police officer. When a former police officer of the
city is re-employed and had withdrawn contributions previously made to the
plan, he or she may reinstate the previous service provided the plan is paid
the total amount previously withdrawn (consisting of accumulated member
contributions plus any interest previously paid by the plan on those
contributions) in a lump sum within six months of re-employment or, effective
November 9, 2010, in installment payments over a period of up to 5 years and
the installment payments must begin within 6 months of re-employment. The
total amount is brought forward with interest for  the total number of
months from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment, calculated to
the nearest month. This calculated amount equals the amount to be repaid to
the plan in a lump sum.  If the member chooses to pay over time, interest
will continue to accrue during the period of repayment. The interest to bring
forward the total amount will be at the equivalent compound monthly rate
derived from the earning rate assumed by the actuary in the most recent
actuarial valuation submitted to the Division of Retirement pursuant to F.S.
Chapter 112, Part VII.  No credit shall be given for any service until all
years of service which are to be repurchased, have been repurchased.



   (b)   Prior police officer service.  Unless otherwise prohibited by
law, the years or fractional parts of years that a police officer previously
served as a police officer for any other municipal, county, state or federal
police department or service in the military shall be added to the years of
credited service provided that:



      (1)   The police officer contributes to the fund the sum that
would have been contributed, based on the police officer’s salary and the
employee contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is
requested, had the police officer been a member of this system for the years
or fractional parts of years for which the credit is requested plus amount
actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in
any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services
rendered to the Board in connection with the purchase of years of credited
service.



      (2)   Payment by the police officer of the requirement amount
may be made within six months of the request for credit and in one lump sum
payment, or the police officer can buy back this time over a period equal to
the length of time being purchased or five years, whichever is greater, at an
interest rate which is equal to the fund’s actuarial assumption. A police
officer may request to purchase a maximum of five years of service. No credit
shall be given for any service until all years of service which are to be
repurchased, have been repurchased.



      (3)   The credit purchased under this section shall count for
benefit computation purposes, but not for vesting.



      (4)   In no event, however, may credited service be purchased
pursuant to this section for prior service with any other municipal, county
or state police department, if such prior service forms or will  form the
basis of a retirement benefit or pension from another retirement system or
plan. This subparagraph does not apply to military service.



(Ord. No. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10; Ord. No. 11-011, § 2, 3-15-11)



Sec. 18-173.  Rollovers.



   (a)   Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions.



      (1)   General. This subsection applies to distributions made
on or after January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the
contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee’s election under this
subsection, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed
by the Board of Trustees, to have any portion of an eligible rollover
distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the
distributee in a direct rollover.



      (2)   Definitions.



         a.   Eligible rollover distribution.  Any distribution
of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except
that an eligible rollover does not include any distribution that is one of a
series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than
annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the
joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the
distributee’s designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten
years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required
under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and the portion of any
distribution that is not includable in gross income.



         b.   Eligible retirement plan.  An individual
retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code,
an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Internal
Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, that accepts the distributee’s eligible rollover
distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to
the surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement
account or individual retirement annuity.



         c.   Direct rollover.  A payment by the plan to the
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee.



         d.   Distributee.  Includes an employee or former
employee. In addition, the employee’s or former employee’s surviving
spouse and the employee’s or former employee’s spouse or former spouse
who is entitled to payment for alimony and child support under an income
deduction order, are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse
or former spouse.



   (b)   Rollovers from qualified plans. 



      (1)   A member may roll over all or a part of his or her
interest in another qualified plan to the fund, provided all of the following
requirements are met:



         a.   Some or all of the amount distributed from the
other plan is rolled over to this plan no later than the sixtieth day after
distribution was made from the plan or, if distributions are made in
installments, no later than the sixtieth day after the last distribution was
made.



         b.   The amount rolled over to this fund does not
include any amount contributed by the member to the plan on a post-tax basis.
Effective October 1, 2002, a member may rollover amounts contributed on a
post-tax basis.



         c.   The rollover is made in cash.



         d.   The member certifies that the distribution is
eligible for a rollover.



         e.   Any amount which the trustees accept as a rollover
to this fund shall, along with any earnings allocated to them, be fully
vested at all times.



      (2)   A rollover may also be made to this plan from an
individual retirement account qualified  under section408 of the Internal
Revenue Code when the individual retirement account was merely used as a
conduit for funds from another qualified plan and the rollover is made in
accordance with the rules provided in paragraphs a. through e. Amounts rolled
over may be segregated from other fund assets. The trustees shall separately
account for gains, losses, and administrative expenses of these rollovers. In
addition, the fund may accept the direct transfer of a member’s benefits
from another qualified retirement plan or to a deferred compensation plan
pursuant to section 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. The fund shall account
for direct transfers in the same manner as a rollover and shall obtain 
certification from the member that the amounts are eligible for a rollover or
direct transfer to this fund.



   (c)   Transfer of accumulated leave.



      (1)   Members eligible to receive accumulated sick leave,
accumulated vacation leave or any other accumulated leave payable upon
retirement, including entry into the DROP, shall have the leave transferred
to the plan.



For purposes of this section, the term “separation” shall mean
termination of service as a police officer with the city. Members on whose
behalf leave has been transferred may elect one of the following distribution
options within 30 days of separation. Members failing to elect a distribution
option within 30 days of separation will be deemed to have elected option (a)
below:



         a.   Receive a lump sum equal to the transferred leave
balance; or



         b.   Transfer the entire amount of the transferred leave
balance directly to any eligible retirement plan; or



         c.   Purchase additional service credit as may be
permitted by the Code. If the leave balance exceeds the cost of the service
credit purchased, the balance shall be paid to the member in a lump sum; or



         d.   Transfer the entire amount of the transferred leave
balance into the member’s DROP account; or



         e.   Maintain the entire leave balance within the plan.
Earnings shall  be paid as follows:



            1.   Gains or losses at the same interest rate
earned by the Pension Plan; or



            2.   A guaranteed rate of 7%; or



            3.   A percentage of the leave balance account
will be credited with interest gains or losses at the same rate earned by the
pension plan and the remaining percentage will be credited with earnings at a
guaranteed rate of 7%. The actual percentage shall be selected by the member
on a form provided by the Board of Trustees.  The total of the two
percentages must equal 100%.



These accounts will be assessed an administrative fee that is based upon the
ratio that the employee's DROP account bears to the fund as a whole.



      (2)   If a member on whose behalf the city makes a transferred
leave balance to the plan dies after retirement or other separation, but
before making an election, as provided, or after making an election but
before any distribution is made, the election option shall be void. In such
an event, any person who would have received a death benefit had the member
died in service immediately prior to the date of retirement or other
separation, shall be entitled to receive an amount equal to the transferred
leave balance in a lump sum. In the case of a surviving spouse or former
spouse, an election may be made to transfer the leave balance to an eligible
retirement plan in lieu of the lump sum payment. Failure to make such an
election by the surviving spouse or former spouse within 60 days of the
member’s death will be deemed an election to receive a lump sum payment.



      (3)   The Board, by rule, shall have the authority to enact
administrative rules for purposes of administering the provisions of this
section, consistent with the federal tax laws in effect on the date of
transfer. No such rule shall conflict with the provisions of this section.



      (4)   The value of the leave transferred shall be determined
in accordance with applicable city personnel policies or collective
bargaining agreements.



(Ord. No. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10)



Sec. 18-174.  Miscellaneous.



   (a)   Pension validity. The Board of Trustees shall have the power
to examine the facts upon which any pension shall have been granted or
obtained erroneously, fraudulently, or illegally for any reason. The Board is
empowered to purge the pension rolls of any person granted a pension under
proper or existing law or granted under this article if the pension is found
to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any
pensioner who has under any prior or existing law or who shall hereafter
under this article be erroneously, improperly, or illegally classified.



   (b)   False or misleading statements made to obtain retirement
benefits prohibited.



      (1)   It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly
make, or cause to be made, or to assist, conspire with, or urge another to
make, or cause to be made, any false, fraudulent, or misleading oral or
written statement or withhold or conceal material information to obtain any
benefit under this plan.



      (2)   a.   A person who violates subparagraph (1) commits a
misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. Sections
775.082 or 775.083.



         b.   In addition to any applicable criminal penalty,
upon conviction for a violation described in subparagraph (1), a participant
or beneficiary of this plan may, in the discretion of the Board of Trustees,
be required to forfeit the right to receive any or all benefits to which the
person would otherwise be entitled under this plan. For purposes of this
subparagraph, “conviction” means a determination of guilt that is the
result of a plea or trial , regardless of whether adjudication is withheld.



   (c)   Incompetence. If any member or beneficiary is a minor or is,
in the judgment of the Board, otherwise incapable of personally receiving and
giving a valid receipt for any payment due them from the fund, the Board may,
unless and until claims have been made by a duly appointed guardian or
committee of such person, make such payment or any part thereof to such
person’s spouse, children, parent or other person deemed by the Board to
have incurred expenses or assumed responsibility for the expenses of such
person. Any payments so made shall be a complete discharge of any liability
under the system for such payment.



   (d)   Rights and benefits not subject to legal process.  The rights
and benefits provided for herein are vested rights of participants in the
fund and shall not be subject to attachment, garnishment, execution or any
other legal process. However:



      (1)   The Board shall honor an income deduction order for
alimony or child support in accordance with rules and procedures adopted by
the Board; and



      (2)   Upon written request by the retiree, the Board of
Trustees may authorize the plan administrator to withhold from the monthly
retirement payment funds necessary to:



         a.   Pay for benefits being received through the city;



         b.   Pay the certified bargaining agent; or



         c.   Pay for premiums for accident health and long-term
care insurance for the retiree’s spouse and dependents. A retirement plan
does not incur liability for participation in this permissive program if its
actions are taken in good faith pursuant to F.S. Section 185.05(6).



   (e)   Lump sum payment of small retirement income.  Notwithstanding
any provision of the fund to the contrary, if the monthly retirement income
payable to any person entitled to benefits hereunder is less than $30 or if
the single sum value of the accrued retirement income is less than $5,000 as
of the date of retirement or termination of service, whichever is applicable,
the Board of Trustees, in the exercise of its discretion, may specify that
the actuarial equivalent of such retirement income be paid in lump sum.



   (f)   Required distributions.



      (1)   In accordance with section 401(a)(9) of the Internal
Revenue Code, all benefits under this plan will be distributed, beginning not
later than the required beginning date set forth below, over a period not
extending beyond the life expectancy of the member or the life expectancy of
the member and a beneficiary.



      (2)   Any and all benefit payments shall begin by the later of:



         a.   April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar
year of the member’s retirement date; or



         b.   April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar
year in which the member attains age 70.5.



      (3)   If an employee dies before his or her entire vested
interest has been distributed to him or her, the remaining portion of such
interest will be distributed at least as rapidly as provided for under this
plan.



   (g)   Internal Revenue Code limits.



      (1)   Basic limitations. Subject to the adjustments in
paragraph (3), the maximum amount of the actual annual retirement income paid
in  any year with respect to a participant under this plan shall not exceed
the dollar amount allowable for any calendar year pursuant to section 415(b)
of the Code, as adjusted in such calendar year for increases in the cost of
living in accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury
under section 415(d) of the Code. For purposes of applying the basic
limitation, benefits payable in any form other than a straight life annuity
with no ancillary benefits shall be adjusted, as provided by Treasury
Regulations, so that such benefits are the actuarial equivalent of a straight
life annuity. For purposes of this subsection, the following benefits shall
not be taken into account:



         a.   Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related
to retirement income benefits;



         b.   Any other benefit not required under section
415(b)(2) of the Code and Treasury Regulations thereunder to be taken into
account for purposes of the limitation of section 415(b)(1) of the Code.



      (2)   Participation in other defined benefit plans.  The
limitation of this subsection with respect to any participant who at any time
has been a participant in any other defined benefit plan (as defined in
section 414(j) of the Code) maintained by the city shall apply as if the
total benefits payable under all defined benefit plans in which the
participant has been a participant where payable from one plan.



      (3)   Adjustments in limitations.



         a.   In the event the participant's retirement benefits
become payable before age 62, the maximum amount of annual retirement income
limitation prescribed by this article shall be reduced in accordance with
regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the
provisions of section 415(b) of the Code, so that such limitation (as
reduced) equals an annual benefit (beginning when such retirement income
begins) which is equivalent to the Code section 415(b) maximum amount of
annual retirement income beginning at age 62.



         b.   In the event the participant's benefit is based on
at least 15 years of credited service, the adjustments provided for in
subparagraph a. above shall not apply.



         c.   The reductions provided for in subparagraph a.
above shall not be applicable to disability benefits pre-retirement death
benefits.



         d.   In the event the participant’s retirement benefit
becomes payable after age 65, for purposes of determining whether this
benefit meets the basic limitation set forth in paragraph (1) herein, such
benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the benefit
beginning at age 65.  This adjustment shall be made using an assumed
interest rate of 5% and shall be made in accordance with regulations
promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury or his or her delegate.



         e.   Less than ten years of service. The maximum
retirement benefits payable under this article to any participant who has
completed less than ten years of credited service with the city shall be the
amount determined under paragraph (1) multiplied by a fraction, the numerator
of which is the number of the participant’s years of credited service and
the denominator of which is ten. The reduction provided for in this
subparagraph shall not be applicable to disability benefits or pre-retirement
death benefits.



         f.   Ten thousand dollar limit. Not withstanding the
foregoing, the retirement benefit payable with respect to a participant shall
be deemed not to exceed the limitations in this subsection if the benefits
payable, with respect to such participant under this plan and under all other
qualified defined benefit pension plans to which the city contributes, do not
exceed $10,000 for the applicable plan year and for any prior plan year and
the city has not at any time maintained a qualified defined contributions
plan in which the participant participated.



         g.   Reduction of benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or
contributions to all plans, where required, shall be accomplished by first
reducing the participant’s benefit under any defined benefit plans in which
participant participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the
plan in which participant most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in
such priority as shall be determined by the Board and the plan administrator
of such other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures
for defined contribution plans in which the participant participated, such
reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which participant most
recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be
established by the Board and the plan administrator for such other plans
provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in different manner
and priority pursuant to the agreement of the Board and the plan
administrator of all other plans covering such participant.



         h.   Cost-of-living adjustments. The limitations as
stated herein shall be adjusted annually in accordance with any
cost-of-living adjustments prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury
pursuant to section 415(d) of the Code.



      (4)   Additional limitation on pension benefits. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary:



         a.   The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to
a retiree who becomes a participant of the plan on or after January 1, 1980,
and who has not previously participated in such plan, shall not exceed 100%
of his or her average final compensation. However, nothing contained in this
article shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension
increases attributable to cost-of-living increases or adjustments.



         b.   No participant of the plan shall be allowed to
receive a retirement benefit or pension which is in part or in whole based
upon any service with respect to which the participant is already receiving,
or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a
different employer’s retirement plan.  This restriction does not apply to
social security benefits, military benefits or federal benefits under Chapter
67, Title 10, U.S. Code.



(Ord. No. 10-005, §2, 2-2-10)



Sec. 18-175.  Deferred retirement option plan.



   (a)   A deferred retirement option plan (“DROP”) is hereby
created.



   (b)   Eligibility to participate in the DROP is based upon
eligibility for normal service retirement in the plan. Members shall elect to
participate by applying to the Board of Trustees on a form provided for that
purpose.



   (c)   Participation in the DROP must be exercised within the first
25 years of combined credited service.



   (d)   A member shall not participate in the DROP beyond the time of
attaining 30 years of service and the total years of participation in the
DROP shall not exceed five years. For example:



      (1)   Members with 20 years of credited service at time of
entry shall only participate for five years.



      (2)   Members with 25 years of credited service at time of
entry shall participate for five  years.



      (3)   Members with 26 years of credited service at time of
entry shall only participate for four years.



   (e)   Upon a members election to participate in the DROP, he or she
shall cease to be a member and is precluded from accruing any additional
benefit under the Pension Fund. For all fund purposes, the member becomes a
retirant. The amount of credited service and final average salary freeze as
of the date of entry into the DROP. Accumulated, unused sick and vacation
leave shall be included in the compensation calculation; provided however,
that a minimum balance of 120 hours of sick leave and 120 hours of vacation
leave shall be maintained by the employee and excluded from this calculation.
The retained leave balance, including any additions, shall be distributed at
the conclusion of DROP participation and separation from service.



   (f)   Payment shall be made into the employee’s DROP account as if
the employee had retired from the employ of the city. The amounts paid will
be determined in accordance with this Plan and the employee’s selection of
the payment option. Payments into the DROP will be made monthly over the
period the employee participates in the DROP, up to a maximum of 60 months.



   (g)   Effective January 1, 2003, DROP participants have the option
to select optional methods to credit investment earnings to their account
less any outstanding loan balances. The method may be changed each year
effective January 1, however, the method must be selected prior to January 1
on a form provided by the Board of Trustees. The methods are:



      (1)   Gains or losses at the same interest rate earned by the
Pension Plan; or



      (2)   A guaranteed rate of 7%; or



      (3)   A percentage of the DROP account will be credited with
interest gains or losses at the same rate earned by the pension plan and the
remaining percentage will be credited with earnings at a guaranteed rate of
7%. The actual percentage shall be selected by the member on a form provided
by the Board of Trustees. The total of the two percentages must equal 100%.
Employee’s DROP accounts will be assessed an administrative fee that is
based upon the ratio that the Employee’s DROP account bears to the fund as
a whole.



      (4)   Participants in the DROP, as of December 31, 2002, may
change their method for the crediting of earnings. This change in the
crediting of earnings is a one time opportunity. The election to change the
method for crediting must be made during the month of January 2003. The
method, if changed, will be effective February 1, 2003.



   (h)   An employee’s participation in the DROP shall terminate at
the end of five years or 30 years of service, whichever comes first. Failure
to end DROP participation may result in penalties at the discretion of the
Trustees, up to and including forfeiture of the DROP account.  Upon entering
into the DROP, an employee shall file with the Board a binding letter of
resignation from city employment. The binding letter of resignation shall
establish a deferred termination date in accordance with the limitations of
this DROP, which may be amended.



   (i)   All interest shall be credited to the employee’s DROP
account less any outstanding loan balances on a quarterly basis with
quarterly statements provided. In the event that a member dies while in the
DROP, interest shall be pro-rated to the last business day of the month
preceding the death of the member.



   (j)   Upon termination of employment, participants in the DROP will
receive the balance of the DROP account in accordance with the following
rules:



      (1)   Members may elect to begin to receive payment upon
termination of employment or defer payment of DROP until the latest day as
provided under sub-subparagraph (3).



      (2)   Payments may be made in the following ways:



         a.   Lump sum.  The entire account balance will be paid
to or on behalf of the retirant upon approval of the Board of Trustees.



         b.   Installments. The account balance will be paid out
to the retirant in five equal annual payments paid over five years, the first
payment to be made upon approval of the Board of Trustees.



         c.   Monthly installments. The account balance will be
paid out to the retirant on a monthly basis until the account balance is paid
out based on actuarial tables provided by the actuary.



         d.   Partial lump sum withdrawals. Part of the account
balance will be paid to or on behalf of the retirant upon approval of the
Trustees.



      (3)   Any form of payment selected by a police officer must
comply with the minimum distribution requirements of section 401(A)(9) of the
Internal Revenue Code, and is subject to the requirements of Section
18-174(f), e.g., payments must commence by age 70.5.



      (4)   The beneficiary of the DROP participant who dies before
payments from DROP begin shall have the same right to select payment options
as the participant in accordance with this subsection.  A DROP participant
may designate a beneficiary to receive the DROP balance in the event of the
participant’s death prior to pay out of the full DROP balance.



   (k)   No payments will be made from DROP until the employee actually
separates from service with the city.



   (l)   If an employee shall die during participation in the DROP, a
survivor benefit shall be payable in accordance with the form of benefit
chosen at the time of entry into the DROP.



   (m)   Upon commencement of participation in the DROP, the member
shall no longer be eligible for disability retirement from the pension plan.



   (n)   Loans from the DROP.



      (1)   Availability of loans.



         a.   Loans are available to members only after
termination of employment, provided the member had participated in the DROP 
for a period of 12 months.



         b.   Loans may only be made from a member's own account.



         c.   There may be no more than one loan at a time.



      (2)   Amount of loan.



         a.   Loans may be made up to a maximum of 50% of account
balance.



         b.   The maximum dollar amount of a loan is $50,000,
reduced by the highest outstanding loan balance during the last 12 months.



         c.   The minimum loan is $5,000.



      (3)   Limitations on loans shall be made from the amounts paid
into the DROP and the earnings thereon.



      (4)   Term of loan.



         a.   The loan must be for at least one year.



         b.   The loan shall be no longer than five years.



      (5)   Loan interest rate.



         a.   The interest rate shall be fixed at time the loan
is originated for the entire term of loan.



         b.   The interest rate shall be equal to the prime rate
published by an established local bank on the last day of each calendar
quarter preceding the date of loan application.



      (6)   Defaults on loans.



         a.   Loans shall be in default if two  consecutive
months’ repayments are missed or if a total of four months’ repayments
are missed.



         b.   Upon default, the entire balance becomes due and
payable immediately.



         c.   If a loan in default is not repaid in full
immediately, the loan may be canceled and the outstanding balance treated as
a distribution, which may be taxable.



         d.   Upon default of a loan, a member will not be
eligible for additional loans.



      (7)   Miscellaneous provisions.



         a.   All loans must be evidenced by a written loan
agreement signed  by the member and the Board of Trustees. The agreement
shall contain a promissory note.



         b.   A member’s spouse must consent in writing to the
loan. The consent shall acknowledge the effect of the loan on the member’s
account balance.



         c.   Loans shall be considered a general asset of the
fund.



         d.   Loans shall be subject to administrative fees to be
set by the Board of Trustees.



         e.   Outstanding loan balances shall not be credited
with earnings or losses. As the outstanding balance is repaid with interest,
earnings and losses shall be applied to the payments and interest as provided
for in Section 18-175(i).



(Ord. No. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10; Ord. No. 11-011, § 3, 3-15-11)



Sec. 18-176.  Termination of plan and distribution of fund.



   Upon termination of the plan by the municipality for any reason, or
because of a transfer, merger, or consolidation of governmental units,
services, or functions as provided in F.S. Chapter 112, or upon written
notice to the Board of Trustees by the municipality that contributions under
the plan are being permanently discontinued, the rights of all employees to
benefits accrued to the date of such termination or discontinuance and the
amounts credited to the employees’ accounts are nonforfeitable. The fund
shall be apportioned and distributed in accordance with the following
procedures:



   (a)   The Board of Trustees shall determine the date of distribution
and the asset value required to fund all the nonforfeitable benefits after
taking into account the expenses of such distribution. The Board shall inform
the municipality if additional assets are required, in which event the
municipality shall continue to financially support the plan until all
nonforfeitable benefits have been funded.



   (b)   The Board of Trustees shall determine the method of
distribution of the asset value, whether distribution shall be by payment in
cash, by the maintenance of another or substituted trust fund, by the
purchase of insured annuities, or otherwise, for each member entitled to
benefits under the plan, as specified in subsection (c).



   (c)   The Board of Trustees shall distribute the asset value as of
the date of termination in the manner set forth in this subsection, on the
basis that the amount required to provide any given retirement income is the
actuarially computed single-sum value of such retirement income, except that
if the method of distribution determined under subsection (b) involves the
purchase of an insured annuity, the amount required to provide the given
retirement income is the single premium payable for such annuity. The
actuarial single-sum value may not be less than the employee’s accumulated
contributions to the plan, with interest, if provided by the plan, less the
value of any plan benefits previously paid to the employee.



   (d)   If there is asset value remaining after the full distribution
specified in paragraph (c), and after payment of any expenses incurred with
such distribution such excess shall be returned to the municipality, less
return to the state of the state’s contributions, provided that, if the
excess is less than the total contributions made by the municipality and the
state to date of termination of the plan, such excess shall be divided
proportionately to the total contributions made by the municipality and the
state.



   (e)   The Board of Trustees shall distribute, in accordance with the
manner of distribution determined under paragraph (b), the amounts
distributed under subsection (c). If, after 24 months after the date the plan
terminated or the date on which the Board received written notice that the
contributions thereunder were being permanently discontinued, the
municipality or the Board of Trustees of the municipal police officers’
retirement trust fund affected has not complied with all the provisions in
this section, the Department of Management Services shall effect the
termination of the fund in accordance with this section.



(Ord. No. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10)



Sec. 18-177.  Cost of living adjustment.



   (a)   Subject to the conditions set forth in this section, the Board
of Trustees shall annually a cost of living adjustment, the amount of which
shall be determined as of each September 30. The amount of the cost of living
adjustment shall be equal to the actuarial present value of future pension
payments to current pensioners multiplied by the positive difference, if any,
between the rate of investment return and 8%. The actuary shall determine
whether there may be a cost of living adjustment based on the following
factors:



      (1)   The actuary for the Pension Fund shall determine the
rate of investment return on the Pension Fund assets during the 12-month
period ending each September 30. The rate determined shall be the rate
reported in the most recent actuarial report submitted pursuant to F.S.
Chapter 112, Part VII.



      (2)   The actuary for the Pension Fund shall, as of September
30, determine the actuarial present value of future pension payments to
current pensioners. The actuarial present values shall be calculated using an
interest rate of 8% a year compounded annually, and a mortality table
approved by the Board of Trustees and as used in the most recent actuarial
report  submitted pursuant to F.S. Chapter 112, Part VII. This will be the
pool of funds available to fund the cost of living adjustment.



      (3)   If the actuary determines there may be a cost of living
adjustment, the Board of Trustees shall authorize such a distribution unless
the administrative expenses of distribution exceed the amount available for
the distribution.



      (4)   The cost of living adjustment shall be funded only if
the present value of the pool of funds does not exceed the net actuarial
experience accumulated from all sources of gains and losses.



   (b)   Cost of living adjustments will be made to pensioners,
including DROP members, and beneficiaries, who are referred to as eligible
persons.



   (c)   The cost of living adjustment shall be allocated among
eligible persons based upon the participant’s years of service in the
proportion that the participants years of service bear to the aggregate
amount of years of service of all eligible persons. Allocations for
beneficiaries will be in proportion that the beneficiary benefit bears to the
retiree benefit Maximum service credits shall be 20 years. Minimum
allocations for duty disability pensioners shall be based on 13.33 years of
service.



   (d)   The cost of living shall be made as of July 1, 2001 and each
July 1 thereafter. Each eligible person shall be paid his or her allocated
portion from the preceding September 30. Eligible persons must be retired for
one year from September 30 to receive a cost of living adjustment. A
pensioner’s estate is entitled to a pro-rata share of the deceased
retirant’s cost of living adjustment based on a number of months that the
deceased retirant received a pension during the year ending the September 30
prior to the retirant’s death.



(Ord. No. 10-005, § 2, 2-2-10)



Sec. 18-178. Reemployment after retirement.



   (a)   Any retiree who is retired under this fund, except for
disability retirement, may be reemployed by any public or private employer,
except the City, and may receive compensation from that employment without
limiting or restricting in any way the retirement benefits payable under this
fund. Reemployment of a retiree by the City on or after January 1, 2017,
shall be subject to the limitations set forth in this section.



   (b)   Reemployment in a position other than as a police officer or
in a position supervising police officers. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this plan, a retiree who is retired from the fund on a normal
retirement at normal retirement age, and who is subsequently reemployed by
the city in a position other than as a police officer or in a position
supervising police officers, shall, upon being reemployed, continue receipt
of benefits from this fund. The benefit paid from this fund shall not be
changed in any way by such reemployment. These payments shall be considered
in-service distributions.



   (c)   Reemployment as a police officer. In the event a retiree who
is retired from the fund is subsequently reemployed by the city as a police
officer or into a position that supervises police officers, the benefit
payable to the retiree from this fund shall be suspended for the period of
such reemployment until the retiree terminates employment with the city.



      (1)   If by virtue of re-employment as a police officer, the
retiree is eligible to participate in this plan, the retiree shall be deemed
to be 100% vested upon re-employment.



      (2)   The additional credited service accrued during the
subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit
amount attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount
shall be added to the benefit determined upon the initial retirement to
determine the total benefit payable upon final retirement.



      (3)   Calculations of benefits for each retirement shall be
based upon the benefit accrual rate, average annual earnings, credited
service, cost-of-living adjustment as of that date and the retirement benefit
amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the benefit
accrual rate, average annual earnings (based only on the subsequent
employment period), credited service, cost-of-living adjustment, if
applicable, as of the date of subsequent retirement.



      (4)   The optional form of benefit and any joint pensioner
selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to change upon
subsequent retirement except as otherwise provided herein, but the member may
select a different optional form and joint pensioner applicable to the
subsequent retirement benefit.



   (d)   Re-employment of terminated vested persons. Re-employed
terminated vested persons, including those elected or appointed to the City
Commission, shall not be subject to the provisions of this section until such
time as they begin to actually receive benefits after termination of
employment in accordance with Section 18-169(e).



   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of subsection (a), (b) (c) or
(d) above, a retiree who has retired on an early retirement or a disability
retirement may not be reemployed by the city and continue to receive a
benefit from this fund. Retirement pursuant to an early retirement incentive
program shall be deemed early retirement for purposes of this section if the
member was permitted to retire prior to the customary retirement date
provided for in the plan at the time of retirement.



(Ord. No. 18-006, § 6, 5-15-18)



ARTICLE IV. PENSIONS FOR FIREFIGHTERS*



   *Cross reference-Excise tax on fire and tornado insurers for
firefighters retirement, § 23-3.



Sec. 18-179.  Application; Trustee terms of office.



   All other provisions of F.S. Chapter 175 shall meet all the
requirements and be fully applicable, except for the provisions of this
article, to the City of Boynton Beach Municipal Firefighters Pension Trust
Fund. The increased pension benefits in the same percentage of increase as
provided for by this article shall apply to all firefighters now receiving
retirement benefits and all firefighters eligible for retirement benefits but
not now retired, under the provisions of the City of Boynton Beach Municipal
Firefighters Pension Trust Fund, F.S. Chapter 175. A retiree receiving a
joint and survivor form of benefit shall be permitted to change his or her
beneficiary, as provided in F.S. §§ 175.171 and 175.333. The Board of
Trustees shall be governed by F.S. § 175.061. Each Trustee shall have a term
of four (4) years, but may succeed himself or herself in office, and shall
holdover until replaced. All Trustees serving as of January 1, 2014 shall
have their current term extended for a two (2)-year period.



(Code 1958, § 21-95; Ord. No. 89-26, § 1, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 00-19, § 6,
6-6-00; Ord. No. 14-019, § 2, 9-3-14)



Sec. 18-180.  Monthly retirement income.



   (a)   The amount of monthly retirement income payable to a
firefighter who retires on or after the firefighter’s normal retirement
date shall be an amount equal to the number of the firefighter’s years of
credited service multiplied by 3% of such firefighter’s average final
compensation. Effective October 1, 2018 the maximum normal retirement benefit
shall be capped at ninety-five thousand dollars ($95,000) (hereinafter the
“maximum benefit cap”). The maximum benefit cap will be increased
annually beginning on the first day of October 2023 (and on each October 1
thereafter) by one and a half percent (1.5%). The maximum benefit cap shall
also apply to early retirement, deferred vested retirement and disability
retirement. In the case of early retirement and deferred vested retirement,
the maximum benefit cap shall be applied to the normal retirement benefit
before reflecting any reductions for early retirement. At all times, the plan
shall comply with the maximum benefit limitations of IRS Code Section 415(d)
and all applicable Treasury Regulations.



(Code 1958, § 21-91; Ord. No. 89-26, § 1, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 92-44, § 1,
9-2-92; Ord. No. 93-16, § 1, 6-15-93; Ord. No. 99-28, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord.
No. 19-009, § 2, 2-19-19)



Sec. 18-180.1.  Computation of monthly retirement income in the instance of
early retirement.



   The benefit payable for early retirement shall be the same as
determined for normal retirement, as set forth in section 18-180, less three
(3) percent for each year or portion thereof of which the member’s actual
retirement date precedes the date which would have been the member’s normal
retirement date had such member remained in full-time employment with the
city. For all new members hired on or after February 5, 2019 (hereinafter
“Tier 2 members”), early retirement shall be available at age fifty (50)
with at least ten (10) years of service, reduced by the three (3%) percent
per year early retirement reduction described above. The maximum benefit cap
established in 2019 shall apply to early retirement benefits, but for
calculation purposes shall be actuarially determined based on the member’s
normal retirement benefit.



(Ord. No. 84-39, § 1, 10-3-84; Ord. No. 89-26, § 1, 9-19-89; Ord. No.
00-19, § 2, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 19-009, § 3, 2-19-19)



Sec. 18-180.2.   Cost of living increase.



   (a)   Effective December 1, 2011, an automatic two percent (2%)
annual cost of living adjustment (COLA) is created for all members who retire
or enter into the DROP on or after December 1, 2006. Payment of annual COLA
benefits shall not begin until five (5) years after retirement or entry into
the DROP. As of each October first, retirees in pay status and beneficiaries
receiving monthly survivorship benefits on behalf of deceased members, shall
have their benefits adjusted annually, following the five (5)-year delay.
Retirees eligible to receive annual COLA benefits shall include all retirees
electing early retirement and all disability retirees who enter pay status on
or after December 1, 2006.



   (b)   Every third year following adoption of this section, an
actuarial evaluation of the cost of this benefit (two percent (2%) COLA
adjustment for retirees) will be provided to the city by the Pension  Plan's
actuary, or other actuary designated by the city at it's option. In the event
the projected cost of the benefit increases over the projected cost for
fiscal year 2006-2007, the Pension  Plan shall be further amended to provide
that the increased costs will be offset by (1) an increase in the five
percent (5%) employee contribution provided herein, or (2) use of Chapter 175
funds, or (3) reduction of the cost of living (COLA) benefit for non-retired
members, or any combination of (1), (2) or (3), as recommended by the Pension
Board in consultation with the membership. Notwithstanding any provision to
the contrary, COLA benefits under this paragraph shall not be reduced for
retirees.



   (c)   In years where the actuarial evaluation described above
determines that the cost of the COLA  benefit is less than the projected
cost for the benefit for fiscal year 2006-2007, the actuarial savings shall
be recognized in a contribution reserve account within the Pension Plan. Any
savings accumulated in the contribution reserve account shall be held in
trust to be used to offset unanticipated COLA costs in future years.



(Ord. No. 06-092, § 2, 12-5-06)



Sec. 18-181.  Investments.



   The investment powers and authority of the Board of Trustees of the
Municipal Firefighters Pension Trust Fund shall be in accordance with F.S. §
175.071, provided, however:



   (a)   The aggregate investment of fund assets in:



      (1)   Obligations of the United States or obligations
guaranteed as to principal and interest by the government of the United
States; and



      (2)   County bonds containing a pledge of the full faith and
credit of the county involved, bonds of the division of bond finance of the
department of general services, or of any other state agency, which have
approved as to legal and fiscal sufficiency by the state board of
administration; and



      (3)   Obligations of any municipal authority issued pursuant
to the laws of this state; provided, however, that for each of the five (5)
years next preceding the date of investment the income of such authority
available for fixed charges shall have been not less than 1.5 times its
average annual fixed-charges requirement over the life of its obligations; and



      (4)   Bonds or other certificates of indebtedness issued or
guaranteed by a corporation organized under the laws of the United States,
any state or organized territory of the United States or the District of
Columbia;



   shall not at cost exceed seventy (70%) percent of the fund’s assets;
nor shall more than ten (10%) percent of the fund’s assets be invested in
the bonds or other certificates of indebtedness of any one issuing company;
nor shall the aggregate of such investment in any one issuing company exceed
three (3) percent of the outstanding bonds or other certificates of
indebtedness of that company. Fund assets may be invested in investment grade
bonds with not greater than ten percent (10%) of the fixed income portfolio
to hold an investment rating of Baa.



   (b)   The aggregate investment of fund assets in the common stock or
capital stock issued by a corporation organized under the laws of the United
States, any state, or organized territory of the United States or District of
Columbia shall not at cost exceed seventy (70%) percent of the fund’s
assets; nor shall more than five (5) percent of the fund’s assets be
invested in common stock or capital stock of any one issuing company; nor
shall the aggregate of such investment in any one issuing company exceed
three (3) percent of the outstanding bonds or other certificates of
indebtedness of that company.



   (c)   The Board of Trustees may retain in cash and keep unproductive
of income such amount of the fund as it may deem advisable, having regard for
the cash requirements of the fund.



   (d)   The Board of Trustees may cause any investment in securities
held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or
into the name of such nominee as it may direct or it may retain them 
unregistered and in form permitting transferability, but the books and
records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the fund.



(Code 1958, § 21-92; Ord. No. 82-36, § 1, 10-6-82; Ord. No. 83-39, § 1,
12-20-83; Ord. No. 89-26, § 1, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 95-41, § 1, 11-21-95; Ord.
No. 02-005, § 1, 2-5-02; Ord. No. 06-037, § 2, 5-2-06)



Sec. 18-181.1.  Investment authority.



   Pursuant to F.S. § 175.071(1)(b), the Board may invest the assets of
the plan in any lawful investment, real or personal, as provided in F.S. §
215.47, except as otherwise limited by law.  Consistent with F.S. §
175.071, the Board of Trustees may also invest up to ten percent (10%) of
plan assets, at cost, in foreign securities.  Subsequent amendments to F.S.
Ch. 175, which expand the scope of permissible investments shall be
incorporated herein upon adoption by the Florida Legislature.



(Ord. No. 94-52, § 3, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 06-037, § 3, 5-2-06; Ord. No.
07-010, § 2, 5-15-07)



Sec. 18-182.  Disability retirement benefits.



   (a)   Service incurred. Any member who receives a medically
substantiated service connected injury, disease or disability, which injury,
disease or disability totally and permanently disables such member to the
extent that, in the opinion of the board of trustees, the member is wholly
prevented from rendering useful and efficient service as a firefighter, shall
receive a monthly benefit equal to sixty- six and two-thirds (66 2/3) percent
of the member’s basic rate of earnings in effect on the date of disability.
Such benefit shall be payable on the first day each month, commencing on the
first day of the month following the latter to occur of the date on which the
disability has existed for three (3) months and the date the board of
trustees approved the payment of such retirement income. In the event of
recovery prior to the otherwise normal retirement date, credit for service
during the period of disability shall be granted for purposes of subsequent
retirement benefits. The amount of the disability benefit payable from the
fund shall be reduced by any amounts paid or payable as disability benefits
from workers’ compensation and the federal social security system. The
reduction for social security benefits shall be in the amount of the primary
insurance amount (PIA) only, and future increase, if any, in the disabled
member’s  social security  disability benefit  shall not serve to reduce
any further the disability benefit from the fund. The reduction for social
security shall terminate upon the attainment of age sixty-five (65). For
purposes of compliance with Chapter 175, Florida Statutes, service-incurred
disability benefits shall not be offset below 42% of average final
compensation. The maximum benefit cap established in 2019 shall apply to
service incurred disability retirement benefits under this subsection.



   (b)   Nonservice incurred. Any member with ten (10) years of
continuous service who receives a nonservice incurred injury, illness,
disease or disability, and which illness, injury, disease or disability
totally and permanently disables such member to the extent that, in the
opinion of the board of trustees, the member is wholly prevented from
rendering useful and efficient service as a firefighter, shall receive from
the fund in equal monthly installments an amount equal to two and one-half
(2½) percent of that member’s average final compensation for each year of
continuous service until death or  recovery from disability, whichever shall
first occur; Such benefit shall be payable on the first day of each month,
commencing on the first day of the month following the latter to occur of the
date on which the disability has existed for three (3) months and the date
the board of trustees approved the payment of such retirement income. For
purposes of compliance with F.S. Chapter 175, the minimum nonservice-incurred
disability benefit shall be 25% of average final compensation. The maximum
benefit cap established in 2019 shall apply to non-service incurred
disability retirement benefits under this subsection.



   (c)   Medical board. Whenever it becomes necessary for the board to
avail itself of the services of physicians in the case of an application for
disability retirement, the board shall designate a medical board to be
composed of three (3) physicians. The medical board shall arrange for and
pass upon the medical examinations required under the provisions of this
section, shall investigate all essential statements or certificates made by
or on behalf of a member in connection with an application for disability
retirement and shall report in writing to the board its conclusions and
recommendations upon all matters referred to it. The payment for such
services shall be determined by the board.



   (d)   Return to active duty from disability retirement. In the event
a member who has been retired on a pension on account of permanent and total
incapacity regains health and is found by the medical board designated by the
board to be in such physical and mental condition as to meet the
requirements  of the  personnel department for such service as a
firefighter of the city, the board shall order the pension discontinued, and
such person shall be ordered to resume active duty in the city at the same
rate of compensation currently in effect for the member’s pay grade. The
board shall review periodically, in its discretion, the condition of any
member receiving a pension of disability and if there is substantial evidence
that the retired member is capable of performing service acceptable to the
city as a firefighter, such member shall be ordered to resume active duty and
the member’s pension shall be discontinued.



   (e)   Disability exclusions. No member shall be granted a disability
pension upon a showing to the satisfaction of the board:



      (1)   That the disability resulted from an intentionally self-
inflicted wound, injury or ailment, or



      (2)   That the disability resulted from the use of narcotics,
drugs or alcoholic beverages, or



      (3)   That the disability resulted from a member’s
participation or involvement in riot, insurrection or unlawful assembly, or



      (4)   That the disability resulted from a member’s
participation or involvement ill the commission of a crime or unlawful act, or



      (5)   That the disability resulted from injury or disease
sustained by the firefighter while serving in any armed forces.



   (f)   Further disability provisions. Each member applying for a
service incurred disability benefit from this fund shall be required to apply
for disability benefits under social security, and, if applicable, workers’
compensation. Furthermore, each person granted a service incurred disability
benefit shall be required to submit to the board, no later than March first
of each year, a statement showing the monthly amount of social security (PIA
only) and workers’ compensation benefits received by such person as of
March first. Willful refusal by such persons to comply with these 
requirements shall be  grounds for the termination of or non-approval of
disability benefits from this system. However, the board shall exercise its
discretion in each case.



   (g)   Survivor’s benefit. If any member with at least ten (10)
years of continuous service shall die prior to retirement or other
termination of employment with the city, a death benefit shall be payable to
the deceased member’s spouse. The benefit shall equal two and one-half
(2½) per cent of average final compensation for each year of continuous
service. It shall be payable in equal monthly installments commencing the
first day of the month following the date of death and ceasing upon the death
or remarriage of the spouse.



   (h)   Payment options.  Disability retirees shall be entitled to
choose any optional form of payment provided in § 175.171, Florida Statutes.



(Code 1958, § 21-93; Ord. No. 78-7, § 1, 3-7-78; Ord. No. 89-26, § 1,
9-19-89; Ord. No. 00-19, § 3, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 19-009, § 4, 2-19-19)



Sec. 18-183.  Average final compensation defined; average annual
compensation defined.



   (a)   Average final compensation, for the purpose of calculating
entitlement to benefits under this plan, shall mean the average cash
compensation exclusive of bonuses and incentive pay received by a firefighter
during the three highest years of the last ten years of creditable service
prior to retirement.



   (b)   Average annual compensation, for the purposes of determining
compliance of provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, shall mean the
member’s greatest aggregate compensation during the period of three (3)
consecutive calendar years in which the individual is an active member of the
plan. This provision relates solely to calculation of maximum pension
earnings in section 18-180(b) of the Code of Ordinances and shall not be
applicable to the determination of average final compensation as defined in
section 18-183(a) or referred to in the determination of monthly retirement
income in section 18-180(a).



(Code 1958, § 21-94; Ord. No. 89-26, § 1, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 93-16, § 2,
6-15-93; Ord. No. 00-19, § 4, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 02-005, § 1, 2-5-02)



Sec. 18-184.  Ex officio membership of the fire chief on the board of
trustees.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, there is hereby
created an ex officio, non-voting position on the board of trustees which
shall be occupied by the fire chief.  The ex officio board member shall have
the opportunity to participate in all board discussions and activities but
shall not be counted for the purpose of a quorum nor shall the ex officio
member be entitled to move or second the adoption of any issue or vote on any
matter before the board. The ex officio member shall receive all official
board communications and shall be eligible to attend fiduciary education
opportunities otherwise authorized for voting trustees.



(Ord. 98-39, § 1, 9-15-98)



   Editor's note-Before the enactment of Ord. No. 98-39 on September 15,
1998, the former § 18-184, which pertained to additional creditable service
for years spent on the volunteer force of the city's fire department, was
repealed by Ord. No. 94-11, § 1, adopted May 3, 1994. This previous §
18-184 was derived from the 1958 Code, § 21-96; Ord. No. 79-23, Art. I,
adopted Aug. 7, 1979; and Ord. No. 89-26, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 1989.



Sec. 18-184.1.  Thirteenth Check.



   (a)   Thirteenth check supplement created.  A benefit is hereby
created to be provided in the form of a thirteenth monthly retirement payment
to each beneficiary and retiree of the Plan. Payment shall only be made in
those years in which an actuarial gain has been determined to exist by the
Board of Trustees, following consultation with the actuary to the Board.



   (b)   Determination of actuarial gains.  The actuary for the
Retirement Fund shall perform an annual calculation to determine on the basis
of all actuarial factors used to measure the Plan whether or not the Plan has
sustained an actuarial gain or loss. The actuary shall report annually at a
special meeting of the Board regarding the actuarial gain or loss for the
year. Once certified by the actuary, the Board shall notify retirees
regarding the availability of a thirteenth check payment for the year. In any
year in which the Board of Trustees, following consultation with the actuary,
determines that no actuarial gain has occurred, no benefit shall be payable.
In years in which the Plan's actuarial gain is sufficient to support the
payment of a thirteenth check, the payment shall be made in December.



   (c)   Creation of thirteenth check fund.  Following the
determination of actuarial gain, a fund is hereby created, within the assets
of the Retirement System, which shall consist of the portion of the actuarial
gain attributable to retirees and beneficiaries. This portion shall be equal
to the total actuarial gain multiplied by the ratio of the present value of
benefits for retirees and beneficiaries to the present value of all future
benefits for all members of the System. The fund shall be co-mingled with
other assets of the System but shall be measured for accounting purposes as a
separate fund within the Retirement System for the exclusive purpose of
providing benefits under this section.



   (d)   Distribution of benefits; limitations.  In any year in which
the Board determines that a distribution may be made in accordance with the
provisions of this section, a supplemental benefit shall be paid in the form
of a thirteenth monthly pension payment to each retiree or beneficiary of a
deceased retiree. The payment for each retiree shall be determined by the
Board, but the total amount payable may not exceed the thirteenth check fund.



   (e)   Non-guarantee of benefits.  By acceptance of a supplemental
benefit under this section, each retiree and beneficiary acknowledges that
they have no right, title or interest in any such benefits except as may be
determined by the Board of Trustees. The payment of a thirteenth check in any
year shall not create any right, title or interest in any person to the
payment of a thirteenth check in any other year. The Board of Trustees
reserves the exclusive right to alter the manner of payment of this benefit
or, to decline the payment of such benefit in any year in which the Board, in
the exercise of its fiduciary responsibility and its sole discretion,
determines it is in the best interest of the Plan to forego such payment.



   (f)   Rule-making authority.  The Board of Trustees shall have
authority to make such uniform rules as it deems appropriate to facilitate
the payment of benefits under this system.



(Ord. No. 02-005, § 3, 2-5-02)



Sec. 18-184.2.  Ad Hoc Supplemental Benefit.



   (a)   Supplemental benefit.  "Available funds" shall be used to pay
an "extra benefit" as set forth in this section, from "additional premium tax
revenues" as defined by Section 175.351(1)(a), Florida Statutes. An ad hoc
supplemental benefit shall be paid annually, following one full year of
retirement (disability, early or normal, DROP or deferred vested retirement),
to eligible retirees who have entered pay status. After the Board approves
payment, the distribution shall be made by the end of the second calendar
quarter.



   (b)   Using available funds, an ad hoc supplemental benefit shall be
paid to each eligible retiree who retires after the adoption of this section,
provided that additional premium tax revenue is available. For purposes of
this section, eligible retiree shall mean any member who is currently
employed and future members who retire after earning ten or more years of
actual service, including DROP participants. Any ad hoc supplemental benefits
payable under this section to active DROP participants shall be paid into a
member's DROP account, beginning one year after entering DROP.



   (c)   Calculation of ad hoc benefit.  Each eligible retiree shall
receive a distribution of available funds of up to five hundred dollars
($500) per year of credited service, for each year of credited service in the
plan, not to exceed twenty years. The city delegates to the Pension Board the
ability to adopt administrative rules to implement this section.



   (d)   Calculation of available funds.  On the date of adoption of
this section, the pension plan provides for a twelve percent (12%) member
contribution rate. Any future increases in the member contribution rate over
twelve percent (12%), including but not limited to COLA costs described in
section 18-180.2, shall first be deducted from available funds. Prior to
paying ad hoc supplemental benefits, the availability of additional premium
tax revenues and available funds shall be confirmed in writing by the Pension
Board's actuary. From time to time, the Pension Board may recommend
adjustments to the calculation formula, based on the projected status of
available funds.



   (e)   Lump sum supplemental benefit for eligible recent retirees. 
Available funds shall also be used by the Board to pay a lump sum
supplemental benefit to recent retirees who separated from service on or
after October 1, 2005 but prior to the adoption of this section.  The lump
sum benefit shall be calculated based on the number of years of service
between October 1, 2005 and retirement. The lump sum shall be paid in annual
installments corresponding to the number of years of service worked
subsequent to October 1, 2005. Such retirees shall not be eligible for future
ad hoc supplemental benefits.



   (f)   Non-guarantee of benefits.  Prior to payment of any benefit
under this section, eligible retirees shall acknowledge in writing that they
have no right, title or interest in ad hoc supplemental benefits in any
future year.  Eligible retirees shall further acknowledge that they have no
expectation in any future ad hoc supplemental benefits since there may be
years where no ad hoc supplemental benefit is paid, based on the availability
of additional premium tax revenue. Eligible retirees shall specifically
acknowledge that available funds and additional premium tax revenues may be
used for other purposes in the future, as determined by the collective
bargaining process.



(Ord. No. 10-016, § 1, 8-3-10)



Sec. 18-185.  Normal retirement date.



   The normal retirement date of each firefighter will be the first day of
the month coinciding with, or next following, the earlier of the date on
which such firefighter has attained and completed twenty (20) years of
service, regardless of age, or at  fifty-five (55) years of age with ten
(10) years of service. There is no age requirement for a normal retirement.
For all members first hired on or after February 5, 2019 (hereinafter “Tier
2 members”), the normal retirement date will be the first day of the month
coinciding with or next following the date on which the firefighter has
attained and completed twenty- five (25) years of service, regardless of age,
or at fifty- five (55) years of age with ten (10) years of service. If a Tier
2 member separates from service with less than twenty-five (25) years of
service the normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month
coinciding with, or next following, attainment of age fifty-five (55).



(Ord. No. 81-33, § 1, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 89-26, § 1, 9-19-89; Ord. No.
00-19, § 1, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 19-009, § 5, 2-19-19)



Sec. 18-186.  Payroll deductions; Employee, State and City contributions.



   Effective November 27, 2006, the City of Boynton Beach shall deduct
from all firefighters entitled to the benefits of the article, twelve percent
(12%) from each installment of salary of each firefighter so long as such
firefighter shall hold office or be employed. Said amount shall be so
deducted and be deposited to the Boynton Beach Firemen’s Pension Fund.
Payroll deductions shall be deposited in the trust fund immediately, after
each pay period. Any monies received or receivable by reason of laws of the
state for the express purpose of funding and paying for retirement benefits
for firefighters of the City shall be deposited in the trust fund comprising
part of this plan. Any such amount shall be deposited in the fund
immediately, and under no circumstances more than five (5) days after receipt
by the City. The City shall make annual contributions to the trust fund, as
needed, in an amount at least equal to the difference each year between the
total member contributions plus state contributions for the year, less the
total cost for the year as shown by the most recent actuarial valuation for
the system. The City’s contribution, if so required, shall be deposited on
at least a quarterly basis.



(Ord. No. 81-33, § 2, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 89-26, § 1, 9-19-89; Ord. No.
00-19, § 5, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 06-092, § 3, 12-5-06)



Sec. 18-187.  Accounting.



   The trust fund shall operate on a fiscal year basis, the fiscal year
commencing October 1st, and ending September 30th.



(Ord. No. 90-24, § 1, 8-7-90)



Sec. 18-188.  Required distributions.



   In no event may a member's retirement benefit be delayed the later of
the April first (1st) following the calendar year in which he attains age
seventy and one-half (70½) or April first (1st) of the year following the
calendar year in which he retires.



   When a distribution of the participant's entire interest is not made in
a lump sum, the distribution will be made in one (1) or more of the following
ways: over the life of the participant: over the life of the participant and
designated beneficiary; over a period certain not extending beyond the life
expectancy of the participant; or over a period certain not extending beyond
the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the participant and a
designated beneficiary.



   If distribution has commenced before the participant's death, the
remaining interest will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the
method of distribution being used as of the date of the participant's death.



   The method of distribution, if the participant dies before
distributions commence, must satisfy the following requirements:



   (a)   Any remaining portion of the participant's interest that is
not payable to a beneficiary designated by the participant will be
distributed within five (5) years after the participant's death; and



   (b)   Any portion of the participant's interest that is payable to a
beneficiary designated by the participant will be distributed either:



      (i)   Within five (5) years after the participant's death; or



      (ii)   Over the life of the beneficiary, or over a period
certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the beneficiary,
commencing not later than the end of the calendar year following the calendar
year in which the participant died, (or, if the designated beneficiary is the
participant's surviving spouse, commencing not later than the end of the
calendar year following the calendar year in which the participant would have
attained age seventy and one-half (70½).



(Ord. No. 90-24, § 1, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 93-16, § 3, 6-15-93)



Sec. 18-189.  Repeal or termination of fund.



   In the event of the termination or partial termination of this plan,
each participant's accrued pension benefit shall become nonforfeitable (one
hundred (100) percent) to the extent funded. At such time, the fund shall be
appropriated and distributed in accordance with Chapter 175.351, Florida
Statutes.



(Ord. No. 93-16, § 3, 6-15-93)



§ 18-190.  Purchase of Military/Fire Service Credit/Permissive Service
Credit.



   Upon entry into the Plan, members shall be permitted to purchase up to
an additional five (5) years of credited service based upon (i) service as a
full-timefirefighter employed by a city, county, state, federal or other
public agency or (ii) military service in the Armed Forces of the United
States. Temporary, auxiliary, reserve, volunteer or private agency service
shall not apply.  Members who do not have any prior firefighter service or
military service shall be permitted to purchase up to five (5) years of
permissive service credit, as permitted by the Pension Protection Act of
2006.  For each year purchased, benefits shall be calculated based on an
enhanced multiplier of an additional three percent (3%) per year, resulting
in a total multiplier of six percent (6%) for each year purchased.  Service
credit purchased under the provisions of this section shall not count for
vesting purposes.



   Prior service shall not be granted until the member has paid to the
Pension Fund the actuarial cost of the service purchased, as determined by
the actuary for the Plan. Members purchasing service credit shall provide the
Board of Trustees with proof of prior service with honorable separation. No
service credit may be purchased if the member is receiving or will receive
any other retirement benefit based on this service. The Board shall establish
a uniform rule for the implementation of this provision.



   The contribution by the member of the actuarially determined cost of
the buyback may be made in one lump sum or may be made by payroll deductions
in installments for a period not to exceed five (5) years. A member electing
to make installment payments shall be charged interest based on the
actuarially assumed rate of return for the Plan. A member making installment
payments shall complete all required payments prior to payment of any benefit
under this section.



   A member who terminates service prior to vesting in the Plan shall be
entitled to a refund, without interest, of all money paid to buyback prior
military or fire service.



(Ord. No. 01-46, § 1, 8-7-01; Ord. No. 08-009, § 2, 5-6-08)



§ 18-191  Limitation on compensation.



   Compensation in excess of the limitations set forth in Section
401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be disregarded. The limitation
on compensation for “eligible employees” shall not be less than the
amount which was allowed to be taken into account under the Plan as in effect
on July 1, 1993. For this purpose, an “eligible employee” is an
individual who was a member of the Pension Plan before the first plan year
beginning after September 30, 1996.



(Ord. No. 96-35, § 1, 7-16-96)



Sec. 18-192.  Transfer of accumulated leave.



   (a)   Members eligible to receive accumulated sick leave,
accumulated vacation leave or any other accumulated leave payable upon
separation may elect, not later than December 31st of the calendar year prior
to the year of retirement or entry into the DROP, to have the leave
transferred to the Plan. For purposes of this section, the term "separation"
shall mean termination of service as a firefighter with the City. Members on
whose behalf leave has been transferred may elect one of the following
distribution options within thirty (30) days of separation. Members failing
to elect a distribution option within thirty (30) days of separation will be
deemed to have elected option 1 below:



      (1)   Receive a lump sum equal to the transferred leave
balance, or



      (2)   Transfer the entire amount of the transferred leave
balance directly to any eligible retirement plan, or



      (3)   Purchase additional service credit as may permitted by
the Code. If the leave balance exceeds the cost of the service credit
purchased, the balance shall be paid to the member in a lump sum, or



      (4)   Transfer the entire amount of the transferred leave into
the member's DROP account.



   (b)   Members who fail to elect a transfer not later than December
31st of the calendar year prior to the year of retirement or entry into the
DROP will receive payment in a lump sum at time of separation with all
attendant tax consequences.



   (c)   If a member on whose behalf the City makes a transferred leave
balance to the Plan dies after retirement or other separation, but before
making an election, as provided, or after making an election but before any
distribution is made, the election option shall be void. In such an event,
any person who would have received a death benefit had the member died in
service immediately prior to the date of retirement or other separation,
shall be entitled to receive an amount equal to the transferred leave balance
in a lump sum. In the case of a surviving spouse or former spouse, an
election may be made to transfer the leave balance to an eligible retirement
plan in lieu of the lump sum payment. Failure to make such an election by the
surviving spouse of former spouse with sixty (60) days of the member's death,
will be deemed an election to receive a lump sum payment.



   (d)   The Board, by rule, shall have the authority to enact
administrative rules for purposes of administering the provisions of this
section, consistent with the Federal tax laws in effect on the date of
transfer. No such rule shall conflict with the provisions of this section.



   (e)   Members electing to enter into the DROP shall be required to
preserve a balance of one hundred  and twenty (120) hours of sick leave and
one hundred and twenty (120) hours of vacation leave at the time of entry
into the DROP.



   (f)   The value of the leave transferred shall be determined in
accordance with applicable city personnel policies or collective bargaining
agreements.



(Ord. No. 01-63, § 1, 12-18-01)



Sec. 18-193.   Firefighter DROP Loan Program.



   (a)   A DROP Loan program is hereby established for firefighters.



   (b)   Availability of loans.



      (1)   Loans are available to members only after termination of
employment, provided the member had participated in the DROP for a period of
12 months.



      (2)   Loans may only be made from a member's own account.



      (3)   There may be no more than one loan at a time.



   (c)   Amount of loan.



      (1)   Loans may be made up to a maximum of 50% of account
balance.



      (2)   The maximum dollar amount of a loan is $50,000, reduced
by the highest outstanding loan balance during the last 12 months.



      (3)   The minimum loan is $5,000.



   (d)   Limitations on loans shall be made from the amounts paid into
the DROP and the earnings thereon.



   (e)   Term of loan.



      (1)   The loan must be for at least one year.



      (2)   The loan shall be no longer than five years.



   (f)   Loan interest rate.



      (1)   The interest rate shall be fixed at time the loan is
originated for the entire term of loan.



      (2)   The interest rate shall be equal to the prime rate
published by an established local bank on the last day of each calendar
quarter preceding the date of loan application.



   (g)   Defaults on loans.



      (1)   Loans shall be in default if two consecutive months'
repayments are missed or if a total of four months' repayments are missed.



      (2)   Upon default, the entire balance becomes due and payable
immediately.



      (3)   If a loan in default is not repaid in full immediately,
the loan may be canceled and the outstanding balance treated as a
distribution, which may be taxable.



      (4)   Upon default of a loan, a member will not be eligible
for additional loans.



   (h)   Miscellaneous provisions.



      (1)   All loans must be evidenced by a written loan agreement
signed by the member and the Board of Trustees. The agreement shall contain a
promissory note.



      (2)   Notice of a loan shall be provided to a member's spouse,
including a copy of the promissory note.



      (3)   Loans shall be considered a general asset of the fund.



      (4)   Loans shall be subject to administrative fees to be set
by the Board of Trustees.



      (5)   Outstanding loan balances shall not be credited with
earnings or losses. As the outstanding balance is repaid with interest,
earnings and losses shall be applied to the payments and interest on a
quarterly basis.



(Ord. No. 16-020, § 2, 10-4-16)



Secs. 18-194—18-194. Reserved.



ARTICLE V. DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN FOR UNCLASSIFIED PERSONNEL



Sec. 18-195.  Authorized.



   The city commission hereby authorizes execution of the Deferred
Compensation Plan with the International City Management Association
Retirement Corporation attached hereto as Appendix A.



(Ord. No. 79-19, Art. I, § A, 12-5-79)



   Editor's note-Appendix A is not set out in this Code, but is on file in
the office of the city clerk.



Sec. 18-196.  Agreements with employees authorized.



   The city commission hereby authorized the city manager to execute all
joinder agreements with said employees and other eligible officials and
officers which are necessary for said person's participation in the plan.



(Ord. No. 79-19, Art. I, § B, 12-5-79)



ARTICLE VI. FLEXIBLE BENEFIT PLAN



Sec. 18-197.  Authorized.



   The city commission hereby authorizes adoption and creation of an
Internal Revenue Service Code Section 125, Flexible Benefit Plan, for
insurance premiums only.



(Ord. No. 90-41, § 1, 9-18-90)



Sec. 18-198.  Payroll deductions.



   The city shall implement payroll deductions in conformity with the
flexible benefit plan and the Internal Revenue Code Section 125, as amended
from time to time.



(Ord. No. 90-41, § 1, 9-18-90)



Sec. 18-199.  Pension plan contributions.



   All pension contribution calculations shall be based upon an employee's
actual gross earnings without taking into account the dollar amount of any
flexible benefits provided pursuant to this article.



(Ord. No. 90-41, § 1, 9-18-90)



ARTICLE VII. ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTIONS



Sec. 18-200.  Trust-to-trustee transfer.



   If the intended recipient of any “eligible rollover distribution,”
as the term is defined in Section 402(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended, elects and directs to have such distribution paid directly
to an “eligible retirement plan” as defined in the Internal Revenue Code,
and specifies the particular “eligible retirement plan” to which the
distribution is to be paid (in such form and at such time as the plan
administrator or board of trustees to trustee may prescribe), then the
distribution will be made in the form of a direct trustee transfer to the
specified “eligible retirement plan” and shall not be subject to
withholding tax as provided for in Section 402 of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986, as amended.



(Ord. No. 93-10, § 2, 5-18-93)



Secs. 18-201—18-220. Reserved.



ARTICLE VIII. INVESTMENT POLICIES*



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 1994, created
Art. VIII, Investment policies. Sec. 2 of such ordinance provided that
subsections (d) and (d.1) of char., § 20.1 be transferred and renumbered
under Art. VIII; hence, such provisions were redesignated as §§ 18-221 and
18-222. It should further be noted that Ord. No. 92-7, § 3, adopted Apr. 21,
1992, provided that to the extent any investment policy [in subsection d.1
(now § 18-222)] conflicts with an existing policy in subsection (d)[§
18-221], the policy in this ordinance [§ 18-222] shall control and supersede.



Sec. 18-221.  Pension and retirement fund-Generally.



   The policies and limitations set forth in this section shall govern the
investment of the funds of city pension and retirement systems; provided,
these investment policies shall not constitute a contractual part of any
system and may, in the interest of members of the system, be altered by
amendment made in the manner provided or authorized by this article.



      (1)   The aim of the investment policies shall be to preserve
the integrity and security of fund principal, to maintain a balanced
investment portfolio, and to secure the maximum return on investments that is
consonant with safety of principal.



      (2)   The funds of each system may, subject to the limitations
set forth in this section, be deposited in savings banks or federal savings
and loan associations up to the amount, as to each bank or association,
guaranteed by the United States or an agency thereof, and may be invested in
debt securities, including tax sale certificates limited to those of the city
of any other municipality within the state, and of Palm Beach County, and in
preferred and common stocks and mutual fund shares.



      (3)   Of the total fund principal in any system, including the
amounts deposited in banks or associations, the total amount thereof invested
in tax sale certificates shall not exceed thirty (30) per cent; of the total
amount thereof invested in preferred stocks and in debt securities other than
tax sale certificates may aggregate one hundred (100) per cent; the total
amount thereof invested in preferred stocks shall not aggregate more than
twenty (20) per cent; and the total amount thereof invested in common stocks
and mutual fund shares shall not aggregate more than sixty-five (65) per
cent. Percentages shall be based on cost or amortized cost to the fund of all
securities purchased.



      (4)   The following minimum standards shall, as to the funds
of each pension and retirement system, govern the eligibility of securities
for acquisition as fund investments:



         a.   All corporate and association securities and mutual
fund shares shall be issued by a corporation or other legal person
incorporated or otherwise organized within the United States and domiciled
therein.



         b.   Not more than two and one-half (21/2) per cent of
the total fund principal or ten thousand dollars ($10,000), whichever is the
larger amount, shall be invested in any single security other than
obligations of the United States or an agency thereof.



         c.   All bonds and preferred stocks shall be rated
“A” or higher by the investment services published by either Moody's
Investors Service or Standard & Poor's Corporation.



         d.   Bonds and preferred stocks that are convertible
into common stock or that include warrants for the purchase of common stock
shall not be purchased if any premium price is being paid for the conversion
privilege or for the warrants.



         e.   All common stocks except those of banks and
insurance companies and except mutual fund shares must have been listed on
the New York Stock Exchange or the American Stock Exchange for a period of at
least one (1) year immediately preceding the acquisition thereof.



         f.   All common stocks and mutual fund shares must have
a record of uninterrupted dividend payments throughout the ten-year period
immediately preceding the acquisition of the stock as a fund investment.



         g.   At least nine (90) per cent of the total
investments of each mutual fund invested in shall qualify as eligible under
the provisions of this section as a direct investment of the pension and
retirement system.



      (5)   All investments of funds of each existing system made
prior to the adoption hereof may, in the discretion of its trustees, be
retained as investments.



Sec. 18-222.  Deferred retirement option plan.



   (a)   A deferred retirement option plan (“DROP”) is hereby
created.



   (b)   Eligibility to participate in the DROP is based upon
eligibility for normal service retirement in the plan.



   (c)   Participation in the DROP must be exercised within the first
thirty (30) years of employment; provided, however, that participation in the
DROP, when combined with participation in the retirement plan as an active
member, may not exceed thirty (30) years. The maximum period of participation
in the DROP is five (5) years. An employee’s election to participate in the
DROP plan shall be irrevocable and shall be made by executing a resignation
notice on a form prescribed by the City. 



   (d)   Upon exercising the right to participate in the DROP, an
employee’s creditable service, accrued benefits and compensation
calculation shall be frozen and shall utilize the average of the five (5)
highest of the ten (10) years immediately preceding participation in the DROP
as the compensation basis.  Accumulated, unused sick and vacation leave
shall be included in the compensation calculation; provided, however, that a
minimum balance of 120 hours of sick leave and 120 hours of vacation leave
shall be maintained by the employee and excluded from this calculation. The
retained leave balance, including any additions, shall be distributed at the
conclusion of DROP participation and separation from service.



   (e)   Payment shall be made into the employee’s DROP account as if
the employee had terminated employment in the City in an amount determined by
the employee’s selection of the payment option.



   (f)   An employee’s account in the DROP program shall earn
interest in one of three ways.  The selection of the earnings program shall
be irrevocable and shall be made prior to the first deposit in the DROP
account.  The options are:



      (1)   Gain or lose interest at the same rate as the Plan; or,



      (2)   At an annual fixed rate of seven percent (7%); or,



      (3)   In a self-directed account utilizing mutual funds
selected by the board.



   (g)   An employee shall terminate service with the City at the
conclusion of five (5) years in the DROP.



   (h)   All interest shall be credited to the employee’s DROP
account on the last day of the month in which the member separates from
service.  In the event that a member dies while in the DROP, interest shall
be pro-rated to the last business day of the month preceding the death of the
member.



   (i)   Upon termination with the City, an employee may receive
payment within forty-five (45) days of the member requesting payment or may
defer payment until a time not later than the latest date authorized by
Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code at the option of the member.



   (j)   Payments from the DROP may be received as a lump sum
installment payment or annuity, provided, however, that at all times, the
DROP shall be subject to the provisions of the Internal Revenue Service.



   (k)   No payment may be made from the DROP until the employee
actually separates from service with the City.



   (l)   If an employee shall die during participation in the DROP, a
survivor benefit shall be payable in accordance with the form of benefit
chosen at the time of entry into the DROP.



   (m)   Upon commencement of participation in the DROP, the member
shall no longer be eligible for disability retirement from the pension plan.
If a member becomes disabled during the DROP period, the member shall be
treated as if he/she retired on the day prior to the date of disability.



(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 4-18-00)



ARTICLE IX. EARLY RETIREMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM



Sec. 18-223.  Creation of Early Retirement Incentive Program and Eligibility.



   The City Commission may from time to time establish early retirement
incentive programs. Early retirement incentive programs shall be created by
ordinance. No ordinance establishing an Early Retirement Incentive Program
shall be enacted without:



   (a)   A written recommendation from the City Manager and the Finance
Director that the proposed Early Retirement Incentive Program is beneficial
to the administration of the city workforce and is fiscally beneficial;



   (b)   An actuarial study has been conducted and presented to the
City Commission; and



   (c)   Ordinance No. 03-061 has been furnished to the State of
Florida for review, as required by law.



(Ord. No. 00-66, § 2, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 03-058, § 2, 11-5-03; Ord. No.
03-061, § 3, 12-2-03)



Sec. 18-224.  Requirement for Agreement for Participation.



   No employee shall be compelled to participate in an Early Retirement
Incentive Program. Participation is optional and shall be evidenced by the
employees' signature on a participation agreement.



(Ord. No. 00-66, § 3, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 03-058, § 3, 5, 11-5-03; Ord. No.
03-061, § 3, 12-2-03)



Sec. 18-225.  Benefit Provided.



   The benefits provided by any early retirement incentive program shall
not be forfeited when an employee who was eligible for participation in an
Early Retirement Incentive Program offered by the city dies following
execution of an agreement for participation but prior to his or her actual
retirement date.



(Ord. No. 00-66, § 4, 11-21-00 11-21-00; Ord. No. 03-058, § 4, 11-5-03;
Ord. No. 03-061, § 3, 12-2-03)



Sec. 18-226.  Statement of Actuarial Impact.



   The surviving spouse, or any other legally designated representative,
of an employee who is eligible for participation in an Early Retirement
Incentive Program may exercise the employee's option to participate when the
employee dies or is determined to be mentally incompetent subsequent to the
adoption of the ordinance enacting the Early Retirement Incentive Program but
prior to the deadline for electing to participate in the program, provided
the spouse or representative executes the participation agreement on behalf
of the employee. In such cases, the employee's department head, subject to
approval by the City Manager, shall establish the actual date of retirement.



(Ord. No. 00-66, § 5, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 03-058, § 6, 11-5-03; Ord. No.
03-061, § 3, 12-2-03)



Sec. 18-227.  Deadline for participation.



   Eligible employees who elect to participate in the Early Retirement
Incentive Program must execute an Agreement for Participation and Waiver of
Rights form on or before 5:00 p.m. on January 19, 2001.



(Ord. No. 00-66, § 6, 11-21-00)



Sec. 18-228.  Filing with Division of Management.



   The City Administration and the administrators of the retirement plans,
in accordance with the requirements of F.S. Chapter 112, and Rule 60T-1.004,
are directed to certify and furnish a copy of Ordinance No. 00-66, together
with the statement of actuarial impact referenced herein to the Department of
Management, Division of Insurance. The City Administration and plan
administrators are authorized to make such supplemental filings with the
Division of Insurance as is necessary to effectuate this Early Retirement
Incentive Plan.



(Ord. No. 00-66, § 7, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 03-058, § 7, 11-5-03)



Sec. 18-229.  Execution of agreements.



   The City Commission authorizes the City Manager and City Clerk to
execute Agreements for Participation in Early Retirement Incentive Program
and Waiver of Rights forms with eligible employees. A copy of the Agreement
for Participation is attached to Ordinance No. 00-66 as Exhibit "B."



(Ord. No. 00-66, § 8, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 03-058, § 8, 11-5-03)



Sec. 18-230.  Ratification of forms.



   The City Commission adopts and ratifies the Commencement Notice,
Acknowledgment of Receipt of Program Commencement Notice, Information Fact
Sheet, and Employee Declination to Participate forms, heretofore prepared by
the City Administration, copies of which are attached to Ordinance No. 00-66
as Exhibits "C," "D," "E," and "F" respectively. The City Administration is
authorized to modify these forms when modification is necessary to facilitate
the objectives of this article or when amendment is required to conform the
forms to requirements of state or federal law. In the event of a dispute over
the meaning, interpretation, or application of Exhibits "B," "C," "D," "E,"
and "F," the decision of the City Manager as to the meaning, interpretation,
or application shall be controlling.



(Ord. No. 00-66, § 9, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 03-058, § 9, 11-5-03)



ARTICLE X – PENSION PLAN FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS



Sec. 18-240.  Creation and maintenance of pension benefits.



   (a)   A pension and retirement system for elected officials of the
City is hereby established to provide retirement benefits by participating in
the Florida Retirement System as provided in F.S. Chapter 121, and that the
benefits to the Florida Retirement System shall be extended to such elected
officials pursuant to the rules, regulations and provisions of the Florida
Retirement System, the applicable state laws and amendments thereto.



   (b)   Eligible elected officials may purchase past service
retro-active to the first day of the first year of election. The cost of the
purchase of past service shall be paid by the City.



(Ord. No. 08-019, § 3, 7-15-08)



Chapter 20
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES,
BOATS AND BOAT TRAILERS*



   *Cross references-Regulation of boats and boating generally, § 16-93
et seq.; trailers generally, Ch. 25.



Sec. 20-1.  Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the parking and storage of
recreational vehicles and boats or boat trailers. These regulations are
intended for and in the best interest of the citizens of the city to provide
easy access to recreational vehicles while promoting the health, safety and
welfare of all the citizens of the city.



(Ord. No. 78-2, § 1, 2-7-78)



Sec. 20-2.  Scope.



   This chapter is intended to be applicable in all residentially zoned
areas within the city limits.



(Ord. No. 78-2, § 2, 2-7-78)



Sec. 20-3.  Definition.



   As used in this chapter, “recreation vehicle” means any travel
trailer, motor home, slide-in camper, or other unit built or mounted on a
chassis, excluding vans, designed without a permanent foundation, which is
used for temporary dwelling or sleeping purposes and which may be legally
driven or towed on a highway, and which body length does not exceed
thirty-five (35) feet and total body width does not exceed eight (8) feet, or
any boat or boat trailer, and all other sport type recreational vehicles and
the trailers used to store or transport all such recreational vehicles.



(Ord. No. 78-2, § 3, 2-7-78)



Sec. 20-4.  More stringent regulations to apply.



   This chapter is primarily for the purpose of protecting residential
zoning. Therefore, any ordinances of this city or laws of this state
providing for the regulation of recreation vehicles, boats or boat trailers
or motor vehicles are in addition to this chapter and wherever any provision
of some other ordinance or applicable statute, whether primarily for the
regulation of recreation vehicles, boats or boat trailers or motor vehicles
or for purposes of zoning, imposes more stringent requirements or limitations
than are imposed or required by the provisions of this chapter then the more
stringent requirements or limitations shall apply.



(Ord. No. 78-2, § 7, 2-7-78)



Sec. 20-5.  Effect on private limitations on land use.



   This chapter shall not be construed to limit any deed restrictions,
condominium regulations or similar private limitation more restrictive than
the regulations contained herein. Further this provision shall not be
construed as creating an obligation on the city to enforce private
limitations on land use.



(Ord. No. 78-2, § 7, 2-7-78)



Sec. 20-6.  Conditions to parking on private property.



   Parking or storing of recreation vehicles, boats or boat trailers on
private property may be permitted under the following conditions:



   (a)   That the recreation vehicle, boat or boat trailer may be
parked or stored in a carport.



   (b)   That the recreation vehicle, boat or boat trailer may be
parked or stored on a driveway.



   (c)   That the recreation vehicle, boat or boat trailer may be
stored in the rear yard, not closer than five (5) feet of the rear lot line
or in the side yard not projecting beyond the front roof line.



   (d)   That the recreation vehicle, boat or boat trailer must be
owned or used by a resident of the premises.



   (e)   That the recreation vehicle, boat or boat trailer must be
currently registered and licensed as required by state and federal law.



   (f)   That no recreation vehicle, boat or boat trailer may be parked
between the right-of-way and the structure unless on a driveway or other hard
surfaced area, such as asphalt, paving stones, shellrock or concrete.



   (g)   That the total number of vehicles (other than passenger
vehicles) so parked or stored shall be limited to two (2), not including
those kept in a garage. Only one recreation vehicle may be parked or stored
between the right-of-way and the structure.



   (h)   That the recreation vehicle, boat or boat trailer shall be
parked or stored entirely on the owner's property in a safe and orderly
manner and that vehicles parked or stored on a driveway shall not be a hazard
to people entering the driveway or to persons passing on the sidewalk.



   (i)   That the recreation vehicle, boat or boat trailer is not in
the process of being constructed, reconstructed or undergoing major repairs
that have taken more than seven (7) consecutive days to complete.



(Ord. No. 78-2, § 4, 2-7-78; Ord. No. 80-23, § 1, 6-3-80)



Sec. 20-7.  Time limit for parking on right-of-way.



   No recreation vehicle, boat or boat trailer shall be parked or stored
on any public right-of-way for a period exceeding one hour.



(Ord. No. 78-2, § 5, 2-7-78)



Sec. 20-8.  Occupying on private property.



   (a)   Generally.  It shall be unlawful to occupy any recreation
vehicle while said vehicle is parked or stored on private property unless
such use is specifically permitted in the applicable zoning district.



   (b)   Construction trailers shall be permitted as outlined in
Section 4(H) of Appendix A of this Code.



   (c)   Mobile homes as defined in Section 1, General Definitions, of
Appendix A of this Code shall be permitted in applicable zoned districts.



(Ord. No. 78-2, § 6, 2-7-78)



Chapter 23
TAXATION, ASSESSMENTS AND FEES*



Art. I.    In General, §§ 23-1—23-9



Art. II.   Public Service Tax, §§ 23-10—23-28



   Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 23-10—23-13



   Div. 2.   Electricity and Gas, §§ 23-14—23-21



   Div. 3.   Telecommunications Services, §§ 23-22—23-28



   Div. 4.   Water Service, §§ 23-28.1—23-28.10



Art. III.     Fire Rescue Assessment, § 23-29-23-52



   Div. 1.   Introduction, §§ 23-29–23-32



   Div. 2.   Annual Fire Rescue Assessments, §§ 23-33–23-45



   Div. 3.   Collection and Use of Fire Assessments, §§ 23-46–23-48



   Div. 4.   General Provisions, §§ 23-49–23-53



Art. IV.   Additional Homestead Exemption, § 23-54



Art. V.   Emergency Medical Services Transportation Fees and Charges, §§
23-55—23-57



   *Cross reference-Business tax receipt taxes, Ch. 13.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 23-1.  Reserved.



   Editor's note-Former § 23-1, which required the tax collector to
report to the council periodically concerning amounts of taxes collected, was
repealed by Ord. No. 85-45, Attach. (b), adopted Aug. 20, 1985. Such section
had been derived from Laws of Fla., 1947, Ch. 24398, § 123.



Sec. 23-2.  Excise tax on casualty insurer.



   There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance
company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or
which shall hereafter engage in or carry on the business of insuring with
respect to casualty risks, as shown by the records of the Insurance
Commissioner of the State of Florida, an excise or license tax in addition to
any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city which tax shall be in
the amount of one per cent (1%) of the gross amount of receipts of premiums
from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies,
covering property within the city. The license or excise tax herein levied
shall be due and payable annually on the first day of March of each year.



(Code 1958, § 26-1)



   Cross references-License tax for insurance businesses, § 13-22(164);
pensions for police officers, § 18-164 et seq.



   State law references-Casualty insurance tax authorized, F.S. § 185.08;
proceeds to be paid to police officers' retirement fund or police pension
fund, F.S. § 185.11.



Sec. 23-3.  Excise tax on all property insurers.



   (a)   There is hereby assessed and imposed on every insurance
company, corporation or other insurer now engaged in or carrying on, or who
shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of insuring property
against loss or damage, an excise or license tax amounting to two (2) per
cent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all
premiums collected on such insurance policies covering property within the
corporate limits of the city. The license tax herein assessed and imposed
shall be in addition to all other license taxes now levied by the city.



   (b)   All money derived from the taxes imposed by this section is
hereby appropriated to the fireman's relief and pension fund of the city,
which shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 175,
Florida Statutes, providing for the creation and administration of a
firemen's relief and pension fund in certain cities and towns. The excise or
license tax herein provided for shall be payable and collected in the manner
provided for by Chapter 175, Florida Statutes, providing for the creation and
administration of a firemen's pension trust fund in certain cities and towns.



(Code 1958, §§ 26-10, 26-11; Ord. No. 85-45, Attach. (b), 8-20-85)



   Cross references-License tax for insurance businesses, § 13-22(164);
pensions for firemen, § 18-179 et seq.



   State law references-Property insurance tax authorized, F.S. §
175.101; proceeds to be deposited to firemen's pension trust fund, F.S. §
175.131.



Secs. 23-4—23-9. Reserved.



ARTICLE II. PUBLIC SERVICE TAX



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Secs. 23-10—23-13. Reserved.



DIVISION 2. ELECTRICITY AND GAS*



1    *Cross references-License tax for gas companies, § 13-22(140);
license tax for telephone companies, § 13-22(196).



Sec. 23-14.  Levied.



   (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, there is hereby levied by
the city on each and every purchase in the city of electricity and metered or
bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas, or manufactured), a tax based
upon the charge made by the seller thereof, said tax to be at the rate of ten
(10) per cent upon said charges, which tax, shall in every case, be paid by
the purchaser, for the use of the city, to the seller of such electricity or
gas at the time of paying the charge therefor, to the seller thereof, but not
less often than monthly.



   (b)   Except as otherwise provided herein, there is hereby levied in
the city on every sale in the city of fuel oil (fuel oil being defined as any
bunker C oil, number one (1) and number two (2) fuel oil, and kerosene or any
combination thereof for lighting, heating, cooking, power or any other
purpose delivered to any purchaser thereof within the corporate limits of the
City) a tax of four (4) cents per gallon of fuel oil purchased, which tax
shall in every case be paid by the purchaser, for the use of the city, to the
seller of such fuel oil at the time of paying the charge therefor, to the
seller thereof, but not less often than monthly.



(Code 1958, § 26-5; Ord. No. 85-8, § 1, 1-15-85; Ord. No. 85-14, § 1,
2-19-85; Ord. No. 88-40, § 1, 9-7-88)



   State law reference-Levy authorized, F.S. § 166.231(1)(a).



Sec. 23-15.  Fuel adjustment charge excluded from tax.



   The tax imposed by section 23-14 above shall not be applied against any
fuel adjustment charge, and such charge shall be separately stated on each
bill. “Fuel adjustment charge” shall mean all increases in the cost of
utility services to the ultimate consumer resulting from an increase in the
cost of fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973.



   State law reference-Similar provisions, F.S. § 166.231(1)(b).



Sec. 23-16.  Reserved.



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 85-45, Attach. (b), adopted Aug. 20, 1985,
repealed § 23-16 which provided a tax exemption for small residential
purchases of electricity. Such section bore no history note.



Sec. 23-17.  Exemption for churches.



   Established churches located within the municipal limits of the city
are hereby specifically exempt from imposition and payment of the taxes
hereinabove established.



(Code 1958, § 26-5)



   State law reference-Churches to be exempt, F.S. § 166.231(5).



Sec. 23-18.  Exemptions for governmental agencies.



   The United Stated of America, State of Florida, and political
subdivisions and agencies thereof are hereby exempted from payment of the
taxes provided by this division.



(Code 1958, § 26-8; Ord. No. 88-40, § 2, 9-7-88)



   State law reference-Similar provisions, authority to exempt
governmental agencies, F.S. § 166.231(5).



Sec. 23-19.  Computation of tax.



   In all cases where the seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas
(natural, liquefied petroleum gas, or manufactured), collects the price
thereof at monthly periods, the tax levied by this division may be computed
on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period, provided that the
amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount
computed.



(Code 1958, § 26-9; Ord. No. 88-40, § 3, 9-7-88)



Sec. 23-20.  Collection.



   It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered and
bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), to collect
from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax hereby levied, at the
time of collecting the selling price charged for each transaction, and to
report and pay over, on or before the fifteenth day of each calendar month,
to the city clerk all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding
calendar month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of
any purchase of electricity or metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied
petroleum gas, or manufactured) without at the same time collecting the tax
hereby levied in respect to such purchase or purchases. Any seller failing to
collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any sale shall be
liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same
had been actually paid to the seller, and the mayor of the city shall cause
to be brought all suits and actions and take all proceedings in the name of
the city as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax; provided, however,
that the sellers shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon
uncollected bills. If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to
the seller, the seller's charge, and the tax hereby imposed and as hereby
required, on account of the purchase for which such charge is made, or
either, the seller shall have and is hereby vested with the right, power and
authority to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until
the tax and the seller's bill have been paid in full.



(Code 1958, § 26-6; Ord. No. 88-40, § 4, 9-7-88)



   State law reference-Tax to be collected by seller from purchaser, F.S.
§ 166.231(6).



Sec. 23-21.  Records required; inspection.



   Each and every seller of electricity and metered or bottled gas
(natural, liquefied petroleum gas, or manufactured), shall keep complete
records showing all sales in the city of such commodities or service, which
records shall show the price charged upon each sale, the date thereof, and
the date of payment therefor, and the records shall be kept open for
inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during business hours on
all business days, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the
right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times
as they may desire.



(Code 1958, § 26-7; Ord. No. 88-40, § 5, 9-7-88)



DIVISION 3. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES*



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 88-40, §§ 6-12, adopted Sept. 7, 1988, added
provisions pertaining to telecommunications services public services tax
designated as Art. III, §§ 23-22—23-28. Such article was redesignated as
Div. 3 of Art. II by the editor for purposes of classification.



Sec. 23-22.  Short title.



   This division shall be known and cited hereinafter as the
“Telecommunications Service Public Service Tax Ordinance”.



(Ord. No. 88-40, § 6, 9-7-88)



Sec. 23-23.  Definitions.



   [As used in this division:]



   Purchaser shall mean every person legally liable for the payment of
taxable telecommunications service rendered to him by a seller, unless such
person is exempt under section 23-25.



   Seller shall mean every person rendering taxable local telephone
services to any purchasers thereof.



(Ord. No. 88-40, § 7, 9-7-88)



Sec. 23-24.  Amount of tax.



   (a)   There is hereby levied and imposed by the city a public
service tax upon purchases within the municipality of telecommunications
service which originates and terminates in this state at a rate not to exceed
seven (7) per cent of the total amount charged for any telecommunications
service provided within the municipality or, of the location of the
telecommunications service provided within the municipality or, if the
location of the telecommunications service provided cannot be determined, the
total amount billed for such telecommunications service to a telephone or
telephone number, a telecommunications number or device, or a customer's
billing address located within the municipality, excluding public telephone
charges collected on site, charges for any foreign exchange service or any
private line service except when such services are used or sold as a
substitute for any telephone company switched service or dedicated facility
by which a telephone company provides a communication path, access charges,
and any customer access line charges paid to a local telephone company.
However, telecommunications service as defined in Section 203.012(5)(b),
Florida Statutes (1987) shall be taxed only on the monthly recurring customer
service charges excluding variable usage charges.



   (b)   When the seller renders a bill to the purchaser to cover
purchases made during the period of time to which the bill is applicable, the
amount of public service tax shall be stated separately from governmental
charges and taxes, and shall not be levied thereon.



   (c)   The purchaser shall pay such public service tax to the seller
at the time of payment of each such bill. The seller, as collection agent for
the city, shall collect such public service tax from the purchaser at the
time of payment of each such bill. Provided and to the extent that such bills
are subsequently paid, the seller shall remit the public service tax to the
finance department in accordance with the provisions hereinafter stated.



   (d)   The tax authorized by this division shall apply to services
rendered and billed on or after the effective date of Ordinance No. 88-40.



   (e)   Services competitive within telecommunication services as
defined in Section 203.012, Florida Statutes (1987) shall be taxed on
comparable terms and on a comparable base at the same rate.



(Ord. No. 88-40, § 8, 9-7-88)



Sec. 23-25.  Exemptions.



   (a)   Purchases of telecommunication services by the United States
government, the State of Florida, any other public body as defined in Section
1.01, Florida Statutes and any recognized church in this state if used
exclusively for church purposes, and



   (b)   Purchases of local telephone service or other
telecommunication service for use in the conduct of telecommunication service
for hire or otherwise for resale, are exempt from taxation under this
division.



(Ord. No. 88-40, § 9, 9-7-88)



Sec. 23-26.  Seller compensation.



   For the purpose of compensating the seller, the seller shall be allowed
one per cent (1%) of the amount of the tax collected and due to the city in
the form of a deduction from the amount collected for remittance. The
deduction is allowed as compensation for keeping of records and collection of
tax and remitting the same.



(Ord. No. 88-40, § 10, 9-7-88)



Sec. 23-27.  Remittance of tax to the city by seller.



   Every seller is hereby required to execute and file no later than the
twentieth (20th) day of each month at the office of the finance department a
statement setting forth the amount of such public service tax to which the
city became entitled under the provisions hereof on account of bills paid by
purchasers during the preceding fiscal month, and contemporaneously with the
filing of such statements, shall pay the amount of such public service tax to
the finance department. In the event that any purchaser refuses to pay such
tax specifically, then seller shall promptly inform the city of the name and
address of such purchaser, and the amount of tax withheld by said purchaser.



(Ord. No. 88-40, § 11, 9-7-88)



Sec. 23-28.  Audit.



   The city may audit the records of seller, and seller shall provide to
the city, upon sixty (60) days' notice, access to all applicable records for
telecommunications service taxable by city. However, any information received
by city in connection with such audit is confidential and is not subject to
the provisions of Section 119.07(1), Florida Statutes. No company records
shall be duplicated or removed from the premises.



(Ord. No. 88-40, § 12, 9-7-88)



DIVISION 4.  WATER SERVICE



Sec. 23-28.1.  Levied.



   Effective April 1, 2008, there is hereby imposed and levied upon each
and every purchase of water service within the city a tax in the amount
specified in § 23-28.2 hereof, to be collected as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. No. 07-032, § 2, 10-16-07)



Sec. 23-28.2.  Amount of tax.



   There is hereby levied and imposed by the city, upon every purchase of
water services in the corporate limits of the city, included in or reflected
by the authorized utility franchisee to the purchaser hereunder, a tax of ten
percent (10%).  The total amount of taxes due pursuant to this section shall
be computed to the nearest whole cent.



(Ord. No. 07-032, § 2, 10-16-07)



Sec. 23-28.3.  Application of tax.



   The tax hereby imposed and levied shall apply to the purchase of water
service, furnished periodically after installation or connection and shall
not be applicable to installation costs, meter deposits, deposits
guaranteeing payment or other charges made by the authorized utility
franchisee for availability of service to the consumer.



(Ord. No. 07-032, § 2, 10-16-07)



Sec. 23-28.4.  City's responsibility.



   The city is required and it shall be its duty to render to each
purchaser, bills at least once a month, covering all the purchases of water
service, and the amount of the tax imposed hereunder shall be entered and
shown by it as a separate item on each such bill and shall become due and
payable to the city whenever such bill becomes due and payable to the city. 
Each such bill shall include purchases applicable to but one (1) location, or
to but one (1) family or business where more than one (1) family or business
uses separate metered services at one (1) location in the corporate limits of
the city.



(Ord. No. 07-032, § 2, 10-16-07)



Sec. 23-28.5.  Fuel adjustment charge.



   The tax imposed by this article shall not be applied against any fuel
adjustment charge, and such charge shall be separately stated on each bill. 
Fuel adjustment charge shall mean all increases in the cost of utility
service to the ultimate consumer resulting from an increase in the cost of
fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973.



(Ord. No. 07-032, § 2, 10-16-07)



Sec. 23-28.6.  Collection of tax.



   The authorized utility franchisee is hereby authorized and required and
it shall be its duty to collect the tax imposed hereunder from such purchaser
at the time of payment of each such bill, and to report and pay over, on or
before the twentieth (20th) of each fiscal month to the city, all such taxes
levied and collected during the preceding fiscal month.  The City Manager
shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and to take all proceedings
in the name of the city as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax.



(Ord. No. 07-032, § 2, 10-16-07)



Sec. 23-28.7.  Payment of tax.



   The purchaser is required and it shall be the purchaser's duty to pay
the tax imposed hereunder to the authorized utility franchisee as agent for
the city at the time of payment of each such bill.



(Ord. No. 07-032, § 2, 10-16-07)



Sec. 23-28.8.  Failure to pay tax.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any purchaser of water services to
evade the payment of the tax imposed herein or any part thereof, or to fail
or neglect to pay such tax within thirty (30) days after same has become due
and payable.



   (b)   If the purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay such
tax, the city is hereby empowered to discontinue to make any further sales or
to render any further water service to the purchaser until the total amount,
including such tax as is imposed hereunder, shown upon such bill has been
paid in full, provided that such discontinuation of water service shall only
occur when the procedures required by city regulations and state law have
been satisfied.



(Ord. No. 07-032, § 2, 10-16-07)



Sec. 23-28.9.  Conformance with state law.



   It is the city's intent by the adoption of this regulation to impose no
more than the maximum public service tax authorized by F.S. Chapter 166.  In
the event of a conflict with any provisions of F.S. Chapter 166 and these
regulations the provision of F.S. Chapter 166 shall control and these
regulations shall be interpreted to conform with the provisions of state
statute.



(Ord. No. 07-032, § 2, 10-16-07)



Sec. 23-28.10.  Grant of authority to administer tax.



   The City Manager is granted authority to enact administrative
regulations and procedures to implement the billing, collection and
enforcement of the water service tax, provided the regulations and procedures
are consistent with the procedures and regulations required by state law. 
All administrative procedures and regulations shall be in writing and the
form and substance approved by the City Attorney.



(Ord. No. 07-032, § 2, 10-16-07)



 


Notes

1 
These cross references do not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor



ARTICLE III.  FIRE RESCUE ASSESSMENT



DIVISION I:  INTRODUCTION



Sec. 23-29.  Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly otherwise requires:



   Annual Rate Resolution means the resolution described in Section 23-40
hereof, establishing the rate at which a fire rescue assessment for a
specific fiscal year will be computed. The final assessment resolution shall
constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year in which a
fire rescue assessment is imposed or reimposed.



   Article means this Fire Rescue Assessment Article.



   Assessed Property means all parcels of land included on the assessment
roll that receive a special benefit from the delivery of the fire rescue
services, programs or facilities identified in the initial assessment
resolution or a subsequent preliminary rate resolution.



   Assessment Roll means the special assessment roll relating to a fire
rescue assessment approved by a final assessment resolution pursuant to
Section 23-38 hereof or an annual rate resolution pursuant to Section 23-40
hereof.



   Building means any structure, whether temporary or permanent, built for
support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattel, or property of any kind,
including mobile homes. This term shall include the use of land in which lots
or spaces are offered for use, rent or lease for the placement of mobile
homes, travel trailers, or the like for residential purposes.



   Certificate of Occupancy means the written certification issued by the
city that a building is ready for occupancy for its intended use. For the
purposes of this article, a set up or tie down permit or its equivalent
issued for a mobile home shall be considered a Certificate of Occupancy.



   City means the City of Boynton Beach, Florida.



   City Clerk means the Clerk of the City Commission.



   City Commission means the City Commission of the City of Boynton Beach,
Florida.



   City Manager means the chief administrative officer of the city,
designated by the City Commission to be responsible for coordinating fire
rescue assessments or such person's designee.



   County means Palm Beach County, Florida.



   Final Assessment Resolution means the resolution described in Section
23-38 hereof which shall confirm, modify, or repeal the initial assessment
resolution and which shall be the final proceeding for the initial imposition
of fire rescue assessments.



   Fire Rescue Assessed Cost means the amount determined by the City
Commission to be assessed in any fiscal year to fund all or any portion of
the cost of the provision of fire rescue services, facilities, or programs
which provide a special benefit to assessed property, and shall include, but
not be limited to, the following components: (a) the cost of physical
construction, reconstruction or completion of any required facility or
improvement; (b) the costs incurred in any required acquisition or purchase;
(c) the cost of all labor, materials, machinery, and equipment; (d) the cost
of fuel, parts, supplies, maintenance, repairs, and utilities; (e) the cost
of computer services, data processing, and communications; (f) the cost of
all lands and interest therein, leases, property rights, easements, and
franchises of any nature whatsoever; (g) the cost of any indemnity or surety
bonds and premiums for insurance; (h) the cost of salaries, volunteer pay,
workers' compensation insurance, or other employment benefits; (i) the cost
of uniforms, training, travel, and per diem; (j) the cost of construction
plans and specifications, surveys and estimates of costs; (k) the cost of
engineering, financial, legal, and other professional services; (l) the costs
of compliance with any contracts or agreements entered into by the city to
provide fire rescue services; (m) all costs associated with the structure,
implementation, collection, and enforcement of the fire rescue assessments,
including any service charges of the Tax Collector, or Property Appraiser and
amounts necessary to off-set discounts received for early payment of fire
rescue assessments pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act or for
early payment off fire rescue assessments collected pursuant to Section 23-47
herein; (n) all other costs and expenses necessary or incidental to the
acquisition, provision, or construction of fire rescue services, facilities,
or programs, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any
related financing authorized by the City Commission by subsequent resolution;
(o) a reasonable amount for contingency and anticipated delinquencies and
uncollectible fire rescue assessments; and (p) reimbursement to the city or
any other person for any moneys advanced for any costs incurred by the city
or such person in connection with any of the foregoing components of fire
rescue assessed cost. In the event the city also imposes an impact fee upon
new growth or development for fire rescue related capital improvements, the
fire rescue assessed cost shall not include costs attributable to capital
improvements necessitated by new growth or development that will be paid by
such impact fees.



   Fire Rescue Assessment means a special assessment lawfully imposed by
the City Commission against assessed property to fund all or any portion of
the cost of the provision of fire rescue services, facilities, or programs
providing a special benefit to property as a consequence off possessing a
logical relationship to the value, use, or characteristics of the assessed
property.



   Fiscal Year means that period commencing October 1st of each year and
continuing through the next succeeding September 30th, or such other period
as may be prescribed by law as the fiscal year for the city.



   Government Property means property owned by the United States of
America or any agency thereof, a sovereign state or nation, the State of
Florida or any agency thereof, a county, a special district or a municipal
corporation.



   Initial Assessment Resolution means the resolution described in Section
23-34 hereof which shall be the initial proceeding for the identification of
the fire rescue assessed cost for which an assessment is to be made and for
the imposition of a fire rescue assessment.



   Maximum Assessment Rate means the highest rate of a fire rescue
assessment established by the City Commission in an initial assessment
resolution or preliminary rate resolution and confirmed by the City
Commission in the final assessment resolution or annual rate resolution.



   Owner shall mean the person reflected as the owner of assessed property
on the tax roll.



   Person means any individual, partnership, firm, organization,
corporation, association, or any other legal entity, whether singular or
plural, masculine or feminine, as the context may require.



   Preliminary Rate Resolution means the resolution described in Section
23-40 hereof initiating the annual process for updating the assessment roll
and directing the reimposition of fire rescue assessments pursuant to an
annual rate resolution.



   Property Appraiser means the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser.



   Tax Collector means the Palm Beach County Tax Collector.



   Tax Roll means the real property ad valorem tax assessment roll
maintained by the Property Appraiser for the purpose of the levy and
collection of ad valorem taxes.



   Uniform Assessment Collection Act means F.S. §§ 197.3632 and
197.3635, or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of non-ad
valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable
regulations promulgated thereunder.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 1.01, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-30.  Interpretation.



   Unless the context indicates otherwise, words importing the singular
number include the plural number, and vice versa; the terms "hereof,"
"hereby," "herein," "hereto," "hereunder" and similar terms refer to this
article; and the term "hereafter" means after, and the term "heretofore"
means before, the effective date of this article. Words of any gender include
the correlative words of the other genders, unless the sense indicates
otherwise.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 1.02, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-31.  General Findings.



   It is hereby ascertained, determined, and declared that:



   (a)   Pursuant to Florida Constitution, Art. VIII, § 2(b) and 
F.S. §§ 166.021 and 166.041, the City Commission has all powers of local
self-government to perform municipal functions and to render municipal
services in a manner not inconsistent with law, and such power may be
exercised by the enactment of city ordinances.



   (b)   The City Commission may exercise any governmental, corporate,
or proprietary power for a municipal purpose except when expressly prohibited
by law, and the City Commission may legislate on any subject matter on which
the Florida Legislature may act, except those subjects described in F.S. §
166.021(3)(a), (b), (c), and (d). The subject matter of F.S. §
166.021(3)(a), (b), (c), and (d), are not relevant to the imposition of
assessments related to fire rescue services, facilities or programs of the
city.



   (c)   The purpose of this article is to (1) provide procedures and
standards for the imposition of city-wide fire rescue assessments under the
general home rule powers of a municipality to impose special assessments; (2)
authorize a procedure for the funding of fire rescue services, facilities, or
programs providing special benefits to property within the city; and (3)
legislatively determine the special benefit provided to assessed property
from the provision of the city's consolidated fire rescue services.



   (d)   The annual fire rescue assessments, to be imposed using the
procedures provided in this article, shall constitute non-ad valorem
assessments within the meaning and intent of the Uniform Assessment
Collection Act.



   (e)   The fire rescue assessments to be imposed using the procedures
provided in this article are imposed by the City Commission, not the Palm
Beach County Board of County Commissioners, Property Appraiser or Tax
Collector. The duties of the Property Appraiser and Tax Collector under the
provisions of this article and the Uniform Assessment Collection Act are
ministerial.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 1.03, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-32.  Legislative Determinations of Special Benefit.



   It is hereby ascertained and declared that the fire rescue services,
facilities, and programs provide a special benefit to property that is
improved by the existence or construction of a building based upon the
following legislative determination: fire rescue services possess a logical
relationship to the use and enjoyment of improved property by: (1) protecting
the value of the improvements and structures through the provision of
available fire rescue services; (2) protecting the life and safety of
intended occupants in the use and enjoyment of improvements and structures
within improved parcels; (3) lowering the cost of fire insurance by the
presence of a professional and comprehensive fire rescue program within the
city; and (4) containing the spread of fire incidents occurring on vacant
property with the potential to spread and endanger the structures and
occupants of improved property.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 1.04, 7-11-01)



DIVISION II:  ANNUAL FIRE RESCUE ASSESSMENTS



Sec. 23-33.  General Authority.



   (a)   The City Commission is hereby authorized to impose an annual
fire rescue assessment to fund all or any portion of the fire rescue assessed
cost upon benefitted property at a rate of assessment based on the special
benefit accruing to such property from the city's provision of fire rescue
services, facilities, or programs. All fire rescue assessments shall be
imposed in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Division.



   (b)   The amount of the fire rescue assessment imposed in a fiscal
year against a parcel of assessed property shall be determined pursuant to an
apportionment methodology based upon a classification of property designed to
provide a fair and reasonable apportionment of the fire rescue assessed cost
among properties on a basis reasonably related to the special benefit
provided by fire rescue services, facilities, or programs funded with
assessment proceeds.



   (c)    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to
require the imposition of fire rescue assessments against government property.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.01, 7-11-01)



Sec.  23-34.   Initial Proceedings.



   The initial proceeding for the imposition of a fire rescue assessment
shall be the adoption of an initial assessment resolution by the City
Commission, (1) containing a brief and general description of the fire rescue
services, facilities, or programs to be provided, (2) determining the fire
rescue assessed cost to be assessed, (3) describing the method of
apportioning the fire rescue assessed cost and the computation of the fire
rescue assessment for specific properties, (4) establishing an estimated
assessment rate for the upcoming fiscal year, (5) establishing a maximum
assessment rate, if desired by the City Commission, and (6) directing the
City Manager to (a) prepare the initial assessment roll, as required by
Section 23-35 hereof, (b) publish the notice required by Section 23-36
hereof, and (c) mail the notice required by Section 23-37 hereof using
information then available from the tax roll.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.02, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-35.  Initial Assessment Roll.



   (a)   The City Manager shall prepare, or direct the preparation of,
the initial assessment roll, which shall contain the following:



      (1)   A summary description of all assessed property
conforming to the description contained on the tax roll.



      (2)    The name of the owner of the assessed property.



      (3)    The amount of the fire rescue assessment to be imposed
against each such parcel of assessed property.



   (b)   The initial assessment roll shall be retained by the City
Manager and shall be open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be
construed to require that the assessment roll be in printed form if the
amount of the fire rescue assessment for each parcel of property can be
determined by use of a computer terminal available to the public.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.03, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-36.  Notice by Publication.



   Upon completion of the initial assessment roll, the City Manager shall
publish, or direct the publication of, once in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city a notice stating that at a meeting of the City
Commission on a certain day and hour, not earlier than 20 calendar days from
such publication, which meeting shall be a regular, adjourned, or special
meeting, the City Commission will hear objections of all interested persons
to the final assessment resolution which shall establish the rate of
assessment and approve the aforementioned initial assessment roll. The
published notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform
Assessment Collection Act. Such notice shall include (a) a geographic
depiction of the property subject to the fire rescue assessment; (b) a brief
and general description of the fire rescue services, facilities, or programs
to be provided; (c) the rate of assessment including a maximum assessment
rate in the event one was adopted; (d) the procedure for objecting provided
in Section 23-36 hereof; (e) the method by which the fire rescue assessment
will be collected; and (f) a statement that the initial assessment roll is
available for inspection at the office of the City Manager and all interested
persons may ascertain the amount to be assessed against a parcel of assessed
property at the office of the City Manager.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.04, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-37.  Notice by Mail.



   (a)   In addition to the published notice required by Section 23-36,
the City Manager shall provide notice, or direct the provision of notice, of
the proposed fire rescue assessment by first class mail to the owner of each
parcel of property (except government property) subject to the fire rescue
assessment. Such notice shall include (1) the purpose of the fire rescue
assessment; (2) the rate of assessment to be levied against each parcel of
property, including a maximum assessment rate in the event one was adopted;
(3) the unit of measurement applied to determine the fire rescue assessment;
(4) the number of such units contained in each parcel of property; (5) the
total revenue to be collected by the city from the fire rescue assessment;
(6) a statement that failure to pay the fire rescue assessment will cause a
tax certificate to be issued against the property or foreclosure proceedings
to be instituted, either of which may result in a loss of title to the
property; (7) a statement that all affected owners have a right to appear at
the hearing and to file written objections with the City Commission within 20
days of the notice; and (8) the date, time, and place of the hearing. The
mailed notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform
Assessment Collection Act. Notice shall be mailed at least 20 calendar days
prior to the hearing to each owner at such address as is shown on the tax
roll. Notice shall be deemed mailed upon delivery thereof to the possession
of the United States Postal Service. The City Manager may provide proof of
such notice by affidavit. Failure of the owner to receive such notice due to
mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll
nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a fire rescue
assessment imposed by the City Commission pursuant to this article.



   (b)   Pursuant to Laws of Florida, Ch. 92-264, a special act
relating to the county, the City Commission shall provide notice in addition
to the first class mailed notice described in Subsection (a) of this section.
This additional notice shall be mailed by the Property Appraiser and included
as a part of the notice of proposed property taxes under F.S. § 200.069, the
truth-in millage notification. The City Manager shall provide to the Property
Appraiser, no later than August 1 of each year, the fire rescue assessment
rate expressed in dollars and cents per billing unit, the associated fire
rescue assessment amount, and the purpose of the fire rescue  assessment.
The Property Appraiser shall include notice of the fire rescue assessment in
the manner directed by Laws of Florida, Ch. 92-264.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.05, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-38.  Adoption of Final Assessment Resolution.



   At the public hearing as noticed pursuant to Sections 23-36 and 23-37
hereof, or to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken by the City
Commission, the City Commission shall receive any oral or written objections
of interested persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the City
Commission adopt the final assessment resolution which shall (a) confirm,
modify, or repeal the initial assessment resolution with such amendments, if
any, as may be deemed appropriate by the City Commission; (b) establish the
rate of assessment to be imposed in the upcoming fiscal year; (c) establish a
maximum assessment rate that may be imposed in the event such rate was
adopted; (d) approve the initial assessment roll, with such amendments as it
deems just and right; and (e) determine the method of collection. The
adoption of the final assessment resolution by the City Commission shall
constitute a legislative determination that all parcels assessed derive a
special benefit from the fire rescue services, facilities, or programs to be
provided or constructed and a legislative determination that the fire rescue
assessments are fairly and reasonably apportioned among the properties that
receive the special benefit. All written objections to the final assessment
resolution shall be filed with the City Manager at or before the time or
adjourned time of such hearing. The final assessment resolution shall
constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year in which
fire rescue assessments are imposed or reimposed hereunder.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.06, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-39.  Effect of Final Assessment Resolution.



   The fire rescue assessments for the initial fiscal year shall be
established upon adoption of the final assessment resolution. The adoption of
the final assessment resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues
presented (including, but not limited to, the determination of special
benefit and fair apportionment to the assessed property; the method of
apportionment and assessment; the initial rate of assessment; the maximum
assessment rate, if any; the initial assessment roll; and the levy and lien
of the fire rescue assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a
court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date
of the City Commission action on the final assessment resolution. The initial
assessment roll, as approved by the final assessment resolution, shall be
delivered to the Tax Collector, as required by the Uniform Assessment
Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in Section 23-47
hereof is used to collect the fire rescue assessments, such other official as
the City Commission by resolution shall designate.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.07, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-40.  Adoption of Annual Rate Resolution.



   (a)    The City Commission shall adopt an annual rate resolution
during its budget adoption process for each fiscal year following the initial
fiscal year for which a fire rescue assessment is imposed hereunder.



   (b)   The initial proceedings for the adoption of an annual rate
resolution shall be the adoption of a preliminary rate resolution by the City
Commission (1) containing a brief and general description of the fire rescue
services, facilities, or programs to be provided; (2) determining the fire
rescue assessed cost to be assessed for the upcoming fiscal year; (3)
establishing the estimated assessment rate for the upcoming fiscal year; (4)
establishing or increasing a maximum assessment rate, if desired by the City
Commission; (5) authorizing the date, time, and place of a public hearing to
receive and consider comments from the public and consider the adoption of
the annual rate resolution for the upcoming fiscal year; and (6) directing
the City Manager to (a) update the assessment roll, (b) provide notice by
publication and first class mail to affected owners in the event
circumstances described in Subsection (f) of this Section so require, and (c)
directing and authorizing any supplemental or additional notice deemed
proper, necessary or convenient by the city.



   (c)   The annual rate resolution shall (1) establish the rate of
assessment to be imposed in the upcoming fiscal year and (2) approve the
assessment roll for the upcoming fiscal year with such adjustments as the
City Commission deems just and right. The assessment roll shall be prepared
in accordance with the method of apportionment set forth in the initial
assessment resolution, or any subsequent preliminary rate resolution,
together with modifications, if any, that are provided and confirmed in the
final assessment resolution or any subsequent annual rate resolution.



   (d)   Nothing herein shall preclude the City Commission from
providing annual notification to all owners of assessed property in the
manner provided in Sections 23-36 and/or 23-37 hereof or any other method as
provided by law.



   (e)   The City Commission may establish or increase a maximum
assessment rate in an initial assessment resolution or preliminary rate
resolution and confirm such maximum assessment rate in the event notice of
such maximum rate assessment has been included in the notices required by
Sections 23-36 and 23-37 hereof.



   (f)   In the event (1) the proposed fire rescue assessment for any
fiscal year exceeds the rates of assessment adopted by the City Commission
including a maximum assessment rate, if any, that were listed in the notices
previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to Sections
23-36 and 23-37 hereof, (2) the purpose for which the fire rescue assessment
is imposed or the use of the revenue from the fire rescue assessment is
substantially changed from that represented by notice previously provided to
the owners of assessed property pursuant to Sections 23-36 and 23-37 hereof,
(3) assessed property is reclassified or the method of apportionment is
revised or altered resulting in an increased fire rescue assessment from that
represented by notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property
pursuant to Sections 23-36 and 23-37 hereof, or (4) an assessment roll
contains assessed property that was not included on the assessment roll
approved for the prior fiscal year, notice shall be provided by publication
and first class mail to the owners of such assessed property as provided by
law. Such notice shall substantially conform with the notice requirements set
forth in Sections 23-36 and 23-37 hereof and inform the owner of the date,
time, and place for the adoption of the annual rate resolution. The failure
of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence, shall not
affect the validity of the assessment roll nor release or discharge any
obligation for payment of a fire rescue assessment imposed by the City
Commission pursuant to this article.



   (g)   As to any assessed property not included on an assessment roll
approved by the adoption of the final assessment resolution or a prior year's
annual rate resolution, the adoption of the succeeding annual rate resolution
shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented as to such assessed
property (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit
and fair apportionment to the assessed property, the method of apportionment
and assessment, the rate of assessment, the establishment or increase of a
maximum assessment rate, the assessment roll, and the levy and lien of the
fire rescue assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court
of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of
the City Commission action on the annual rate resolution. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed or interpreted to affect the finality of any fire
rescue assessment not challenged within the required 20-day period for those
fire rescue assessments previously imposed against assessed property by the
inclusion of the assessed property on an assessment roll approved in the
final assessment resolution or any subsequent annual rate resolution.



   (h)   The assessment roll, as approved by the annual rate
resolution, shall be delivered to the Tax Collector as required by the
Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in
Section 23-47 hereof is used to collect the fire rescue assessments, such
other official as the City Commission by resolution shall designate. If the
fire rescue assessment against any property shall be sustained, reduced, or
abated by the court, an adjustment shall be made on the assessment roll.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.08, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-41.  Lien of Fire Rescue Assessments.



   Upon the adoption of the assessment roll, all fire rescue assessments
shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity
with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special
assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such lien shall be superior
in dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims, until
paid. The lien for a fire rescue assessment shall be deemed perfected upon
the City Commission's adoption of the final assessment resolution or the
annual rate resolution, whichever is applicable. The lien for a fire rescue
assessment collected under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act shall attach
to the property included on the assessment roll as of the prior January 1,
the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the tax roll. The lien for a
fire rescue assessment collected under the alternative method of collection
provided in Section 23-47 shall be deemed perfected upon the City
Commission's adoption of the final assessment resolution or the annual rate
resolution, whichever is applicable, and shall attach to the property on such
date of adoption.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.09, 7-11-01)



Sec.  23-42.   Revisions to Fire Rescue Assessments.



   If any fire rescue assessment made under the provisions of this article
is either in whole or in part annulled, vacated, or set aside by the judgment
of any court, or if the City Commission is satisfied that any such fire
rescue assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be
enforced or collected, or if the City Commission has failed to include or
omitted any property on the assessment roll, which property should have been
so included, the City Commission may take all necessary steps to impose a new
fire rescue assessment against any property benefitted by the fire rescue
assessed costs, following as nearly as may be practicable, the provisions of
this article and in case such second fire rescue assessment is annulled,
vacated, or set aside, the City Commission may obtain and impose other fire
rescue assessments until a valid fire rescue assessment is imposed.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.10, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-43.  Procedural Irregularities.



   Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with
the levy of any fire rescue assessment under the provisions of this article
shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any
fire rescue assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient
evidence that such fire rescue assessment was duly levied, that the fire
rescue assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings
adequate to such fire rescue assessment were duly had, taken, and performed
as required by this article; and no variance from the directions hereunder
shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting
was materially injured thereby.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.11, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-44.  Correction of Errors and Omissions.



   (a)   No act of error or omission on the part of the Property
Appraiser, Tax Collector, City Manager, City Commission, or their deputies or
employees, shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment
of a fire rescue assessment imposed by the City Commission under the
provision of this article.



   (b)   When it shall appear that any fire rescue assessment should
have been imposed under this article against a parcel of property specially
benefitted by the provision of fire rescue services, facilities, or programs,
but that such property was omitted from the assessment roll; or such property
was erroneously assessed; or was not listed on the tax roll as an individual
parcel of property as of the effective date of the assessment roll approved
by the annual rate resolution for any upcoming fiscal year, the City
Commission may, upon provision of a notice by mail provided to the owner of
the omitted or erroneously assessed parcel in the manner and form provided in
Section 23-37, impose the applicable fire rescue assessment for the fiscal
year in which such error or omission is discovered, in addition to the
applicable fire rescue assessment due for the prior two fiscal years. Such
fire rescue assessment shall constitute a lien against assessed property
equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or
municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to
all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims in and to or against the
real property involved, shall be collected as provided in Division III
hereof, and shall be deemed perfected on the date of adoption of the
resolution imposing the omitted or delinquent assessments.



   (c)   Prior to the delivery of the assessment roll to the Tax
Collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the City
Manager shall have the authority at any time, upon his or her own initiative
or in response to a timely filed petition from the owner of any property
subject to a fire rescue assessment, to reclassify property based upon
presentation of competent and substantial evidence, and correct any error in
applying the fire rescue assessment apportionment method to any particular
parcel of property not otherwise requiring the provision of notice pursuant
to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any such correction shall be
considered valid ab initio and shall in no way affect the enforcement of the
fire rescue assessment imposed under the provisions of this article. All
requests from affected property owners for any such changes, modifications or
corrections shall be referred to, and processed by, the City Manager and not
the Property Appraiser or Tax Collector.



   (d)   After the assessment roll has been delivered to the Tax
Collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, any
changes, modifications, or corrections thereto shall be made in accordance
with the procedures applicable to correcting errors and insolvencies on the
tax roll upon timely written request and direction of the City Manager.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.13, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-45.  Interim Assessments.



   An interim fire rescue assessment may be imposed against all property
for which a certificate of occupancy is issued after the adoption of the
annual rate resolution. The amount of the interim fire rescue assessment
shall be calculated upon a monthly rate, which shall be one-twelfth of the
annual rate for such property computed in accordance with the annual rate
resolution for the fiscal year for which the interim fire rescue assessment
is being imposed. Such monthly rate shall be imposed for each full calendar
month remaining in the fiscal year. In addition to the monthly rate, the
interim fire rescue assessment may also include an estimate of the subsequent
fiscal year's fire rescue assessment. Issuance of the certificate of
occupancy without the payment in full of the interim fire rescue assessment
shall not relieve the owner of such property of the obligation of full
payment. Any interim fire rescue assessment not collected prior to the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy may be collected pursuant to the
Uniform Assessment Collection Act as provided in Section 23-46 of this
article, under the alternative collection method provided in Section 23-47 or
by any other method authorized by law. Any interim fire rescue  assessment
shall be deemed due and payable on the date the certificate of occupancy was
issued and shall constitute a lien against such property as of that date.
Said lien shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state,
county, district or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in
rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in and
to or against the real property involved and shall be deemed perfected upon
the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 2.14, 7-11-01)



DIVISION III:  COLLECTION AND USE OF FIRE RESCUE ASSESSMENTS



Sec. 23-46.  Method of Collection.



   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by the City Commission, the fire
rescue assessments shall be collected pursuant to the uniform method provided
in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and the city shall comply with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any hearing
or notice required by this article may be combined with any other hearing or
notice required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act or other provision
of law.



   (b)   The amount of a fire rescue assessment to be collected using
the uniform method pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act for any
specific parcel of benefitted property may include an amount equivalent to
the payment delinquency, delinquency fees and recording costs for a prior
year's assessment for a comparable service, facility, or program provided,
(1) the collection method used in connection with the prior year's assessment
did not employ the use of the uniform method of collection authorized by the
Uniform Assessment Collection Act, (2) notice is provided to the owner as
required under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and (3) any lien on the
affected parcel for the prior year's assessment is supplanted and transferred
to such fire rescue assessment upon certification of a non-ad valorem roll to
the Tax Collector by the city.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 3.01, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-47.  Alternative Method of Collection.



   In lieu of using the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the City
Commission may elect to collect the fire rescue assessments by any other
method which is authorized by law or under the alternative collection method
provided by this section:



   (a)   The City Commission shall provide fire rescue assessment bills
by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of property, other
than government property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall
include (1) a brief explanation of the fire rescue assessment, (2) a
description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the
fire rescue assessment, (3) the number of units contained within the parcel,
(4) the total amount of the fire rescue assessment imposed against the parcel
for the appropriate period, (5) the location at which payment will be
accepted, (6) the date on which the fire rescue assessment is due, and (7) a
statement that the fire rescue assessment constitutes a lien against assessed
property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county,
district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments.



   (b)   The City Commission shall have the right to foreclose and
collect all delinquent fire rescue assessments in the manner provided by law
for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property or appoint or retain an
agent to institute such foreclosure and collection proceedings. A fire rescue
assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the
date payment was due, as identified in accordance with paragraph (a)(6) of
this section. The City Commission or its agent shall notify any property
owner who is delinquent in payment of his or her fire rescue assessment
within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state
in effect that the City Commission or its agent will either (1) initiate a
foreclosure action or suit in equity and cause the foreclosure of such
property subject to a delinquent fire rescue assessment in a method now or
hereafter provided by law for foreclosure of mortgages on real property, or
(2) cause an amount equivalent to the delinquent fire rescue assessment, not
previously subject to collection using the uniform method under the Uniform
Assessment Collection Act, to be collected on the tax bill for a subsequent
year.



   (c)   All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney
fees and title search expenses, related to any foreclosure action as
described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered
therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the city may be
the purchaser to the same extent as any person. The City Commission or its
agent may join in one foreclosure action the collection of fire rescue
assessments against any or all property assessed in accordance with the
provisions hereof. All delinquent owners whose property is foreclosed shall
be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred
by the City Commission and its agents, including reasonable attorney fees, in
collection of such delinquent fire rescue assessments and any other costs
incurred by the City Commission as a result of such delinquent fire rescue
assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to,
the costs of the action.



   (d)   In lieu of foreclosure, any delinquent fire rescue assessment
and the costs, fees and expenses attributable thereto, may be collected
pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided however, that (1)
notice is provided to the owner in the manner required by the Uniform
Assessment Collection Act and this article, and (2) any existing lien of
record on the affected parcel for the delinquent fire rescue assessment is
supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of the assessment roll,
as applicable, to the Tax Collector.



   (e)   Notwithstanding the City Commission's use of an alternative
method of collection, the City Manager shall have the same power and
authority to correct errors and omissions as provided to him or other city
officials in Section 23-44 hereof.



   (f)   Any City Commission action required in the collection of fire
rescue assessments may be by resolution.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 3.02, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-48.  Government property.



   (a)   In the event fire rescue assessments are imposed against
government property, the City Commission shall provide fire rescue assessment
bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of government
property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include (1) a
brief explanation of the fire rescue assessment, (2) a description of the
unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the fire rescue
assessment, (3) the number of units contained within the parcel, (4) the
total amount of the parcel's fire rescue assessment for the appropriate
period, (5) the location at which payment will be accepted, and (6) the date
on which the fire rescue assessment is due.



   (b)   Fire rescue assessments imposed against government property
shall be due on the same date as all other fire rescue assessments and, if
applicable, shall be subject to the same discounts for early payment.



   (c)   A fire rescue assessment shall become delinquent if it is not
paid within 30 days from the date payment was due, as identified in paragraph
(A)(6) of this section. The City Commission shall notify the owner of any
government property that is delinquent in payment of its fire rescue
assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice
shall state that the City Commission will initiate a mandamus or other
appropriate judicial action to compel payment.



   (d)   All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney
fees and title search expenses, related to any mandamus or other action as
described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered
therein. All delinquent owners of government property against which a
mandamus or other appropriate action is filed shall be liable for an
apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city,
including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent fire
rescue assessments and any other costs incurred by the City Commission as a
result of such delinquent fire rescue assessments and the same shall be
collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action.



   (e)   As an alternative to the foregoing, a fire rescue assessment
imposed against government property may be collected as a surcharge on a
utility bill provided to such government property in periodic installments
with a remedy of a mandamus action in the vent of non-payment. The City
Commission may contract for such billing services with any utility, whether
or not such utility is owned by the city.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 3.03, 7-11-01)



DIVISION IV:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 23-49.  Applicability.



   This article and the City Commission's authority to impose assessments
pursuant hereto shall be applicable throughout the city.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 4.01, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-50.  Alternative Method.



   (a)   This article shall be deemed to provide an additional and
alternative method for the doing of the things authorized hereby and shall be
regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws,
and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing or
which may hereafter come into existence. This article, being necessary for
the welfare of the inhabitants of the city, shall be liberally construed to
effect the purposes hereof.



   (b)   Nothing herein shall preclude the City Commission from
directing and authorizing, by resolution, the combination with each other of
(1) any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper, necessary, or
convenient by the city, (2) any notice required by this article, or (3) any
notice required by law, including the Uniform Assessment Collection Act.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 4.02, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-51.  Severability.



   The provisions of this article are severable; and if any section,
subsection, sentence, clause or provision is held invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this article shall not be
affected thereby.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 4.03, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-52.  Effective Date.



   This article shall take effect immediately upon its passage and
adoption on the second and final reading.



(Ord. No. 01-34, § 4.04, 7-11-01)



Sec. 23-53.  Limitation on Fire Rescue Assessment Duration.



   Notwithstanding any authority in this article to the contrary, no fire
rescue assessment shall be imposed to fund any fiscal year beyond that fiscal
year ending on September 30, 2008.



(Ord. No. 01-56, passed 11-20-01)



ARTICLE IV.  ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION



Sec. 23-54.  Additional homestead exemption for persons 65 and older.



   (a)   Definitions.



      (1)   Household means a person, or group of persons living
together in a room or group of rooms as a housing unit, but the term does not
include persons boarding or renting a portion of a dwelling, as defined in
Section 196.075(1), Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time.



      (2)   Household income means the adjusted gross income, as
defined in s. 62 of the United States Internal Revenue Code, of all members
of the household, as defined in Section 196.076(1), Florida Statutes, as
amended from time to time.



   (b)   General.



      (1)   The additional homestead exemption set forth in this
section shall apply only to taxes levied by the City of Boynton Beach
including, if any, dependent special districts and municipal service taxing
units.



      (2)   Any person who meets the requirements set forth in (c)
below, shall be eligible for an additional homestead exemption in an amount
up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).



   (c)   Requirements to obtain additional homestead exemption. Any
person who has attained the age of sixty-five (65) years will be entitled to
an additional homestead exemption if:



      (1)   The person has legal or equitable title to real estate;
and



      (2)   The person maintains thereon the permanent residence of
the owner; and



      (3)   The person's household income does not exceed twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00).



      (4)   The taxpayer claiming the exemption shall annually
submit a request for the additional exemption herein created to the Palm
Beach County Property Appraiser, not later than March 1, a sworn statement of
household income on a form prescribed by the Florida Department of Revenue
and in accordance with rules of the Florida Department of Revenue. The
applicant shall submit copies of any federal income tax returns for the prior
year, any wage and earnings statements (W-2 forms),and any other documents
which the Florida Department of Revenue finds necessary, for each member of
the household, is submitted by June 1. The taxpayer's statement shall attest
to the accuracy of such copies; and



      (5)   Property appraiser approval.  The property appraiser
may not grant the exemption without the required documentation.



   (d)   Household income.  For the purposes of (c)(3) above,
beginning January 1, 2001, the twenty thousand dollar ($20,000.00) household
income limitation shall be adjusted annually on January 1, by the percentage
change in the average cost-of-living in the period January 1 through December
31 of the immediate prior year compared with the same period for the year
prior to that.  The index is the average of the monthly consumer-price index
figures for the stated twelve-month period, relative to the United States as
a whole, issued by the United States Department of Labor.



   (e)   If title is held jointly with the right of survivorship, the
person residing on the property and otherwise qualifying may receive the
entire amount of the additional homestead exemption.



(Ord. No. 04-044, § 2, 7-20-04)



ARTICLE V.  EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES TRANSPORTATION FEES AND CHARGES



Sec. 23-55.   Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:



   (a)   Basic life support (BLS) services include the treatment of
medical emergencies by a qualified person through the use of techniques such
as patient assessment, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), splinting,
obstetrical assistance, bandaging, administration of oxygen, application of
medical anti-shock trousers, administration of a subcutaneous injection using
a premeasured auto-injector of epinephrine to a person suffering an
anaphylactic reaction, and other techniques described in the Emergency
Medical Technician Basic Training Course Curriculum of the United States
Department of Transportation.



   (b)   Advanced life support services means the treatment of
life-threatening emergencies through the use of techniques such as
endotracheal intubation, the administration of intravenous fluids,
medications, telemetry, cardiac monitoring, cardiac defibrillation, and the
use of external pacemakers by a qualified paramedic. Advanced life support
services are classified in two categories as follows:



      (1)   Advanced life support, level 1 (ALS1). Where medically
necessary, the provision of an assessment by an advanced life support (ALS)
provider and/or the provision of one (1) or more ALS interventions. An ALS
intervention is defined as a procedure beyond the scope of an EMT-Basic as
defined in the National EMS Education and Practice Blueprint.



      (2)   Advanced life support, level 2 (ALS2). Where medically
necessary, the administration of at least three (3) different medications
and/or the provision of one (1) or more of the following ALS procedures:



         a.   Manual defibrillation/cardio-version.



         b.   Endotracheal intubation.



         c.   Central venous line.



         d.   Cardiac pacing.



         e.   Chest decompression.



         f.   Surgical airway.



         g.   Intraosseous line.



(Ord. No. 14-012, § 3, 8-19-14)



Sec. 23-56.   Emergency medical services transportation fees and charges.



   The fees and charges for emergency medical transportation services are
as follows:



   (a)   Effective October 1, 2014:



      (1)   BLS transport fee    $610.00



      (2)   ALS1 transport fee    610.00



      (3)   ALS2 transport fee    770.00



      (4)   Mileage    12.00



   (b)   Effective October 1, 2015:



      (1)   BLS transport fee    $630.00



      (2)   ALS1 transport fee    630.00



      (3)   ALS2 transport fee    790.00



      (4)   Mileage    12.50



   (c)   Effective October 1, 2016:



      (1)   BLS transport fee    $650.00



      (2)   ALS1 transport fee    650.00



      (3)   ALS2 transport fee    810.00



      (4)   Mileage    13.00



   (d)   Effective October 1, 2017:



      (1)   BLS transport fee    $670.00



      (2)   ALS1 transport fee    670.00



      (3)   ALS2 transport fee    830.00



      (4)   Mileage    13.50



   (e)   Effective October 1, 2018:



      (1)   BLS transport fee    $690.00



      (2)   ALS1 transport fee    690.00



      (3)   ALS2 transport fee    850.00



      (4)   Mileage    14.00



(Ord. No. 14-012, § 3, 8-19-14)



Sec. 23-57.   Collection of emergency medical services transportation fees
and charges.



   (a)   The Fire Rescue Department will submit bills to patients or to
the patient’s insurance carrier for the provision of basic life support or
advanced life support transportation.



   (b)   The Boynton Beach Fire Rescue Department has established the
Standard Operating Guidelines for EMS Transportation Billing Policies,
Procedures and Collections. The Administration and Finance Officer is hereby
authorized to adjust the accounts as stated in the policy.



   (c)   The city may collect delinquent charges through any and all
available legal remedies.



   (d)   The City Finance Department is hereby authorized to accept
assignment at the maximum allowable rate of Medicaid, Medicare, and Palm
Beach County Health Care District benefits.



   (e)   The City Finance Department is hereby authorized to negotiate
payment settlements of outstanding debts owed to the city for emergency
services rendered when the debtor is unable to satisfy the outstanding
balance due.



(Ord. No. 14-012, § 3, 8-19-14)



Chapter 24
VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Sec. 24-1.  Definitions.



   As used in this chapter:



   Advertising shall mean vehicle overlays, attached or painted signage,
as regulated by City of Boynton Beach Land Development Regulations, Chapter
21, any written statement made in connection with the solicitation by vehicle
for hire business and includes without limitation, statements or
representations made in a newspaper, "Yellow Pages" or other publication, or
on radio, television or contained in any notice, handbill, business card,
sign, catalog, billboard, brochure, poster or letter.



   Applicant shall mean any person who applies for a vehicle for hire
business tax receipt.  In the case of partnerships, associations,
corporations and other legal entities, "applicant" shall also mean any member
of a partnership and the corporate officers and directors.



   Compensation shall mean a return in money, property, or anything of
value for the rendition of vehicle for hire services.



   County Business Permit shall mean the grant by Palm Beach County to
operate one (1) vehicle for hire not subject to reciprocity, upon the streets
of the County.



   Cruising means the driving of a taxicab on the streets, alleys or
public places of the City in search of, or soliciting, prospective passengers
for hire.



   Driver means an individual who operates or is in actual physical
control of a public vehicle.



   Holder means a person, corporation, partnership, or other business
entity to whom the City issues a business tax receipt to operate a vehicle
for hire business.



   Jitney shall mean any non-metered vehicle for hire which may or may not
operate a regular intervals over a designated route, and which fixed fares or
rates may be charged for services.



   Limousine means any chauffeur-driven, non-metered passenger vehicle for
hire, including, but not limited to, modified-for-the-purpose luxury
limousines or full-sized luxury sedans, providing seating accommodations for
not more than the number of passengers, including the driver, specified by
the vehicles manufacturer, whose rates are determined on an hourly, daily,
weekly or monthly rental of the vehicle and the chauffeur, or a combination
of rental and mileage charges, with a minimum rental period of one (1) hour.



   Manifest means a daily record prepared by a vehicle for hire driver of
all trips made by said driver showing the time and place of origin,
destination, number of passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip.



   Non-motorized vehicle means vehicles for hire designed to be propelled
by humans and/or animals which do not also have engines or motors installed,
including, but not limited to, rickshaw, animal-drawn vehicle, bicycle or
other opened or closed vehicle with two (2) or more wheels, pedicab or
pedestrian cab.



   Operator means any person owning, leasing or controlling a vehicle for
hire. An operator may or may not be a driver.



   Public vehicle means taxicabs, vans, limousines and non-motorized
vehicles for the transportation for hire of passengers where new fares begin
within the City limits of Boynton Beach.



   Taxicab means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire, having seating accommodations for not more than
the number of passengers, including the driver, specified by the vehicles
manufacturer.



   Vehicle for hire driver's identification badge (I.D. badge) shall mean
a permit issued by Palm Beach County, authorizing the holder thereof to
utilize the vehicle for hire described in said permit for the transportation
of passengers as authorized pursuant to this Article.



   Waiting time means the time when a taxicab is not in motion from the
time of acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge, but
does not include any time that the taxicab is not in motion if due to any
cause other than the request, act or fault of a passenger or passengers.



(Code 1958, § 27-1) (Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2,
1-2-07)



Sec. 24-2.  Compliance.



   (a)   The operation of a vehicle for hire within and upon the
streets of the City shall be subject to the conditions, restrictions, and
regulations set forth in this Chapter. It shall be unlawful to operate any
vehicle for hire within and upon such streets without first obtaining the
appropriate City business tax receipt for the operation of a vehicle for
hire. The provisions of this Chapter, however, shall not apply to the
following:



      (1)   Vehicles operated by a governmental agency;



      (2)   Vehicles tendering transportation services not for
compensation;



      (3)   Vehicles owned and operated by hotels, motels, churches,
private clubs and organizations, or other such entities, which provide
transportation services for their guests/members only, for which the
guest/member does not incur a separate charge;



      (4)   Discharge within the regulatory purview of this Chapter
of a passenger picked up pursuant to legal authority in either another
municipality or another county;



      (5)   Operation of motor vehicles for the transportation of
passengers, not for compensation, between the vicinity of their residences
and the vicinity of their places of work, in an arrangement commonly known as
a "car pool" or "van pool", and exclusive ride-sharing vehicles as defined in
F.S. § 341.031.(9), as amended.;



      (6)   Motor vehicles used exclusively in transporting children
to and from school/daycare;



      (7)   Motor vehicles whose primary business is transporting
passengers to and/or from airports located outside the City limits of Boynton
Beach;



      (8)   Out-of-county origin exception. Nothing in this Chapter
shall prohibit discharge within the City of any passenger, lawfully picked up
in another county and lawfully transported into the City. Any passenger
lawfully picked up in another county, transported to, and discharged at any
location within the City, may be picked up at the discharge location so long
as the transportation is part of a prearranged, roundtrip fare (evidenced by
written manifest or load ticket.) Additional passengers may not be picked up
at the discharge point unless a valid City of Boynton Beach Business Tax
Receipt is obtained. This exemption is not applicable to scheduled discharge
locations, such as bus terminals.



Compliance with Palm Beach County Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, as may be
amended from time to time is required in order to obtain a business tax
receipt from the City and to receive an annual renewal of the City's business
tax receipt.



   (b)   Non-motorized vehicles:



      (1)   Non-motorized vehicles shall not be operated on any
sidewalk;



      (2)   Animal waste generated by non-motorized vehicles shall
be immediately disposed of in a sealed container by the vehicle driver.



      (3)   Non-motorized vehicles shall comply with posted
regulations for stopping and standing. Non-motorized vehicles may not stop or
stand in on-street spaces reserved for bus or trolley stops;



      (4)   Non-motorized vehicles may use available public parking
spaces for stopping or standing but shall comply with posted time
requirements and are subject to ticketing for failure to comply with such
requirements;



      (5)   There shall be a passenger visible location provided in
the vehicle for the public vehicle's driver's Palm Beach County
Identification to be displayed;



      (6)   Non-motorized vehicles are limited to the City's
Community Redevelopment Area and shall not transgress streets other than
those permitted within the district.



   (c)   Compliance with state, federal safety laws:



      (1)   Every vehicle for hire company shall be responsible for
ensuring that each vehicle in its employ complies with applicable state and
federal laws, rules, regulations, and standards regarding motor vehicle
safety equipment and devices. Every vehicle for hire company shall cause
every vehicle that it owns, leases or controls to be inspected at least
annually to ensure that each such vehicle complies with F.S. Ch. 316. The
vehicle for hire company shall maintain a permanent registry containing
information on the identity of each vehicle inspected, the date of the
inspection, the nature of any deficiencies or defects discovered, remedial
action or service performed, and the name of the inspector. All information
so required shall be typewritten or printed legibly.



      (2)   The City may require additional inspections of any
vehicle for hire to enforce the provisions of this section. Such inspections
shall be conducted by persons qualified to perform the inspection requested.



      (3)   A vehicle for hire which fails to meet the operating and
safety requirements of F.S. Ch. 316 or other applicable law, rule, or
regulation shall not be operated for the transportation of passengers for
hire until the defect or deficiency has been rectified. In no case shall an
unsafe vehicle for hire be operated upon the streets, roads, and highways of
the City.



      (4)   All vehicle for hire drivers must display, in a
conspicuous location visible to passengers, their Palm Beach County issued
driver's identification card.



(Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-06)



Sec. 24-3.  Advertising.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle for hire company to
advertise vehicle for hire services and/or transportation services without
obtaining and maintaining a current and valid vehicle for hire City of
Boynton Beach Business Tax Receipt, Palm Beach County business permit and
Palm Beach County vehicle decal(s) pursuant to the provisions of this
Article. Any advertisements of any vehicle for hire business shall clearly
and conspicuously disclose the vehicle for hire Palm Beach County business
permit number. The permit number shall be preceded by "PBC".



   (b)   With the exception of limousines and executive sedans, each
vehicle for hire shall clearly display on the exterior of the driver and
passenger side of the vehicle, letters at least two (2) inches high and in
contrasting colors, the vehicle for hire company's name, telephone number and
Palm Beach County business permit number. The permit number shall be preceded
by "PBC".



   (c)   All taxicabs shall conspicuously advertise their meter rates
on the exterior of the vehicle and metered drop rate must match the
advertised rate.



(Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07)



Sec. 24-4.  Prohibited conduct of public vehicle drivers.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for anydriver of a public vehicle to:



      (1)   Violate any of the terms, provisions or directions of
this Chapter;



      (2)   Fail to keep a written manifest of all trips, which
record shall give information as to the time of each trip, the starting and
ending point of each trip, together with the number of persons carried. The
manifest shall he available for the inspection by the Police Department of
the City at all times and shall be kept available for a period of not less
than one (1) year.



      (3)   Fail to report promptly all accidents to the Police
Department.



      (4)   Fail to report to the Business Tax Receipt division of
the City any changes in driver status within five (5) working days.



      (5)   Fail to give a receipt for fares when requested by
passengers.



      (6)   Operate a vehicle for hire for more than twelve (12)
hours of any continuous 24-hour period.



      (7)   Operate any vehicle for hire while any article is on,
upon or attached to the running board, fender, hood or door thereof. All
articles and baggage or bicycles carried by vehicles under this Chapter shall
be wholly within such vehicle, except that transporting of baggage/bicycles
securely fastened in baggage/ bicycle racks safely attached to any licensed
vehicles shall be a permissible practice.



      (8)   Leave unattended while parked, any animal used for an
animal-drawn vehicle for hire.



(Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07; Ord. No.
06-096, § 2, 1-2-07)



Sec. 24-5.  Vehicle for hire business tax receipt.



   (a)   An application for a vehicle for hire business tax receipt
shall be filed with the appropriate City department upon forms provided by
the City; such application shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the
following information:



      (1)   The applicant's name and name under which the applicant
is providing the vehicle for hire service;



      (2)   The applicant's local business address;



      (3)   The number, make, model, year of manufacture, and
specific color scheme of each vehicle for hire operated by the applicant;



      (4)   The vehicle identification number and license tag for
each vehicle for hire operated by the applicant;



      (5)   Proof of liability insurance as required by this Chapter.



      (b)   Each applicant for a vehicle for hire business tax
receipt shall employ only those drivers who have been issued a vehicle for
hire Palm Beach County driver's identification badge pursuant to Chapter 19,
Section 19-217, Palm Beach County Codeof Ordinances, as may be amended from
time to time. The applicant shall provide copies of each identification badge
for each of the applicant's drivers along with a current and valid
chauffeur's driver's license to the City upon receipt from Palm Beach County,
within seven (7) working days of the issuance of a City Business Tax Receipt
or a business tax receipt application renewal to the City's Business Tax
Receipt Office. Any changes to driver's status shall be reported to the
City's Business Tax Receipt Office within ten (10) working days of the status
change.



   (c)   The City may deny or revoke a business tax receipt issued to
an applicant for vehicles for hire, if it is determined that the applicant
has misrepresented, omitted, or concealed a fact on the application, renewal
application, or replacement application.  The applicant shall be given
written notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have the
opportunity to appeal the revocation to the City Manager.



   (d)   A business tax receipt shall only be valid for the vehicle for
hire person or company to which the City issues the business tax receipt. 
The license is transferable; however, any change in name or business
structure, must meet all requirements for this Chapter.



(Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07)



Sec. 24-6.  Vehicle safety and  operational requirements.



   Each applicant for a vehicle for hire business tax receipt shall comply
with the vehicle safety requirements pursuant to Chapter 19, Sections 19-218
and 19-219, Palm Beach County Code of Ordinances, as may be amended from time
to time.



(Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07)



Sec. 24-7.  Liability insurance required.



   The City shall not issue a business tax receipt nor shall a vehicle for
hire business be permitted to continue in operation unless there is in full
force and effect a liability insurance policy for each vehicle authorized in
the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single
limit covering bodily injury per person; bodily injury per accident; and
property damage per occurrence. Said liability insurance shall inure to the
benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to
property proximately caused by the negligence of a holder, his servants, or
agents. A copy of the liability insurance policy shall be submitted to the
City's Business Tax Receipt Office at the time of application or renewal of
the applicant's business tax receipt, and insurance shall be with a company
authorized to do business in the State of Florida.



(Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07)



Sec. 24-8.  License fees prerequisite  to continuance of operation.



   An individual or company shall not be permitted to operate a vehicle
for hire business within the City unless the individual or company pays the
annual business tax receipt fee as provided in Chapter 13 of this Code for
the right to engage in the vehicle for hire business. Such business tax
receipt fees shall be for the license year and shall be in addition to any
other license fees or charges established by proper authority and applicable
to the holder of the vehicle or vehicles under his operation and control.



(Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07)



Sec. 24-9.  Driver to have chauffeurs license.



   A person shall not operate a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the
City and a person who owns or controls a vehicle for hire shall not permit
the vehicle for hire to be driven within the City, and a vehicle for hire,
licensed by the City, shall not be driven at any time for hire, unless the
driver of the vehicle for hire obtains and holds a current and valid
chauffeur's license issued by the State of Florida. All driver's licenses for
drivers of vehicles for hire shall be submitted by the applicant to the
City's Business Tax Receipt Office at the time the individual or business
applies for or renews their business tax receipt, and throughout the year. 
All City Business Tax Receipt applicants shall supply copies of the Palm
Beach County issued Driver's Identification Badge, satisfying the
requirements pursuant to Chapter 19, Section 19-221, Palm Beach County Code
of Ordinances, as may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07)



Sec. 24-10.  Duty to give receipts.



   The driver of any vehicle for hire shall, upon request by a passenger,
provide to the passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a
mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which
shall be the name of the owner, business tax receipt number, amount of meter
reading or total charges, and date of transaction.



(Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07)



Sec. 24-11.  Refusal of passenger to pay; intent to defraud.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of
any of the vehicles for hire mentioned in this Chapter after having hired the
same, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle herein
defined with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value
of such service.



(Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04)



Sec. 24-12.  Manifests required.



      Every driver of a vehicle for hire shall maintain a daily
manifest upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing time and
place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare, and all such
completed manifests shall be returned to the owner of the vehicle for hire by
the driver at the conclusion of the driver's workday. The forms for each
manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner of the vehicle for
hire.  Every holder of a business tax receipt shall retain and preserve all
driver's manifests in a safe place for at least one (1) calendar year, and
such manifests shall be available to the City upon request.



(Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 06-096, § 2, 1-2-07)



Sec. 24-13.  Number of passengers.



   A driver of a vehicle for hire shall not permit more persons to be
carried in a vehicle for hire as passengers, than the rated seating capacity
of the vehicle for hire.



(Ord. No. 04-029, § 2, 5-4-04)



Chapter 25
TRAILERS*



   *Cross references-License tax for trailer park, § 13-22(800);
recreational vehicles and boat trailers, Ch. 20.



Sec. 25-1.  Defined.



   As used in this chapter, “trailer” shall mean any of the various
types of vehicles with motor power, or designed to be towed by another
vehicle, and adapted to human habitation either for the purpose of sleeping
or eating or the preparation of meals, or both, or designed or adapted to use
as an office or for the purpose of carrying on business.



(Code 1958, § 30-1)



Sec. 25-2.  Parking on streets.



   It shall be unlawful to park any trailer on any of the public streets
within the city for a period of time longer than one hour, and while so
parked, it shall be unlawful to prepare or serve any meals involving the
cooking of foods.



(Code 1958, § 30-2)



Sec. 25-3.  Vehicle to be attached when parked on street.



   It shall be unlawful to park on any of the public streets within the
city any detachable motor trailer unless the same shall be attached to the
vehicle designed to tow the motor trailer at all times during the period in
which the same shall be parked.



(Code 1958, § 30-7)



Sec. 25-4.  Parking interfering with traffic.



   It shall be unlawful to park any trailer on any public street within
the city in such a manner as to interfere with normal use of traffic upon the
street.



(Code 1958, § 30-6)



Sec. 25-5.  Manner of attachment to towing vehicle.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful to operate over or upon any of the
public streets of the city any detachable trailer unless the same shall be
firmly connected to the towing vehicle by some mechanically sound device to
prevent any detachment therefrom when in motion, together with an auxiliary
or independent device such as a chain or cable, which would, in the event of
a disruption of the principal towing device, prevent the trailer from being
detached from the towing vehicle.



(Code 1958, § 30-7)



Sec. 25-6.  Parking on private property.



   No trailer which is commonly used for living or sleeping purposes,
whether actually being so used or not, may be kept, maintained, parked or
occupied on any privately owned property within the city, unless the property
on which the trailer shall be situated is zoned and utilized for commercial
trailer sales or as a trailer park or camp, unless such trailer is kept
entirely within a closed building and is not used for living or sleeping
purposes, or is defined as a recreation vehicle by Chapter 20 of this Code
and is parked or stored in accordance with that chapter.



(Code 1958, § 30-3)



Sec. 25-7.  Exemption for construction trailers.



   Section 25-6 above shall not apply to the utilization of a trailer as a
temporary construction office located on a building site within the city
provided that prior to such utilization, a specific permit for same shall be
obtained from the building official. The building official shall have the
right and privilege to impose reasonable restrictions regarding the public
health, safety and welfare in connection with the issuance of such temporary
permits.



(Code 1958, § 30-3; Ord. No. 89-5, § 1, 3-21-89)



Sec. 25-8.  Placing on roof or high place.



   It shall further be unlawful to place or store any trailer or other
property upon the roof of any structure or any other high place within the
city, such practice being deemed a nuisance and hazard to inhabitants of the
city and to adjacent property.



(Code 1958, § 30-3)



Sec. 25-9.  Limitation on number of trailers on parcel of land.



   The presence of more than one trailer on the same parcel of land other
than in a properly zoned trailer park or camp for the purpose of furnishing
human, inhabitation therein, or for the purpose of carrying on any business,
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the chief of police is hereby
directed and instructed to abate the nuisance and prevent the same. A parcel
of land as above referred to is hereby designated as having ten thousand
(10,000) square feet.



(Code 1958, § 30-4)



Chapter 25.1
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Sec. 25.1-1.  Title.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Boynton
Beach Communications Facilities in Public Rights-of-way Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 3, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-2.  Intent and Purpose; Applicability to State-controlled
Rights-of-way.



   (1)   Intent and Purpose. It is the intent of the city to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare by: (a) providing for the
placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public
rights-of-way within the city; (b) adopting and administering reasonable
rules and regulations not inconsistent with state and federal law, including
F.S. § 337.401, as amended, by the Advanced Wireless Infrastructure
Deployment Act, the city’s home-rule authority, and in accordance with the
provisions of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and other federal
and state law; (c) establishing reasonable rules and regulations necessary to
manage the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the
public rights-of-way by all communications services providers; (d) protecting
the city's unique and extraordinary aesthetic qualities; and (e) minimizing
disruption to the public rights-of-way. In regulating its public
rights-of-way, the city shall be governed by and shall comply with all
applicable federal and state laws.



   (2)   State-controlled Rights-of-way. This chapter shall apply to
wireless and communications facilities in public rights-of-way under the
control and jurisdiction of the city. This article shall also apply to
wireless and communications facilities in public rights-of-way under the
control and jurisdiction of the Florida Department of Transportation,
provided that the city is authorized to apply this article under a
permit-delegation agreement between the city and Department in accordance
with F.S. § 337.401(1)(a), or as otherwise provided by law.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 4, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-3.  Definitions.



   (1)   Generally.  For the purposes of this chapter, the following
terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations and derivations shall have the
meanings given herein, unless otherwise expressly stated. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense; words in the plural number include the singular number; and
words in the singular number include the plural number; and the masculine
gender includes the feminine gender. “And” and “or” may be read
conjunctively or disjunctively. The words “shall” and “will” are
mandatory, and “may” is permissive. Unless otherwise expressly stated,
words not defined in this chapter shall be given the meaning set forth in
Title 47 of the United States Code, and, if not defined therein, their common
and ordinary meaning. References to governmental entities (whether persons or
entities) refer to those entities or their successors in authority. If
specific provisions of law referred to herein are renumbered, then the
reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered provision. References to
laws, ordinances or regulations shall be interpreted broadly to cover
government actions, however nominated, and include laws, ordinances and
regulations now in force or hereinafter enacted or amended.



   (2)   Definitions.



      Abandonment shall mean the permanent cessation of all uses of a
communications facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation
of all use of a facility within a physical structure where the physical
structure continues to be used. For example, cessation of all use of a cable
within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used, shall not be
Abandonment of a facility in public rights-of-way.



      Antenna means any transmitting or receiving device mounted on,
within, or incorporated into a  building or structure, and used in
communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital
signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), light,
wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term Antenna does not include any device
designed for over-the-air reception of radio or television broadcast signals,
or a multi-channel, multi-point distribution service.



      Applicable Codes means uniform building, fire, electrical,
plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code
organization and the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention
Code, and or local amendments to those codes enacted to address building,
accessibility and fire code standards and threats of destruction of property
or injury to persons, or local codes or ordinances adopted to implement this
subsection. The term includes objective design standards adopted by ordinance
that may require a small wireless facility to meet reasonable location
context, color, stealth, and concealment requirements. The term also includes
objective design standards adopted by ordinance that may require a new
utility pole that replaces an existing utility pole to be of substantially
similar design, material, and color, or that may require reasonable spacing
requirements concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment.



      Applicant means the person registering and applying to locate
wireless facilities in the right-of-way of the city, and includes the
applicant’s successors-in-interest and anyone owning and maintaining the
wireless facilities.



      Application means a request submitted by an application to an
authority for a permit to place or collocate wireless facilities.



      Authority means a county or municipality having jurisdiction and
control of the public rights-of-way of any public road.



      City shall mean City of Boynton Beach, Florida. Where
appropriate, the word City may refer to the City Commission or the relevant
city officer or board considering an application under this chapter.



      City-owned Facility or City-owned Structure means any facility,
structure or infrastructure to which the city holds title, easement, or a
leasehold interest, including, but not limited to, communications facilities,
utility poles, towers, buildings, and communications infrastructure,
regardless of whether located within or outside the public rights-of-way.



      City-owned Real Property means real property to which the city
holds title, easement, or a leasehold interest, but does not include the
public rights-of-way.



      Cluttered shall mean placement in a confused, disordered,
disorganized, jumbled or crowded state, which can occur when too much is
located in too small of an area, given the reasonable location context.



      Collocation means to install, mount, maintain modify, operate, or
replace one or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a
wireless support structure or utility pole. The term does not include the
installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure in the
public rights-of-way.



      Communications Services shall mean the transmission, conveyance
or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals
to a point, or between or among points, by or through any electronic, radio,
satellite, cable, optical, microwave, or other medium or method now in
existence or hereafter devised, regardless of the protocol used for such
transmission or conveyance.



      Communications Services Provider shall mean any person, including
a municipality or county, providing communications services through the
placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public
rights-of-way. Communications Services Provider shall also include any
person, including a municipality or county, that places or maintains a
communications facility in public rights-of-way, but does not provide
communications services.



      Communications Facility(ies) or Facility or System(s) shall mean
any permanent or temporary physical plant, equipment or property, including,
but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, fiber optics, poles,
antennae, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults,
drains, surface location markers, appurtenances, and other equipment or
pathway placed or maintained or to be placed or maintained in the public
rights-of-way of the city and used or capable of being used to transmit,
convey, route, receive, distribute, provide or offer communications services.
The term includes wireless facilities.



      Concealed means an ancillary structure, equipment compound, or
communications facility or area (collectively “physical improvements”)
that is not readily identifiable as such, and is designed to be aesthetically
compatible with existing and proposed building(s) and uses on and adjacent to
the proposed location of such physical improvements.



      FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.



      In Public Rights-of-way or in the Public Rights-of-way shall mean
in, on, over, under or across the public rights-of-way.



      Maintain shall mean to exercise physical control over a wireless
facility in the public rights-of-way, including ownership or the right to
maintain and repair. A person providing service only through resale or only
through use of a third party's unbundled network elements is not Maintaining
the wireless facilities through which such service is provided. The
transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of
the public rights-of-way does not constitute Maintaining facilities in the
public rights-of-way.



      Micro Wireless Facility means a small wireless facility having
dimensions no larger than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15)
inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height, and an exterior antenna,
if any, no longer than eleven (11) inches.



      Ordinance shall mean this ordinance.



      Pass-through Provider means any person who, upon registering with
the city, places or maintains a communications facility in the city’s
rights-of-way and that does not remit communications service taxes as imposed
by the city pursuant to F.S. Ch. 202.



      Permit means the public rights-of-way permit that must be
obtained before a person may construct in the public rights-of-way, and shall
include, but not be limited to, the city’s public rights-of-way engineering
and construction permits issued by the City Engineer or his or her designee.



      Person shall include any individual, child, firm, association,
joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate,
fiduciary, corporation, organization or legal entity of any kind, successor,
assignee, transferee, personal representative, all other groups or
combinations, and shall include the city to the extent the city acts as a
communications services provider



      Place or Maintain or Placement or Maintenance or Placing or
Maintaining shall mean to erect, construct, install, maintain, grade,
excavate, place, repair, extend, replace, expand, remove, occupy, locate or
relocate. A communications services provider that owns or exercises physical
control over communications facilities in public rights-of-way, such as the
physical control to maintain and repair, is Placing or Maintaining the
facilities. A party providing service only through resale or only through use
of a third party’s unbundled network elements is not Placing or Maintaining
the communications facilities through which such service is provided. The
transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of
the public rights-of-way does not constitute Placing or Maintaining
facilities in the public rights-of-way.



      Pole Attachment means any attachment of a wireless facility by a
wireless provider to an existing utility pole or structure utilized for
electric, telephone, cable television, street lights, or other lighting, and
other utilities.



      Public Rights-of-way shall mean a public right-of-way, public
utility easement, public highway, street, lane, bridge, sidewalk, road,
waterway, tunnel, alley, or similar property, regardless of which
governmental entity has jurisdiction over such, for which the city is the
authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to
such property pursuant to applicable law, and includes the surface, the air
space over the surface, and the area below the surface, to the extent the
city holds a property interest therein. Public Rights-of-way shall not
include private property. Public Rights-of-way shall not include any real or
personal city property except as described above, and shall not include city
buildings, fixtures, poles, conduits, facilities or other structures or
improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public
rights-of-way. No reference herein, or in any permit, to public rights-of-way
shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its
interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to
permit its use for such purposes, and a registrant shall be deemed to gain
only those rights to use as are properly in the city and as the city may have
the undisputed right and power to give.



      Registrant shall mean a communications services provider or other
person that has registered with the city in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



      Registration or Register shall mean the process described in this
chapter whereby a communications services provider provides certain
information to the city.



      Small Wireless Facility or Small Wireless Facilities means a
wireless facility that meets the following qualifications:



         1.   Each antenna associated with the facility is
located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or,
in the case of antennas that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of
its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six (6)
cubic feet in volume: and



         2.   All other wireless equipment associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment power transfer switches, cutoff switches, vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services, and utility poles or other
support structures.



      Stealth Design means a method of camouflaging any antenna,
wireless facilities, or other ancillary supporting communications facility,
including, but not limited to, supporting electrical, optical, or mechanical,
or other equipment which enhances compatibility with adjacent land uses and
which is visually and aurally unobtrusive. Stealth Design may include a
repurposed structure.



      Utility Pole means a pole or similar structure that is used, in
whole or in part, to provide communications services or for electric
distribution, street lights or other lighting, cable television, traffic
control, signage, or a similar function. The term includes the vertical
support structure for traffic lights, but does not include a horizontal
structure to which signal lights or other traffic control devices are
attached, and does not include a pole or similar structure fifteen (15) feet
or less in height, unless an authority grants a waiver for such.



      Wireless Facility or Wireless Facilities means equipment at a
fixed location which enables wireless communications between user equipment
and a communications network, including radio transceivers, antennas,
distributed antenna systems (“DAS”), wires, coaxial or fiber-optic cable
or other cables, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment,
regardless of technological configuration, and equipment associated with
wireless communications. The term includes small wireless facilities and
micro wireless facilities. The term does not include:



         1.   The structure or improvements on, under, within, or
adjacent to the structure on which the equipment is collocated;



         2.   Wireline backhaul facilities: or



         3.   Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between
wireless structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately
adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna.



      Wireless Infrastructure Provider means a person who has been
certificated to provide telecommunications service in the state, and who
builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless
facilities, or wireless support structures, but is not a wireless services
provider.



      Wireless Provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a
wireless services provider.



      Wireless Services means any services provided using licensed or
unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using wireless
facilities.



      Wireless Services Provider means a person who provides wireless
services.



      Wireless Support Structure means a freestanding structure, such
as a monopole, a guyed or self-supporting tower, or another existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. The term does not include a utility pole.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 5, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-4.  Registration for Placing or Maintaining Communications
Facilities in Public Rights-of-way.



   (1)   A communications services provider that desires to place or
maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the city shall
first register with the city in accordance with this chapter. Subject to the
terms and conditions prescribed in this chapter, a registrant may place or
maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way. A communications
services provider with an existing communications facility in the public
rights-of-way of the city as of the effective date of this chapter shall
comply with this chapter’s registration requirements within sixty (60) days
from the effective date of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
registration, or be in violation hereof.



   (2)   A registration shall not convey any title, equitable or legal,
to the registrant in the public rights-of-way. Registration under this
chapter governs only the placement or maintenance of communications
facilities in public rights-of-way. Other ordinances, codes or regulations
may apply to the placement or maintenance in the public rights-of-way of
facilities that are not communications facilities. Registration does not
excuse a communications services provider from obtaining appropriate access
or pole attachment agreements before locating its facilities on the city’s
or another person’s facilities. Registration does not excuse a
communications services provider from complying with all applicable city
ordinances, codes or regulations or submitting right-of-way permit
applications, including this chapter.



   (3)   Each communications services provider that desires to place or
maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the city shall
file a single registration with the city which shall include the following
information:



      (a)   Name of the applicant;



      (b)   Name, address, email address, and telephone number of
the applicant’s primary contact person in connection with the registration
and the person to contact in case of an emergency;



      (c)   Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this
chapter and acknowledgment that registrant has received and reviewed a copy
of this chapter, which acknowledgment shall not be deemed an agreement;



      (d)   A copy of the applicant’s certificate of authorization
or license to provide communications services issued by the Florida Public
Service Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or other federal
or state authority, if any; and



      (e)   For an applicant that does not provide a Florida Public
Service Commission certificate of authorization number, if the applicant or
registrant is a corporation or limited liability company, proof of authority
to do business in the State of Florida, including the number of the
certificate of incorporation.



   (4)   The Utilities and Engineering Departments shall review the
information submitted by the applicant. If the applicant submits information
in accordance with subsection (3) above, the registration shall be effective
and the city shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of registration
in writing. If the city determines that the information has not been
submitted in accordance with subsection (3) above, the city shall notify the
applicant of the non-effectiveness of registration, and reasons for the
non-effectiveness, in writing. The city shall so reply to an applicant within
thirty (30) days after receipt of registration information from the
applicant. Non-effectiveness of registration shall not preclude an applicant
from filing subsequent applications for registration under the provisions of
this section.



   (5)   Cancellation of Registration. A registrant may cancel a
registration upon written notice to the city stating that it will no longer
place or maintain any communications facilities in public rights-of-way
within the city and will no longer need to obtain permits to perform work in
public rights-of-way. A registrant cannot cancel a registration if the
registrant continues to place or maintain any communications facilities in
public rights-of-way.



   (6)   Limited Rights Conferred by Registration. Registration shall
not, in itself, establish any right to place or maintain or priority for the
placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way
within the city, but shall establish for the registrant a right to apply for
a permit, if permitting is required by the city. Registrations are expressly
subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this chapter, and
further subject to any additional city’s ordinances, as well as any state
or federal laws that may be enacted.



   (7)   A registrant shall renew its registration with the city by
April 1 of even-numbered years in accordance with the registration
requirements in this chapter. Within thirty (30) days of any change in the
information required to be submitted pursuant to subsection (3), except, as
of October 1, 2001, subsection (3)(c), a registrant shall provide updated
information to the city. If no information in the then-existing registration
has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure
to renew a registration may result in the city restricting the issuance of
additional permits until the communications services provider has complied
with the registration requirements of this chapter.



   (8)   In accordance with applicable city ordinances, codes or
regulations and this chapter, a right-of-way utilization permit and a
building permit shall be required of a communications services provider that
desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public
rights-of-way. An effective registration shall be a condition precedent to
obtaining a permit. Notwithstanding an effective registration, permitting
requirements shall continue to apply. A permit may be obtained by or on
behalf of a registrant having an effective registration if all permitting
requirements are met. Individual rights-of-way permits shall be obtained from
the Department of Engineering on appropriate form currently in use.



   (9)   City-owned Structures, Facilities, and Real Property. The city
may construct or designate existing city-owned structures, facilities, and
real property, within the public rights-of-way, including any accompanying
equipment or communications facilities necessary to provide communications
services via such structures, facilities, or real property, for the purpose
of housing privately or publicly owned antennas and other communications
facilities, or to provide communications services to, or support the
provision of communications services by, providers of communications services
within the city. The city may also allow the placement of an antenna or other
communications facility upon a city-owned structure or real property, or
otherwise allow the use of city-owned facilities outside of the
rights-of-way, upon such terms as the city may deem acceptable, in writing,
and subject to such rental, use, utility, license, or other fees as may be
consistent with the law and established by the City Commission via resolution



      (a)   In the interests of facilitating the safe, efficient,
and aesthetically desirable use of the public rights-of-way, and to otherwise
avoid the negative effects upon the public welfare of, and address safety
concerns relating to, proliferation of structures within the rights-of-way,
the city may, in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory manner, offer
to an applicant who wishes to install, construct, place, or maintain an
antenna or other communications facility in the public rights-of-way, to
place or collocate such antenna or communications facility upon or within a
city-owned structure outside of the rights-of-way where feasible. Such
antenna or communications facility shall meet the requirements of this
chapter.



      (b)   The city reserves and does not waive any right that the
city may have in its capacity as a property owner or utility provider with
respect to city-owned structures, facilities, and real property, and may
exercise control over such to the extent not prohibited by law. When the city
allows the placement of communications facilities upon, or the use of,
city-owned structures, facilities, and real property, the city shall be
deemed to be acting within its proprietary capacity or capacity as a utility
provider, as appropriate and otherwise consistent with the law. The
provisions of this article shall not limit the city’s discretion with
respect to the use, installation, construction, placement, or maintenance of
city-owned structures, facilities, and real property, subject to F.S. §
337.401(7)(f).



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 6, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-5.  Transfer, Sale or Assignment of Assets in Public Rights-of-way.



   (1)   If a registrant transfers, sells or assigns its assets located
in public rights-of-way incident to a transfer, sale or assignment of the
registrant’s assets, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall be obligated
to comply with the terms of this chapter. Written notice of any such
transfer, sale or assignment shall be provided by such registrant to the city
within twenty (20) days after the effective closing date of the transfer,
sale or assignment. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is a current
registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee is not required to
re-register. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is not a current
registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee shall register, as
provided in Section 25.1-4, within sixty (60) days of the transfer, sale or
assignment.



   (2)   If permit applications are pending in the registrant’s name,
the transferee, buyer or assignee shall notify the Engineering and Utilities
Departments that the transferee, buyer or assignee is the new applicant.



   (3)   Any encumbrance on the communications facilities of the
registrant in the public rights-of-way shall be subject and subordinate to
the rights of the city under this chapter  and applicable law.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 7, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-6.  Placement or Maintenance of a Communications Facility in
Public Rights-of-way.



   (1)   Prohibitions.



      (a)   No communications services facilities or other
communications facilities shall be installed in the city’s rights-of-way
without a right-of-way utilization permit.



      (b)   Wireless facilities, other than small wireless
facilities and micro wireless facilities, are prohibited within the public
rights-of-way.



      (c)   To comply with clear zone requirements and the safe
operation of traffic control, no wireless facilities or other communications
facilities shall be closer than eight (8) feet from the street curb or edge
of pavement if no curb is present.



      (d)   Wireless facilities are prohibited within the public
rights-of-way of roadways and railways under the jurisdiction and control of
the Florida Department of Transportation, unless approved by the city, as
provided in any agreement between the city and the Florida Department of
Transportation.



      (e)   Wireless facilities are prohibited on arms used to
support or mount traffic control signals and warning signals, and on arms
attached to utility poles.



      (f)   Wireless facilities are prohibited in the rights-of-way
of any geographic area approved as an historic district either by the city,
the State of Florida, or listed on the National Register of Historic Places
that were adopted by ordinance on or before April 1, 2017, unless:



         1.   The city’s Historic Preservation Board recommends
approval of the method to deploy the wireless facilities in stealth so as not
to detract from contributing historic structures and the ambiance of the
district; and



         2.   The city accepts the recommendation and approves of
the application.



      (g)   Wireless facilities are prohibited on utility poles or
similar structures fifteen (15) feet or less in height, unless incorporated
into and hidden in the pole under a top-mounted street light.



      (h)   Wireless facilities may not block or interfere with the
view of signs of commercial businesses or street signs.



      (i)   Wireless facilities, excluding micro wireless
facilities, shall not be suspended on cables strung between existing utility
poles in the city.



   (2)   The applicant, or the applicant’s successor, must agree to
remove the wireless facilities at any time if warranted by public health or
safety as determined by the city.



   (3)   Grounds for Denial. The city may deny a proposed collocation
of a small wireless facility in the public rights-of-way if the applicant
fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, or if the proposed
collocation:



      (a)   Materially interferes with the safe operation of traffic
control equipment;



      (b)   Materially interferes with sight lines or clear zones
for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes;



      (c)   Materially interferes with compliance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act, or similar federal or state standards and regulations
regarding pedestrian access or movement;



      (d)   Materially fails to comply with the most current edition
of the “Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation
Manual”; or



      (e)   Fails to comply with applicable codes.



   (4)   A registrant or an applicant shall at all times comply with
and abide by all applicable provisions of state, federal and local law and
city ordinances, codes and regulations in placing or maintaining a
communications facility in public rights-of-way. The burden of proof shall at
all times be on an applicant to establish compliance with requirements under
this chapter and state and federal law.



   (5)   A registrant shall not place, commence to place or maintain a
communications facility in public rights-of-way until all applicable permits,
if any, have been issued by the city or other appropriate authority, except
in the case of an emergency. No wireless facility shall operate unless the
city has conducted a final inspection and issued a certificate of completion
pursuant to the Florida Building Code as adopted and amended.



      (a)   The term Emergency shall mean a condition that affects
the public’s health, safety or welfare, which includes an unplanned
out-of-service condition of a preexisting service.



      (b)   Registrant shall provide prompt notice to the city of
the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public
rights-of-way in the event of an emergency, and shall be required to obtain
an after-the-fact permit within thirty (30) days, if a permit would have
originally been required to perform the work undertaken in public
rights-of-way in connection with the emergency.



      (c)   Registrant acknowledges that, as a condition of granting
such permits, the city may impose reasonable rules or regulations governing
the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public
rights-of-way. Permits shall apply only to the areas of public rights-of-way
specifically identified in the permit.



      (d)   Further, once the emergency is abated, the
communications facility placed in the public right-of-way during the
emergency shall be removed, unless permitted without the emergency as a basis.



   (6)   Application Review; Decisions; Time Frames; Permit Duration.



      (a)   Notification of Completeness. Within fourteen (14) days
after receiving an application, the city shall determine and notify the
applicant, by electronic mail to the email address provided in the
application, as to whether the application is complete. If an application is
deemed incomplete, the city shall specifically identify the missing
information. An application is deemed complete if the city does not provide
notification to the applicant within fourteen (14) days.



      (b)   Application Review Period. The city shall approve or
deny an application within sixty (60) days after receipt of the complete
application, or it is deemed approved in accordance with F.S. § 337.401. If
the city does not use the thirty (30) day negotiation period provided in
subsection (7), Alternative Collocations, the parties may mutually agree to
extend the sixty (60) day application review period. The city shall grant or
deny the application at the end of the extended period.



      (c)   Permit Duration. A right-of-way utilization permit
issued pursuant to an approved application shall remain in effect for one (1)
year unless extended by the city.



      (d)   Notification Procedure.



         1.   The city shall notify the applicant of approval or
denial by electronic mail. The city shall approve a complete application
unless it does not meet the applicable codes.



         2.   If the application is denied, the city will specify
in writing the basis for denial, including the specific code provisions on
which the denial was based, and send the documentation to the applicant by
electronic mail on the day the city denies the application.



      (e)   Opportunity to Cure Deficiencies. The applicant may cure
the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the application within
thirty (30) days after notice of the denial is sent to the applicant. If the
curative information is not provided within such time frame, the application
will be considered withdrawn or closed. The city shall approve or deny the
revised application within  thirty (30) days after receipt or the
application is deemed approved. Any subsequent review shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial.



      (f)   Consolidated Applications. An applicant may file a
consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of
up to thirty (30) small wireless facilities. If the application includes
multiple small wireless facilities, the city may separately address small
wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been
received or which have been denied.



   (7)   Alternative Collocations.



      (a)   If an applicant seeks to place a wireless facility upon
a city utility pole or seeks to install a new utility pole, the city may,
within fourteen (14) days after the date that a wireless facility application
is filed, request that the proposed location of the wireless facility be
moved to another location in the right-of-way and placed on an alternative
utility pole or support structure or may place a new utility pole, including
for aesthetic or public safety reasons, or a location outside the
right-of-way on city-owned structures or property in accordance with Section
25.1-4 . The city may offer an alternative location in the right-of-way for a
wireless facility for health, safety, general welfare, or aesthetic reasons.



      (b)   The city and the applicant may negotiate the alternative
location, including any objective design standards and reasonable spacing
requirements for ground-based equipment, for thirty (30) days after the date
of the request. At the conclusion of the negotiation period, if the
alternative location is accepted by the applicant, the applicant must notify
the city of such acceptance, and the application shall be deemed granted for
any new location for which there is agreement and all other locations in the
application. If an agreement is not reached, the applicant must notify the
city of such non-agreement and the city shall grant or deny the original
application within ninety (90) days after the date the application was filed.



      (c)   A request for an alternative location, an acceptance of
an alternative location, or a rejection of an alternative location shall be
in writing and provided by electronic mail.



   (8)   Application Requirements.



      (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, a permit to
construct or install wireless facilities or other communications facilities
in the public rights-of-way shall not be granted except upon administrative
review and approval pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.



      (b)   As part of any permit application to place a new or
replace an existing communications facility in public rights-of-way, the
registrant shall provide the following:



         1.   Plans Submittal. For each proposed wireless
facility location, submit plans, signed and sealed by a Florida-registered
professional engineer, or prepared by a person who is exempt from such
registration requirements as provided in F.S. § 471.003, showing:



            a.   The location of each proposed communications
facility;



            b.    True-to-scale site plan depicting all
physical improvements, including property lines within a forty (40) foot
radius;



            c.   A graphical depiction of each proposed
communications facility to be installed;



            d.   The size of each proposed communications
facility;



            e.   The specifications for each communications
facility; and



            f.   Existing utilities in the immediate vicinity.



         2.   The plans shall be in a hard copy format or an
electronic format specified by the city, provided such electronic format is
maintained by the registrant. Such plans in a format maintained by the
registrant shall be provided at no cost to the city. The plans shall be in a
digitized format, showing the two-dimensional location of the facilities,
based on the city’s geographical database, or other format acceptable to
the city. The city shall maintain the confidentiality of such plans and any
other information provided in accordance with F.S. § 202.195, as it may be
amended.



         3.   If the actual installation deviates or will deviate
from the submitted plans due to unforeseen conditions or any other reason,
the registrant shall promptly provide revised plans.



         4.   A description of the manner in which the facility
will be installed (i.e., anticipated construction methods or techniques);



         5.   A description of the stealth design techniques
proposed to minimize the visual impact of the wireless communications
facility;



         6.   A traffic plan for maintenance of any disruption of
the public rights-of-way;



         7.   Information on the ability of the public
rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed facility, if available (such
information shall be provided without certification as to correctness, to the
extent obtained from other persons;



         8.   If appropriate given the facility proposed, an
estimate of the cost of restoration to the public rights-of-way;



         9.   The timetable for construction of the project, or
each phase thereof, and the areas of the city which will be affected;



         10.   A one-hundred-fifty-dollar ($150.00) collocation
fee per wireless facility per year for attachments to an authority pole; and



         11.   Such additional information that the city finds
reasonably necessary, with respect to the placement or maintenance of the
communications facility that is the subject of the permit application, to
review such permit application.



   (9)   Factors Considered in Granting Permit. In addition to any
applicable requirements or standards imposed by this Code of Ordinances, the
following factors shall be considered in determining whether to issue a
permit to a registrant to place or maintain a communications facility within
the public rights-of-way, consistent with the requirements of F.S. §
337.401(7).



      (a)   Height and dimensions of the proposed communications
facility;



      (b)   Proximity of the communications facility to residential
structures and residential district boundaries, and the uses on those
properties;



      (c)   Surrounding topography, tree coverage and foliage;



      (d)   Compliance with the objective design standards set forth
herein, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the
effect of concealing, reducing, or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;



      (e)   Proposed ingress and egress (where applicable);



      (f)   The location context must be reasonable. Proximity to
other structures within the rights-of-way cannot create a hazardous or safety
condition;



      (g)   Proximity to and/or interference with other private or
public uses within or outside the rights-of-way, including, but not limited
to, utilities, easements, traffic control devices, and other uses;



      (h)   Suitability of the right-of-way, or the proposed section
of the right-of-way, for the proposed communications facility, with reference
to safety, engineering, and/or aesthetic concerns; and



      (i)   Any other requirements set forth in this chapter.



   Based upon a review of these factors, the city may still utilize the
alternative collocation process as provided in subsection (7) herein.



   (10)   Non-interference; Encouraged Technology; Additional
Regulations.



      (a)   All communications facilities shall be placed and
maintained so as not to interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by
the public, and with the rights and convenience of property owners who adjoin
any of the public rights-of-way.



      (b)   All facilities shall be placed underground to the extent
that similarly situated utilities (electric, communications, etc.) are so
required. The registrant shall be liable for the displacement, damage or
destruction of any property, irrigation system or landscaping as a result of
the placement or maintenance of its facility within the public rights-of-way.
All facilities shall be placed underground to the extent not inconsistent
with the rules of the Public Service Commission. The use of trenchless
technology (i.e., directional bore method) for the installation of facilities
in the public rights-of-way, as well as joint trenching or the collocation of
facilities in existing conduit, is strongly encouraged, and shall be employed
wherever feasible. Notwithstanding the foregoing, small wireless facilities
and micro wireless facilities and their associated support structures are
exempt from this undergrounding requirement.



      (c)   The city may promulgate additional reasonable rules and
regulations concerning the placement or maintenance of a communication
facility in public rights-of-way consistent with this chapter and other
applicable law.



   (11)   Requirements for Wireless and Communications Facilities.
Wireless and communications facilities shall be placed in the public
rights-of-way pursuant to the following requirements:



      (a)   Any aesthetic requirements and provisions of this
chapter governing antennas shall apply to wireless and communications
facilities located within the right-of-way,



      (b)   It is strongly encouraged that wireless and
communications facilities be concealed and utilize stealth design, as defined
by chapter. Such stealth design and concealment shall eliminate the need to
locate any ground or elevated equipment on the exterior of a pole or other
structure, in order to preserve and promote the unique aesthetic character of
the city.



      (c)   In order to avoid the clustering of multiple items of
approved ground equipment or elevated equipment in a single area, only one
(1) equipment box may be located in any single wireless and communication
facility location. Where an applicant demonstrates that undergrounding and
stealth design and concealment goals cannot be employed under this
subsection, and the city agrees with such demonstration, the individual,
approved exterior equipment boxes or containment devices shall not exceed
twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume, and the configuration and dimensions
of such shall be the least visually obtrusive as possible. The use of foliage
and vegetation or other concealment method around any approved equipment may
be required by the city, based on conditions of the specific area where the
equipment is to be located.



      (d)   Insofar as wireless facilities are constructed
underground, the wireless infrastructure provider shall become a member of,
and maintain membership in Florida utility notification one (1) call system.
Wireless facilities shall have five (5) foot horizontal clearance from other
underground utilities and their appurtenances, unless applicant can
demonstrate compliance with all applicable codes and noninterference with
existing underground facilities.



   (12)   Objective Design Standards.



      (a)   Wireless facilities shall meet the following reasonable
location, context, color, stealth, and concealment requirements. Design
standards may be waived if the city determines that the design standards are
not reasonably compatible for the particular location of a wireless facility,
or that the design standards impose excessive expense in relation to the
aesthetic concerns of the city. The waiver shall be granted or denied within
forty-five (45) days after the date of the request.



         1.   Any above-ground wireless facilities shall meet
stealth design requirements.



         2.   Wireless facilities may increase the height of a
metal street light pole only if the antenna is top-mounted and not wider than
the pole, or if the antenna is hidden in a cylinder that appears like an
original part of the pole. A cellular antenna shall not extend more than ten
(10) feet above the utility pole or structure upon which the wireless
facility is to be collocated.



         3.   A new utility pole that replaces an existing
utility pole shall be of substantially similar design, material, and color as
the existing utility pole, unless the existing pole is made of wood, which is
no longer permitted.



         4.   The antennas and related equipment shall be in a
color that will provide the most camouflage as determined by the city. 
Ground-based wireless facilities shall be painted forest green, unless
determined otherwise by the city. When on a black pole, wireless facilities
shall be painted black, unless determined otherwise by the city.



         5.   Wires serving the wireless facilities must be
concealed within or flush-mounted to the pole on which the facilities are
collocated, and insulated in accordance with applicable codes.



      (b)   Antennas placed upon structures within the rights-of-way
must meet the following additional requirements if stealth design,
concealment, and this chapter’s requirements regarding such cannot be met:



         1.   Top-mounted antennas and their enclosures must not
extend more than one quarter of the diameter of the supporting structure,
beyond edge of the supporting structure at the level of antenna attachment.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city will permit the antenna and enclosure
so long as they meet the volumetric requirements provided in state law; and



         2.   For public safety purposes, under no circumstances
shall antennas be mounted less than twelve (12) feet above ground level.



         3.   Provide photographs and graphic or simulated
renderings, as follows:



            a.    Photographs clearly showing the nature and
location of the site where each wireless or other communications facility is
proposed to be located, including photographs showing the location and the
relationship of the communication facility to adjacent properties;



            b.    True-to-scale graphic depictions or
simulated renderings accurately representing the visual impact of the
wireless communications facilities when viewed from the street and from
adjacent properties.



      (c)   Street light fixtures with stealth wireless facilities
are encouraged to meet the following standards:



         1.   On street lights, luminaires and bases should be
roughly equal in size and volume for a balanced appearance.



         2.   The decorative base of a street light should be
between ten percent (10%) and twenty-five percent (25%) of the pole height.



         3.   The length of arms extending from the base should
be between twenty percent (20%) and twenty-five percent (25%) of pole height.



         4.   Arms should extend from the pole at a location
within twenty percent (20%) of pole height from the top of the pole.



         5.   Street light fixtures must meet AASHTO structural
guidelines for roadway application and ANSI requirements for vibrations.



         6.   New or replacement poles that support wireless or
communications facilities shall match the style, design, and color of the
utility poles in the surrounding area.



      (d)   Size and Height Requirements. Pole height shall be
measured from the ground to the top of the utility pole, which measurement
shall include any antennas built into or appended to the utility pole. The
size and height of new wireless or communications facilities in the
rights-of-way shall be no greater than the maximum size and height of any
other utility or light poles located in the same portion of the right-of-way
within the city other than a utility pole for which a waiver has previously
been granted, measured from grade in place within five hundred (500) feet of
the proposed location of the small wireless facility. If there is no utility
pole within five hundred (500) feet, the height of the utility pole shall be
limited to fifty (50) feet; provided, however, that applicants proposing
wireless or communications facilities with antennas to be located on existing
poles or other structures may increase the height of the existing pole or
other structure up to ten (10) feet, if necessary, to avoid adversely
affecting existing pole attachments. Additionally, the overall height, above
ground, of any wireless or communications facility shall not exceed forty
(40) feet, or the existing height of other utility or light poles located in
the same portion of the right-of-way, whichever height is less.



      (e)   Setback Requirements.



         1.   Wireless and communications facilities shall be
located at least ten (10) feet from a driveway, at least ten (10) feet from
the edge of existing trees twelve (12) inches or greater in diameter, at
least twenty-five (25) feet from a traffic signal pole unless mounted upon
such traffic signal pole, and at least fifteen (15) feet from any pedestrian
ramp and eight (8) feet from the street curb. The city may require greater
setbacks from these and other fixtures in the right-of-way, to ensure proper
sight lines for public safety purposes, and in other cases as deemed
necessary to advance the purposes of this article.



         2.   If the right-of-way is within or abuts a
residential zoning district, wireless communication facilities must be
located where the shared property line between two (2) residential parcels
intersects the right-of-way, whenever possible, unless an unsafe condition,
cluttered appearance, or other violation of this article would result.



         3.   If the right-of-way is within or abuts a
nonresidential district, wireless facilities must be located between tenant
spaces or adjoining properties where their shared property lines intersect
the right-of-way, whenever possible, unless an unsafe condition, cluttered
appearance, or other violation of this article would result.



      (f)   Waiver. The City Engineer may waive any requirement
under this section if the city determines that such requirement is not
reasonably compatible for the particular location of a small wireless
facility, or that such requirement imposes an excessive expense, or where the
waiver serves the intent or purposes of this chapter. The waiver shall be
granted or denied within forty-five (45) days after the date of the request.



   (13)   New Structures; Availability of Alternatives.  For the
placement of any new utility poles, pole-type structures, or other
freestanding structure associated with any communications facility, the city
shall have the right to utilize the alternative collocation process as
provided in subsection (7) of this section, and as provided in F.S. §
337.401(7).



   (14)   Limitations; No Property Right. A permit from the city
constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities in public
rights-of-way in accordance with this chapter, and does not create a property
right or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an
interest in the public rights-of-way.



   (15)   Construction; Maintenance; Safety; Restoration and Inspection.



      (a)   A registrant shall maintain its communication facility
in public rights-of-way in a manner consistent with accepted industry
practice and applicable law.



      (b)   All safety practices required by applicable law or
accepted industry practices and standards shall be used during the placement
or maintenance of communications facilities.



      (c)   After the completion of any placement or maintenance of
a communication facility in public rights-of-way, or each phase thereof, a
registrant shall, at its own expense, restore the public rights-of-way to at
least its original condition before such work. If the registrant fails to
make such restoration within thirty (30) days, or such longer period of time
as may be reasonably required under the circumstances, following the
completion of such placement or maintenance, the city may perform such
restoration as it deems necessary and charge all costs of the restoration
against the registrant in accordance with F.S. § 337.402, as it may be
amended. For twelve (12) months following the original completion of the
work, the registrant shall guarantee its restoration work and shall, at its
own expense, correct any improper restoration work that does not satisfy the
requirements of this chapter.



      (d)   In connection with excavation in the public
rights-of-way, a registrant shall, where applicable, comply with the
Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act set forth in F.S. Ch.
556, as it may be amended.



      (e)   A registrant shall use and exercise due caution, care
and skill in performing work in the public rights-of-way and shall take all
reasonable steps to safeguard work site areas. The person constructing,
installing, and maintaining wireless facilities must be a licensed
electrician, certified to work as a lineworker, or successfully complete an
accredited lineworker apprenticeship program.



      (f)   A registrant shall not place or maintain its
communications facilities so as to interfere, displace, damage or destroy any
utilities, including, but not limited to, sewers, gas or water mains, storm
drains, pipes, cables or conduits of the city or any other person’s
facilities lawfully occupying the public rights-of-way of the city.



      (g)   The city shall have the right to make such inspections
of communications facilities placed or maintained in public rights-of-way as
it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. In the event the
city determines that a violation exists with respect to registrant’s
placement or maintenance of facilities in the public rights-of- way that is
not considered to be an emergency or danger to the public health, safety or
welfare, the city will provide registrant at least three (3) days written
notice, setting forth the violation and requesting correction.



   (16)   Modifications; Removal and Relocation; Antenna Co1locations.



      (a)   The grant of a permit under this chapter shall not limit
the authority and discretion of the city to regulate and control the public
rights-of-way, and the city may at any time require the removal or relocation
of a communications facility within the rights-of-way in the interests of the
public welfare, health, or safety, or as otherwise authorized by law. The
wireless facilities provider must remove its wireless facilities within
thirty (30) days of notice that the city will remove a utility pole.



      (b)   Removal or relocation at the direction of the city of a
registrant's communications facility in public rights-of-way shall be
governed by applicable requirements of F.S. §§ 337.403 and 337.404, as they
may be amended, in addition to any other applicable city regulations or
provisions of law. Unless otherwise provided by law, this City Code, or
agreement, a registrant shall bear all costs of any removal or relocation of
its facilities.



      (c)   Coordination of Work; Work Schedule. In the interest of
the public’s health, safety and welfare, upon request of the city, and as
notified by the city of the other work, construction, installation or repairs
referenced below, a registrant shall coordinate placement or maintenance
activities under a permit with any other work, construction, installation or
repairs that may be occurring or scheduled to occur within a reasonable time
frame in the subject public rights-of-way. The city may require registrant to
alter its placement or maintenance schedule as the city determines to be
reasonably necessary so as to minimize disruptions and disturbance in the
public rights-of-way. The city may provide a more definite time frame based
on individual city construction or maintenance schedules.



      (d)   No Warranties; Vacation of Rights-of-way. The city makes
no warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability, or
availability of the city’s public rights-of-way, city-owned structures, and
city-owned real property for the registrant’s communications facilities and
any performance of work. Costs incurred by registrant or provision of
services shall be at registrant’s sole risk. Nothing in this chapter shall
affect the city’s authority to add to, vacate or abandon public
rights-of-way, or add vehicular travel lanes. The city makes no warranties or
representations regarding the availability of any added, vacated or abandoned
public rights-of-way for communications facilities.



      (e)   Alteration of Rights-of-way; Other Work and Facilities
in Rights-of-way.



         1.   The city reserves the right to place and maintain,
and permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm
drainage, communications, and other types of facilities, cables or conduit,
and to do, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead
installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the
city in public rights-of-way occupied by the registrant.



         2.   Registrant shall, if registrant so agrees, allow
the city facilities to be collocated within the city’s public rights-of-way
through the use of a joint trench during registrant’s construction project.
Such joint trench projects shall be negotiated in good faith by separate
agreement between registrant and the city, and may be subjected to other city
rights-of-way requirements.



         3.   The city further reserves, without limitation, the
right to alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation,.
relocation, or width of the public rights-of-way within the limits of the
city and within said limits as same may from time to time be altered.



         4.   A registrant shall, on the request of any person
holding a permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its
communications facilities to permit the work authorized by the permit. The
expense of such temporary raising or lowering of facilities shall be paid by
the person requesting the same, and the registrant shall have the authority
to require such payment in advance. The registrant shall be given not less
than thirty (30) days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary
relocation. If the city requests a temporary raising or lowering of a
facility for a public purpose, the city shall not be charged for the
temporary raising or lowering of the facility, subject to F.S. §§ 337.403
and 337.404.



      (f)   Replacement and Maintenance of Wireless Facilities.



         1.   The city shall not require approval or require fees
or other charges for:



            a.   Routine maintenance;



            b.    Replacement of existing wireless facilities
with wireless facilities that are substantially similar or of the same or
smaller size; or



            c.    Communications service provider authorized
to occupy the rights-of-way and who is remitting taxes under F.S. Ch. 202: or



            d.   Installation, placement, or replacement of
micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cable strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with applicable codes, by or for a communications
services provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way and who is remitting
taxes under F.S. Ch. 202.



         2.   Notwithstanding this paragraph, for public safety
the wireless provider must give reasonable notice to the City Engineer before
undertaking the activities of replacement or maintenance, and a right-of-way
permit shall be required for work that involves excavation, closure of a
sidewalk, or closure of a vehicular lane.



      (g)   Additional Authority; Permit Conditions. To the extent
not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law and this chapter, the city
shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
communications facilities within all or parts of the public rights-of-way.
The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the grant of a permit, in
addition to the specific requirements of this code, as deemed appropriate to
advance the intent or purposes of this chapter.



      (h)   The approval of the installation, placement,
maintenance, or operation of a small wireless facility or other wireless
facility pursuant to this chapter does not authorize the installation,
placement, maintenance, or operation of any communications facilities other
than small wireless facilities in the right-of-way.



      (i)   Make-Ready Work for Collocation.



         1.   For a city utility pole that does not support an
aerial facility used to provide communications services or electric service,
the applicant seeking to collocate a small wireless facility shall provide a
make-ready estimate, at the applicant’s expense, for the work necessary to
support the small wireless facility, including pole replacement, and perform
the make-ready work. If pole replacement is required, the scope of the
make-ready estimate is limited to the design, fabrication, and installation
of a utility pole that is substantially similar in color and composition. The
city shall not condition or restrict the manner in which the applicant
obtains, develops, or provides the estimate or conducts the make-ready work
subject to usual construction restoration standards for work in the
right-of-way. The replaced or altered utility pole shall remain the property
of the city.



         2.   The city shall not require more make-ready work
than is required to meet applicable codes or industry standards.



         3.   Fees for make-ready work shall not include costs
related to preexisting damage or prior noncompliance. Fees for make-ready
work, including any pole replacement, shall not exceed actual costs or the
amount charged to communications service providers other than wireless
services providers for similar work and shall not include any consultant fee
or expense.



         4.   Fees for make-ready work must be paid to the city,
even if they exceed the applicant’s estimate, before the wireless
facilities may be operational.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 8, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-7.  Suspension of Permits.



   (1)   Subject to Section 25.1-8 below, the Director of Engineering,
or his or her designee, may suspend a permit for work in the public
rights-of-way for one (1) or more of the following reasons:



      (a)   Failure to satisfy permit conditions, including
conditions set forth in this chapter or other applicable city ordinances,
codes or regulations governing placement or maintenance of communications
facilities in public rights-of-way, including, without limitation, failure to
take reasonable safety precautions to alert the public of work at the work
site, or to restore any public rights-of-way;



      (b)   Misrepresentation or fraud by registrant in a
registration or permit application to the city;



      (c)   Failure to properly renew or ineffectiveness of
registration;



      (d)   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as may be
lawfully required by the city;



      (e)   Failure to commence work within one hundred eighty (180)
days of securing permit; or



      (f)   Abandonment of project or suspension of work for more
than one hundred eighty (180) days.



   (2)   After the suspension of a permit pursuant to this section, the
Director of Engineering, or his or her designee, shall provide written notice
of the reason for the suspension to the registrant.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 9, 7-3-01)



Sec. 25.1-8.  Appeals.



   (1)   Final, written decisions of the Director of Engineering, or
his or her designee, suspending or denying a permit, denying an application
for a registration, or denying an application for renewal of a registration
are subject to appeal, as set forth in Chapter 1, Article VII, of the
city’s Land Development Regulations, as amended.



   (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall effect the remedies the city has
available under applicable law.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 10, 7-3-01)



Sec. 25.1-9.  Conditional Use of Public Rights-of-way.



   (1)   In the event registrant desires to use its existing facilities
or to construct new facilities for the purpose of providing other utility or
non-utility services to existing or potential consumers or resellers, by
providing any other services other than the provision of communications
service, or for providing any other use to existing or potential consumers, a
registrant shall seek such additional and separate authorization from the
city for such activities as may be required by applicable law.



   (2)   To the extent that a registrant leases or otherwise uses the
facilities of a person that is duly registered or otherwise authorized to
place or maintain facilities in the public rights-of-way of the city,
registrant shall make no claim, nor assert any right, which will impede the
lawful exercise of the city's rights, including requiring the removal of such
facilities from the public rights-of-way of the city, regardless of the
effect on registrant's ability to place or maintain its own communications
facilities in public rights-of-way of the city.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 11, 7-3-01)



Sec. 25.1-10.  Involuntary Termination of Registration.



   (1)   The city may terminate a registration if:



      (a)   A federal or state authority suspends, denies, or
revokes a registrant's, certification or license to provide communications
services;



      (b)   The registrant's placement or maintenance of a
communications facility in the public rights-of-way presents an extraordinary
danger to the general public or other users of the public rights-of-way and
the registrant fails to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written
notice; or



      (c)   The registrant ceases to use all of its communications
facilities in public rights-of-way and has not complied with Section 25.1-17
of this chapter.



   (2)   Prior to termination, the registrant shall be notified by the
Director of Engineering, or his or her designee, with a written notice
setting forth all matters pertinent to the proposed termination action,
including which of (a) through (c) above is applicable as the reason
therefore, and describing the proposed action of the city with respect
thereto. The registrant shall have thirty (30) days after receipt of such
notice within which to address or eliminate the reason or within which to
present a plan, satisfactory to the Director of Engineering, or his or her
designee, to accomplish the same. If the plan is rejected, the Director of
Engineering, or his or her designee, shall provide written notice of such
rejection to the registrant and shall make a recommendation to the City
Commission regarding a final decision as to termination of registration. A
decision by the city to terminate a registration may only be accomplished by
an action of the City Commission. A registrant shall be notified by written
notice of any decision by the City Commission to terminate its registration.
Such written notice shall be sent within seven (7) days after the decision.



   (3)   In the event of termination, the former registrant shall: (a)
notify the city of the assumption or anticipated assumption by another
registrant of ownership of the registrant’s communications facilities in
public rights-of-way; or (b) provide the city with an acceptable plan for
disposition of its communications facilities in public rights-of-way. If a
registrant fails to comply with this subsection, the city may exercise any
remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to,
taking possession of the facilities, requiring the registrant’s bonding
company, within ninety (90) days of the termination, to remove some or all of
the facilities from the public rights-of-way and restore the public
rights-of-way to its original condition before the removal, or requiring that
some or all of the facilities be removed and the public rights-of-way
restored to its original condition before the removal at the registrant’s
expense.



   (4)   In any event, a terminated registrant shall take such steps as
are necessary to render safe every portion of the communications facilities
remaining in the public rights-of-way of the city.



   (5)   In the event of termination of a registration, this provision
does not permit the city to cause the removal of any communications
facilities that are used to provide another service for which the registrant
holds a valid certification or license with the governing federal or state
agency, where required, and is properly registered with the city for such
certificated or licensed service, where required.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 12, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-11.  Existing Communications Facilities in Public Rights-of-way.



   (1)   A communications services provider with an existing
communications facility in the public rights-of-way of the city has sixty
(60) days from the effective date of this chapter to comply with the terms of
this chapter.



   (2)   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all
communications facilities placed in the public rights-of-way on or after May
1, 2018, the effective date of Ordinance No. 18-005, and shall apply to all
existing communications facilities placed in the public rights-of-way prior
to May 1, 2018, to the full extent permitted by federal and state law, except
that any provision of this chapter regarding the size, stealth design,
concealment, or location of communications facilities shall not apply to
existing communications facilities lawfully placed within the public
rights-of-way prior to May 1, 2018, to the extent that such communications
facilities may be maintained, repaired, and replaced with  communications
facilities substantially similar in size and for the same purpose.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 13, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-12.  Insurance.



   (1)   A registrant shall provide, pay for, and maintain satisfactory
to the city an acceptable policy, or policies, of liability insurance,
including comprehensive general liability insurance, products/completed
operations liability, personal injury liability, owners and contractors
protective liability, broad form property damage, contractual liability,
automobile liability (owned, non-owned and hired automobiles), workers’
compensation and employee liability. A registrant shall not commence
construction, operation or maintenance of the facility without obtaining all
insurance required under this section and approval of such insurance by Risk
Management of the city, nor shall a registrant allow any contractor or
subcontractor to commence work on its contract or subcontract until all
similar such insurance required of the same has been obtained and approved.
The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire period
the registrant has facilities in the public rights-of-way, and for a period
thereafter, as specified in the minimum coverages described below. If the
registrant, its contractors or subcontractors do not have the required
insurance, the city may order such entities to stop operations until the
insurance is obtained and approved.



   (2)   All liability policies shall provide that the city is an
additional insured as to the activities under this chapter. The required
coverages must be evidenced by properly executed certificates of insurance
forms. The certificates must be signed by the authorized representative of
the insurance company and shall be filed and maintained with the city
annually. Certificates of insurance, reflecting evidence of the required
insurance, shall be filed with the Risk Manager Coordinator. For entities
that are entering the market, the certificates shall be filed prior to the
commencement of construction and once a year thereafter, and as provided
below in the event of a lapse in coverage. For entities that have facilities
in the public rights-of-way as of the effective date of this chapter, the
certificate shall be filed within sixty (60) calendar days of the adoption of
this chapter, annually thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a
lapse in coverage.



   (3)   These certificates of insurance shall contain a provision that
coverages afforded under these policies will not be canceled until at least
forty-five (45) calendar days prior written notice has been given to the
city. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under
the laws of the State of Florida. Financial ratings must be no less than
“A-VI” in the latest edition of “Best’s Key Rating Guide,”
published by A.M. Best Guide.  The insurance requirements may be satisfied
by evidence of self-insurance with sufficient financial strength and reserves
or other types of insurance acceptable to the city. Self-insured status must
be confirmed with certification of same by presentation of financial
statements which are not more than one (1) year old and signed by the
registrant’s Chief Financial Officer or designee. Information contained
therein is subject to review and approval by city’s Risk Management
Division.



   (4)   In the event that the insurance certificate provided indicates
that the insurance shall terminate or lapse during the period of this
contract, then in that event, the registrant shall furnish, at least thirty
(30) calendar days prior to the expiration of the date of such insurance, a
renewed certificate of insurance of equal and like coverage.



   (5)   The insurance policy or policies shall contain contractual
liability insurance naming the city as an insured, and shall also insure
against the types of liabilities covered by the indemnification and hold
harmless provisions of Section 25.1-13.



   (6)   A registrant and its contractors or subcontractors engaged in
work on the operator’s behalf in, on, under or over public rights-of-way,
shall maintain the following minimum insurance:



      (a)   Comprehensive general liability insurance to cover
liability bodily injury and property damage. Exposures to be covered are:
premises, operations, products/completed operations, and certain contracts.
Coverage must be written on an occurrence basis, with the following limits of
liability:



         1.   Bodily injury.



            a.   Each occurrence   $1,000,000



            b.   Annual aggregate   $3,000,000



         2.   Property damage.



            a.   Each occurrence   $1,000,000



            b.   Annual aggregate   $3,000,000



         3.   Personal injury.



            Annual aggregate   $3,000,000



         4.   Completed operations and products liability shall
be maintained for two (2) years after the abandonment of the facility by the
registrant (in the case of the registrant) or completion of the work for the
registrant (in the case of a contractor or subcontractor).



         5.   Property damage liability insurance shall include
coverage for the following hazards: X - explosion, C - Collapse, U -
underground.



      (b)   Workers’ compensation insurance shall be maintained to
comply with statutory limits for all employees, and in the case any work is
sublet, each registrant shall require the subcontractors similarly to provide
workers’ compensation insurance for all the latter’s employees, unless
such employees are covered by the protection afforded by each registrant.
Each registrant and its contractors and subcontractors shall maintain
employer’s liability insurance. The following limits must be maintained:



         1.   Workers’ compensation   Statutory



         2.   Employer’s liability   $ 500,000 per occurrence



      (c)   Comprehensive auto liability.



         1.   Bodily injury.



            a.   Each occurrence   $1,000,000



            b.   Annual aggregate   $3,000,000



         2.   Property damage.



            a.   Each occurrence   $1,000,000



            b.   Annual aggregate      $3,000,000



         Coverage shall include owned, hired and non-owned vehicles.



   (7)   Each communications facility operator shall hold the city, its
agents and employees, harmless on account of claims for damages to persons,
property or premises arising out of its construction, operation or repair of
its communications facility, and name the city as an additional insured.



   (8)   Thirty (30) days advance written notice by registered,
certified or regular mail, as determined by the city, must be given to the
city of any cancellation, intent not to renew, or reduction in the policy
coverages.



   (9)    This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the
city’s rights, privileges and immunities as set forth in F.S. § 768.28.
Insurance under this section shall run continuously with the presence of the
registrant’s facilities in the public rights-of-way, and any termination or
lapse of such insurance shall be a violation of this section and subject to
the remedies as set forth herein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
may, in its sole discretion, require increased or decreased levels of
insurance for any other object placed in the city’s public rights-of-way by
way of individual license agreements.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 14, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-13.  Indemnification.



   (1)   A registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
hold harmless, and defend the city, its officials, boards, members, agents,
and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action,
proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and
expenses incurred by the city arising out of the placement or maintenance of
its communications system or facilities in public rights-of-way, regardless
of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter, provided, however, that a registrant’s
obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the negligence,
gross negligence or wanton or willful acts of the city. This provision
includes, but is not limited to, the city’s reasonable attorneys’ fees
and costs incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings.
The city agrees to notify the registrant, in writing, within a reasonable
time of the city receiving notice, of any issue it determines may require
indemnification. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from
participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and at its
own cost, if, in the city’s reasonable belief, there exists or may exist a
conflict, potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. Nothing contained
in this section shall be construed or interpreted:



      (a)   As denying to either party any remedy or defense
available to such party under the laws of the State of Florida;



      (b)   As consent by the city to be sued; or



      (c)   As a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver
provided in F.S. § 768.28, as it may be amended.



   (2)   The indemnification requirements shall survive and be in
effect after the termination or cancellation of a registration.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 15, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-14.  Construction Bond.



   (1)   Prior to issuing a permit, the city may require a construction
bond to secure the restoration of the public rights-of-way, and the removal
of abandoned equipment or equipment not removed after termination of
registration or non-renewal of the annual permit.



   (2)   In the event a registrant subject to such a construction bond
fails to complete the work in a safe, timely and competent manner in
accordance with the provisions of the permit, there shall be recoverable,
jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages
or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any
compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any
property of the registrant, or the cost of completing the work, plus a
reasonable allowance for attorney’s fees, up to the full amount of the bond.



   (3)   No less than twelve (12) months after completion of the
construction and satisfaction of all obligations in accordance with the bond,
the registrant may request the Director of Engineering to remove the
requirement to continue the construction bond. Notwithstanding, the city may
require a new bond for any subsequent work performed in the public
rights-of-way.



   (4)   The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a
minimum rating of A-1 in Best’s Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty
Edition”; shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney; and shall
provide that:



   “For twelve (12) months after its issuance, this bond may not be
canceled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty (60) days after receipt by the
city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from
the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew.”



   (5)   The rights reserved by the city with respect to any
construction bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all
other rights and remedies the city may have under this section, or at law or
equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the
construction bond will affect any other right the city may have.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 15, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-15.  Security Fund.



   At or prior to the time a registrant receives its first permit to place
or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way after the
effective date of this chapter, the registrant may be required to file with
the city, for city approval, an annual bond, cash deposit or irrevocable
letter of credit in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) having
as a surety a company qualified to do business in the State of Florida, and
acceptable to the city, which shall be referred to as the "security fund."
The security fund shall be conditioned on the full and faithful performance
by the registrant of all requirements, duties and obligations imposed upon
registrant by the provisions of this chapter. The bond or guarantee shall be
furnished annually or as frequently as necessary to provide a continuing
guarantee of the registrant's full and faithful performance at all times. In
the event a registrant fails to perform its duties and obligations imposed
upon the registrant by the provisions of this chapter, subject to the
provisions of Section 25.1-15 of this chapter, there shall be recoverable,
jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages
or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any
compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any
property of the registrant, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees,
up to the full amount of the security fund. The city may at its reasonable
discretion accept a corporate guarantee of the registrant or its parent
company, if the registrant is a publicly traded company and maintains an
insurance rating of no less than A.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 17, 7-3-01)



Sec. 25.1-16.  Enforcement Remedies.



   (1)   A registrant’s failure to comply with provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the
registrant to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in 
F.S. Ch. 162, F.S. § 166.0415 and Sections 2-72 et. seq. of the City Code of
Ordinances, as they may be amended. In addition, violation of this chapter
may be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500), or by
imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both as provided.



   (2)   In addition to any other remedies available at law, including,
but not limited to, F.S. § 166.0415, and F.S. Ch. 162, or equity or as
provided in this chapter, the city may apply any one (1) or combination of
the following remedies in the event a registrant violates this chapter, or
applicable local law or order related to the public rights-of-way:



      (a)   Failure to comply with the provisions of the chapter or
other law applicable to occupants of the public rights-of-way, may result in
imposition of penalties to be paid by the registrant to the city in an amount
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100) per day, or part thereof, that
the violation continues.



      (b)   In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the city
may seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction.



   (3)   Before imposing a fine pursuant to this section, the City
Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall give written notice of the
violation and its intention to assess such penalties, which notice shall
contain a description of the alleged violation. Following receipt of such
notice, the registrant shall have thirty (30) days to either:  (a) cure the
violation to the city’s satisfaction and the city shall make good faith
reasonable efforts to assist in resolving the violation; or (b) file an
appeal with the city to contest the alleged violation. Section 25.1-8 of this
chapter shall govern such appeal. If no appeal is filed and if the violation
is not cured within the thirty (30) day period, the city may collect all
fines owed, beginning with the first day of the violation, through any means
allowed by law.



   (4)   In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the
city shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or
persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy
required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as
the city determines are appropriate to the public interest.



   (5)   Failure of the city to enforce any requirements of this
chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the city’s right to enforce that
violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate
enforcement remedies.



   (6)   In any proceeding before the city where there exists an issue
with respect to a registrant’s performance of its obligations pursuant to
this chapter, the registrant shall be given the opportunity to provide such
information as it may have concerning its compliance with the terms and
conditions of this chapter. The city may find a registrant that does not
demonstrate compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter in
default and apply any one or combination of the remedies otherwise authorized
by this chapter or other applicable laws, ordinances, regulations or city
codes.



   (7)   The City Manager, or a designee, shall be responsible for
administration and enforcement of this chapter, and is authorized to give any
notice required by law.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 18, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-17.  Abandonment of a Communications Facility.



   (1)   Upon abandonment of a communications facility owned by a
registrant in public rights-of-way, the registrant shall notify the city
within ninety (90) days.



   (2)   The city may direct the registrant by written notice to remove
all or any portion of such abandoned communications facility, at the
registrant’s sole expense, if the city determines that the abandoned
facility’s presence interferes with the public health, safety or welfare,
which shall include, but is not limited to, a determination that such
facility:  (a) compromises safety at any time for any public rights-of-way
user or during construction or maintenance in public rights-of-way; (b)
prevents another person from locating facilities in the area of public
rights-of-way where the abandoned facility is located when other alternative
locations are not reasonably available; (c) creates a maintenance condition
that is disruptive to the public rights-of-way’s use; or (d) removal of the
communications facility would improve or enhance the city's aesthetics. In
the event of (b), the city may require the third person to coordinate with
the registrant that owns the existing facility for joint removal and
placement, where agreed to by the registrant.



   (3)   In the event that the city does not direct the removal of the
abandoned facility, the registrant, by its notice of abandonment to the city,
shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion
of the facility by the city, or another person at such third party’s cost.



   (4)   If the registrant fails to remove all or any portion of an
abandoned facility as directed by the city within a reasonable time period as
may be required by the city under the circumstances, the city may perform
such removal and charge the cost of the removal against the registrant or any
successor in interest to the registrant.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 19, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-18.  Force Majeure.



   (1)   In the event a registrant’s performance of or compliance
with any of the provisions of this chapter is prevented by a cause or event
not within the registrant’s control, such inability to perform or comply
shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a
result, provided, however, that such registrant uses all practicable means to
expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For
purposes of this chapter, causes or events not within a registrant’s
control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes,
landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public
enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints
imposed by order of a governmental agency or court.



   (2)   Causes or events within registrant’s control, and thus not
falling within this section, shall include, without limitation,
registrant’s financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship,
and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of registrant’s
directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 20, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-19.  Reports and Records.



   (1)   Each registrant shall, upon thirty (30) calendar days written
notice, if reasonably possible, but in no event less than five (5) business
days written notice, provide the city access to all books and records related
to the construction, maintenance, or repair of the facility, to the extent
the city review of the books and records is necessary to manage its
rights-of-way.



   (2)   Any and all non-proprietary or non-confidential books and
records may be copied by the city. To the maximum extent permitted by F.S. §
202.195, as amended, such books and records shall be kept confidential and
exempt from the provisions of F.S. § 119.07(1). A registrant is responsible
for obtaining or maintaining the necessary possession or control of all books
and records related to the construction, maintenance or repair of the
facility, so that it can produce the documents upon request. Books and
records must be maintained for a period of five (5) years, except that any
record that is a public record must be maintained for the period required by
state law.



   (3)   For purposes of this section, the term Books and Records shall
be read expansively to include information in whatever format stored. Books
and records requested shall be produced to the city at City Hall, except by
agreement.



   (4)   If any books and records are too voluminous, or for security
reasons cannot be copied and moved, then a registrant may request that the
inspection take place at some other location mutually agreed to by the city
and the registrant, provided that the registrant must make necessary
arrangements for copying documents selected by the city after its review; and
the registrant must pay all travel and additional copying expenses incurred
by the city in inspecting those documents or having those documents inspected
by its designee.



   (5)   Without limiting the foregoing, a registrant shall provide the
city the following within ten (10) calendar days of their receipt or (in the
case of documents created by the registrant or its affiliate) filing:



      (a)   Notices of deficiency or forfeiture related to the
operation of the facility; and



      (b)   Copies of any request for protection under bankruptcy
laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy by the operator
or by any partnership or corporation that owns or controls the operator
directly or indirectly.



   (6)   In addition, the city may, at its option, and upon reasonable
notice to the registrant, inspect the facilities in the public rights-of-way
to ensure the safety of its residents.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 21, 7-3-01)



Sec. 25.1-20.  Reservation of Rights and Remedies.



   (1)   The city reserves the right to amend this chapter as it shall
find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers.



   (2)   This chapter shall be applicable to all communications
facilities placed in the public rights-of-way on or after the effective date
of this chapter and shall apply to all existing communications facilities in
the public rights-of-way prior to the effective date of this chapter, to the
full extent permitted by state and federal law.



   (3)   The adoption of this chapter is not intended to waive any
rights or defenses the city may have under any existing franchise, license or
other agreements with a communications services provider.



   (4)   Nothing in this chapter shall affect the remedies the city has
available under applicable law.



   (5)   Any person who uses the communications facilities of a
registrant, other than the registrant that owns the facilities, shall not be
entitled to any rights to place or maintain such facilities in excess of the
rights of the registrant that places or maintains the facilities.



(Ord. No. 01-29, § 22, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Sec. 25.1-21.   Pass-through Provider Fees and Charges.



   (1)   Pass-through providers shall pay to the city on an annual
basis an amount equal to five hundred dollars ($500) per linear mile, or
portion thereof, of communications facilities placed and/or maintained in the
city's rights-of-way. For purposes of this section, the city's rights-of-way
do not include rights-of-way that extend in or through the city, but are
state, county or another authority’s roads or rights-of-way.



   (2)   The amounts charged pursuant to this section shall be based on
the linear miles of rights-of- way where a wireless communications facility
is placed, not based on a summation of the lengths of individual cables,
conduits, strands or fibers. Multiple cables, conduits, strands, or fibers
located within the same conduit shall be considered one (1) communications
facility for purposes of this subsection.



   (3)   Any annual amount charged shall be reduced for a prorated
portion of any twelve (12) month period during which the pass-through
provider remits taxes imposed by the city pursuant to F.S. Ch. 202.



   (4)   Fees for Non-collocated Communications Facilities.



      (a)   Fees for non-collocated communications facilities may be
charged to any person not a dealer of communications services as defined by
F.S. § 202.11.



      (b)   Annual payments shall be due and payable on April 1 of
each year. Failure to timely pay the annual payment shall result in the
immediate forfeiture of all rights to locate any wireless equipment in the
city rights-of-way and all wireless equipment shall be removed within thirty
(30) days at the wireless infrastructure provider’s expense. Fees not paid
shall bear interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month from the date
due until the wireless equipment is removed. The acceptance of any payment
required hereunder by the city shall not be construed as an acknowledgment
that the amount paid is the correct amount due, nor shall such acceptance of
payment be construed as a release of any claim which the city may have for
additional sums due and payable. All fee payments shall be subject to audit
by the city, and assessment or refund if any payment is found to be in error.
If such audit results in an assessment by and an additional payment to the
city, such additional payment shall be subject to interest at the rate of one
percent (1%) per month until the date payment is made.



   (5)   Collocation Fees.



      (a)   The wireless infrastructure provider shall remit a
one-hundred-fifty-dollar ($150.00) collocation fee per wireless facility to
the city with the application to pay for the first year’s fee for
collocating small wireless facilities on a city utility pole.



      (b)   The wireless infrastructure provider shall remit a
one-hundred-fifty-dollar ($150.00) collocation fee per wireless facility to
the city within thirty (30) days of the anniversary of the approval of the
collocation. Failure to timely pay the collocation fee shall result in the
immediate forfeiture of all rights to collocate on the city utility pole, and
any wireless equipment collocated on the utility pole shall be removed within
thirty (30) days at the wireless provider's expense.



   (6)   Fees for City Connections. The city reserves the right to
assess pole connection fees or other fees for the use of city employees and
contractors, as well as fees for access to any fiber network the city may
construct.



   (7)   Permit Fees. The wireless infrastructure provider shall remit
with its application all appropriate fees as provided herein, and as
consistent with F.S. § 337.401(7), as may be amended from time to time.



   (8)   If the payments required by this section are not timely made
by the due date, the city may withhold the issuance of any permits, including
for other wireless facilities, to the registrant until the amount past due is
paid in full.



(Ord. No. 18-005, § 2, 5-1-18)



Chapter 26
WATER, SEWERS AND
CITY UTILITIES



Art. I.    In General, §§ 26-1—26-9



Art. II.   Extensions, Replacements and Additions, §§ 26-10—26-37



   Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 26-10—26-26



   Div. 2.   Cumulative Provisions for Expansion of Water and Sewer
Systems, §§ 26-27—26-37



Art.  III.   Water Shortage Plan, §§ 26-38—26-55



Art. IV.   Sewers, §§ 26-56—26-111



   Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 26-56—26-72



   Div. 2.   Reserved, §§ 26-73—26-99



   Div. 3.   Reserved, §§ 26-100—26-111



   Div. 4.   Industrial and Commercial Waste, §§ 26-112—26-203



      Subdiv. A.   General, §§ 26-112—26-124



      Subdiv. B.   Private Sewage Disposal System, §§
26-125—26-130



      Subdiv. C.   Installation and Connections, §§ 26-131—26-139



      Subdiv. D.   Use of Public Sewers, §§ 26-140—26-147



      Subdiv. E.   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, §§
26-148—26-155



      Subdiv. F.   Reporting, Inspections, and Monitoring, §§
26-156—26-159



      Subdiv. G.   Waste Discharge Permits, §§ 26-160, 26-161



      Subdiv. H.   User Charge and Industrial Cost Recovery System,
§§ 26-162—26-166



      Subdiv. I.   Administration, §§ 26-167—26-170



      Subdiv. J.   Violations, remedies, §§ 26-171—26-204



Art. V.   Cross-Connection Control and Backflow Prevention, §§
26-205—26-299



Art. VI.   Stormwater System, §§ 26-300—26-399



Art. VII.   Stormwater Utility Fees, §§ 26-400—26-499



Art. VIII.   Reclaimed Water, §§ 26-500—26-521



   *Cross references-Utilities department, § 2-3; operating capital
improvements fund, § 2-14; plumbing generally, § 5-28 et seq.; collection
and disposal of refuse by city, § 10-22 et seq.; sewer systems in
subdivisions, App. C, Art. IX, § 10 ; water systems in subdivisions, App. C,
Art. IX, § 15.



 


Notes

App. C, Art. IX, § 10 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor

App. C, Art. IX, § 15. 
This cross reference does not exist in the code.

   - Folio Legal Editor



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Secs. 26-1—26-6. Reserved.



Sec. 26-7.   Lien for unpaid charge; liability for charges.



   (a)   Lien when customer is owner of property. In addition to any
other remedy provided in this chapter, when the customer is the owner of the
property, the city shall have a lien against the property serviced for any
and all unpaid fees and charges authorized for the city's water, sewer,
stormwater, reclaimed water system. The city may record the lien in the
public records of Palm Beach County, Florida. The lien shall be coequal with
the lien of all county and municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other
liens, titles and claims, until paid. Such lien when delinquent for more than
30 days may be foreclosed by the city in the manner provided by the laws of
Florida for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property. The city shall be
entitled to recover costs and a reasonable attorney's fee incurred in
foreclosing any such lien. No change of occupancy or ownership shall affect
the lien.



   (b)   Lien when customer is tenant. When the customer is a tenant,
the city shall have a lien against the leasehold interest and the tenant's
personal property on the premises for all unpaid fees and charges. The city
may record the lien in the public records of Palm Beach County, Florida. The
lien shall be coequal with the lien of all county and municipal taxes,
superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and claims, until paid. The
city shall be entitled to recover costs and a reasonable attorney's fee
incurred in foreclosing any such lien. The city shall not impose a lien
against the rental property for any unpaid utility charges incurred by a
former occupant except to the extent that the present tenant or owner
directly benefited from the services provided to the former occupant. It is
presumed that a property owner benefit from the city providing utilities to
the former occupant unless the property owner following the city's notice of
intent to file a lien, submits an affidavit and supporting documents to the
city establishing the following, when applicable:



      (1)   The lease agreement, in effect during the time period
the delinquency accrued, contained a provision or addendum which required the
tenant/former occupant to pay the utilities; and



      (2)   The property owner had no knowledge that utility
payments were in arrears;



      (3)   The property owner received no rent payment during the
time period the delinquency accrued; and



      (4)   The property owner did not have a security deposit or
the security deposit was applied to delinquent rent; and



      (5)   Prior to the time period the delinquency accrued, the
property owner legally conveyed all of his/her/its interest in the respective
property to an unassociated individual or entity.



   The owner of a rental unit shall be responsible for all fees and
charges for the rental property until such time as the tenant applies for
service and tenders the required deposit. Any charges prior to the current
tenant's application and deposit and subsequent to the former tenant's
termination shall be the responsibility of the owner. The city shall have a
lien against the property serviced for all unpaid fees and charges during the
period of the owner's responsibility as stated in subsection (a) of this
section.



   (c)   Liability for charges; civil actions. The customer applying
for utility service shall be personally liable to the city for the payment of
all fees and charges. In addition to all other remedies, including the lien
and foreclosure remedies set forth in (a) and (b) above, the city shall have
the authority to recover from the customer in a civil legal action all unpaid
fees, charges and penalties and the costs and a reasonable attorney's fee
incurred in any such action, including those incurred while on appeal.
Additionally, the customer shall be liable for any administrative costs the
city incurs in collection of the account.



   (d)   An administrative fee of $125.00 shall be charged to the
customer whenever the city records a lien against the property serviced for
unpaid water, sewer, stormwater, reclaimed water rates, fees and charges.



(Ord. No. 16-005, § 3, 3-1-16)



Sec. 26-8.  Water and sewer connection, deposit and service charges.



   There is hereby established a fee structure for water and sewer
service, field visits, meter connections and deposits, and miscellaneous
services as set forth below:



 

Field Visit Services
 
Charge Per Occurrence




Field visit (Including, but not limited to: initial read on, initial read
shut, final read on, final read shut, temporary disconnects, non-emergency
shut off for repair, customer requested meter locates, and installation,
movement, or removal of hydrant/construction meters.)
 
$20


   Turn-on after hours
 
$55


   Turn-off after hours
 
$55


Meter test (Based on meter size)*
 


   ¾”
 
$130


   1"
 
$150


   1½”
 
$206


   2"
 
$230


   3" and above
 
$515


Re-read* (customer request)
 


   Residential
 
$30


   Commercial/Multi-Family
 
$40


Water shut-off charge for non-payment
 
$40


Labor charge for meter upgrades
 
$60


Flow test*
 
$30


Dishonored checks
 
$25


Late payment
 
$10




 



*No charge if meter error, city's error, or substandard flow rate is
detected. Any adjustments to the utility bill will be no more than three (3)
months.



Customer Tampering/Damages



The Utilities Department is authorized to collect expenses for damages to
meters/service by customers. If damages result from tampering, a per hour
rate for staff time and material will be applied.  All charges will be
assessed to the account where tampering/damages occurred.



      Charge Per Occurrence



   Unauthorized reconnection of service    $150



   Pulled meter / reinstallation (In addition to the unauthorized
reconnection of service charge for instances in which unauthorized
connections cannot be securely disconnected due to tampering and/or damages
or inability to lock the meter.)   $50



   Field Visit Services   Charge Per Occurrence



   Illegal meter bypass (For theft of service after meter has been pulled
or if jumper lines are used around existing meter. This charge may be applied
alone or in addition to other tampering charges.)   $150



 


Meter Connection Charges




Meter Size (in inches)

 

Inside City

 

Outside City

 

Deposit






5/8 and 3/4

 

$220

 

$275

 

$100




1

 

$255

 

$315

 

$125




1 1/2

 

$455

 

$565

 

$250




2

 

$530

 

$660

 

$400




3

 

Furnished and installed by and at the expense of customer

 

$750




4

 

Furnished and installed by and at the expense of customer

 

$1,250




6

 

Furnished and installed by and at the expense of customer

 

$2,500




8

 

Furnished and installed by and at the expense of customer

 

$4,000





 



 


Construction Meters




Meter Size (in inches)

 

Penalty for Nonread/month

 

Deposit




3/4

 

$25

 

$100




1

 

$25

 

$100




1 1/2

 

$25

 

$200




2

 

$25

 

$200




Hydrant meter

 

$150

 

$600




 



   If the customer requests to increase the size of his water meter to a
size greater than originally installed, the customer shall pay only the
differential cost between the original meter and the cost of the new meter
for both the connection and deposit charges.



(Ord. No. 90-35, § 2, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 02-045, § 2, 8-20-02; Ord. No.
09-019, § 2, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 12-007, § 2, 6-5-12)



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 90-35, §§ 2, 3, adopted Sept. 18, 1990,
provided for the inclusion of provisions pertaining to water and sewer
service charges and monthly rates. Such provisions, designated as §§ 26-36
and 26-37, have been redesignated by the editor as §§ 26-8 and 26-9, for
purposes of classification.



Sec. 26-8.1   Water and sewer deposits; accounts, credits, termination and
re-connection.



   (a)   Accounts.  All utility deposits collected by the city
pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained in a non-interest bearing
account.



   (b)   Credits on deposits for residential customers.  On December
1st of each year the city will refund utility deposits to residential
customers who have maintained a consecutive twelve (12) month satisfactory
payment record and have established services for a consecutive twenty-four
(24) month period.  Accounts classified as commercial are not eligible for
refunds described in section (b) hereof prior to termination of service. 
For purposes of this section a "satisfactory payment record" shall mean that
the customer:



      (1)   Has not made more than one late payment after the
expiration of 30 days from the date of mailing.



      (2)   Has not paid with a check refused by the bank.



      (3)   Has not been disconnected for non-payment.



      (4)   Has not tampered with the meter.



      (5)   Has not used service in a fraudulent or unauthorized
manner.



   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if subsequent to the refund of the
deposit to the residential customer, the customer shall become delinquent for
a period in excess of 30 days the city may require the customer to pay a new
deposit within 15 days of written notice.  Said deposit shall also be
subject to refund in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (c)   Termination of service.  Upon termination of service the
deposit, if not already refunded to the customers account, shall be credited
against the final bill and the balance, if any, shall be returned to the
customer in the form of a check.



   (d)   Re-connection.  Customer shall be required to place a new
deposit on account according to the then current rate upon reconnection to
the city system. 



   (e)   Billing for utility service for parcels that will receive both
water and sewer service shall commence on the first day that either a sewer
connection is made, or the water meter is set in place. Billing for parcels
receiving sewer service shall commence on the day that the sewer service line
is connected to the City's utility system.  For initial billing periods of
less than thirty (30) days, the base facility charge will be pro-rated by
multiplying the standard base facility charge by the number of days the
service was provided, and then dividing by thirty (30).



   (f)   Base facility charge.  The base facility charge is defined as
the monthly base fee charged per unit that shall be levied upon the
initiation of service.  The base facility charge is used to defray those
non-consumption related operational expenses such as salaries, debt service,
meter reading, billing and maintenance activities associated with the City's
utility department, that are incurred regardless of water usage.



   (g)   Temporary account activation for purpose of property
inspection. Customer shall be required to open a new account including a
deposit under current rates. All charges will be applied in same manner as
they are for all new accounts.



(Ord. 95-32, § 1, 9-19-95; Ord. No. 00-54, § 2, 10-17- 00; Ord. No. 12-007,
§ 3, 6-5-12)



Sec. 26-8.2   Water Service/Annexation Agreements.



   The City Manager or Utilities Director is authorized to execute
individual Owner Water Service/Annexation Agreements. The Release of a Water
Service/Annexation Agreement requires City Commission approval.



(Ord. No. 17-006, § 2, 2-21-17)



Sec. 26-9.  Water and wastewater rates and charges.



   (a)   The monthly rates and charges for water and wastewater shall
be reviewed annually by the Utilities Management and the rates set by the
Commission during the annual budget process. Such rates shall become
effective on October 1 of each fiscal year. Unless otherwise agreed, rates
for customers outside the city are set twenty-five percent (25%) higher.



   (b)   The maximum sewer commodity charge for residential customers
(in city or outside city) will be based upon a maximum sewer usage of seven
thousand (7,000) gallons per month. Commercial accounts will be billed sewer
charges based upon total water usage.



   (c)   For multi-family and commercial buildings (in city or outside
city) in which several units are serviced by a single meter, the base
facility charge per meter shall be calculated by multiplying the number of
units times the standard base charges for water, sewer and stormwater.  The
billing for consumption shall similarly be calculated by dividing the total
monthly consumption for each meter by the number of units, in order to
determine the billing rate and amount per unit, which is then multiplied by
the number of units on each meter.  Billing for utility services for
multi-unit parcels shall commence on the first day that either a sewer
connection is made or a water meter is set in place.



   (d)   If the utility account is temporarily disconnected, there
shall continue to be a minimum charge for water and wastewater billed monthly
and calculated at the base rate for the applicable billing category.



(Ord. No. 90-35, § 3, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 94-30, § 1, 9-20-94; Ord. No.
00-54, § 3, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 02-045, § 3, 8-20-02; Ord. No. 07-023, §§
2, 3, 9-2-07; Ord. No. 09-019, §§ 3, 4, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 09-037, § 2,
8-4-09; Ord. No. 11-022, § 2, 10-4-11; Ord. No. 18-020, § 2, 9-20-18)



   Note-See the editor's note following § 26-8.



ARTICLE II. EXTENSIONS, REPLACEMENTS AND ADDITIONS



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 26-10.  Definitions.



   The following definitions of words and phrases shall apply in
interpreting this article:



   Facilities shall mean the existing sewer and water systems of the city.



   Off-site shall mean the area up to the point or points of joining of
the facilities to the system.



   System shall mean the sanitary sewerage collection system and all
facilities incident thereto, and all water mains and distribution lines and
appurtenances incident thereto within a development.



   Water main shall mean and refer to the water main owned, operated and
maintained by the city.



(Code 1958, § 30B-2; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-11.  Plans and specifications to be approved by city officers.



   In connection with the installation and construction of any extension,
replacement or addition to the existing municipal utility systems, including
but not limited to sewer and water, whether such extension, replacement or
addition is within or outside the territorial limits of the municipality, or
whether such extension, replacement or addition is to be publicly or
privately owned and maintained, it shall be mandatory that prior to issuance
of any building permit for the system itself or structures to be located
within any proposed building project, as more particularly described
hereinafter, or other authorization to proceed be granted, in connection with
such project or projects, that the plans and specifications for such
extension, replacement or addition be approved by the office of the city
manager, the utilities director, the city's engineers, and the chief of the
fire department.



(Code 1958, § 30B-1; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-12.  Approval of plans by state.



   Subsequent to the foregoing municipal officials approving such plans
and specifications for proposed additions, replacements or extensions to the
municipal utility systems, same shall be approved by the Palm Beach County
Health Department, Florida Department of Environmental Regulation prior to
issuance of construction permits.



(Code 1958, § 30B-1; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-13.  Supervision when work not done by city; deposit required.



   Where such extension, replacement or addition is to be constructed
and/or financed by private developers, rather than municipal forces, or their
supervised agents or contractors, such private developer shall coordinate all
installations with the municipal utilities department, in order to insure
supervision of such installation by a duly authorized supervisor or
supervisors designated by said officials, at all stages of construction, in
order that such installation is made in full compliance with approved plans
and specifications. It shall be a further and additional requirement that
prior to issuance of any project building permit or installation permit for
any project involving extension, replacement or addition to any municipal
utility system, the total cost of supervision by the city be paid by the
developer and that a sum sufficient to cover such cost as estimated by the
municipal utilities director be deposited with the city by the private
developer prior to issuance of said permits.



(Code 1958, § 30B-1; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-14.  Certification that bills paid prerequisite to approval by city.



   Prior to final acceptance of any project described hereinabove, the
city shall be furnished with an affidavit from the developer that all bills
for labor, services and materials incurred by the developer in connection
with subject installation project have been paid in full.



(Code 1958, § 30B-1; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-15.  Approval of utility service provision prerequisite to building
permit for development.



   Any proposed building project or development to be located within the
city involving commercial and industrial units or more than two ((2)
residential units, shall be considered to involve the general public welfare
and interest and as such, no building permit will be issued therefor by the
building department unless and until plans and specifications for additions
to the municipal utility systems, as hereinabove described, indicating the
manner in which said project shall be serviced utility-wise have been
approved by the municipal officers above indicated and it shall be mandatory
that any changes or alterations in said proposed plans and specifications
designated by said officials be effected prior to issuance of subject permits.



(Code 1958, § 30B-1; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-16.  Prerequisites to approval of development permit.



   In connection with review of any proposed plans or specifications above
described by the designated municipal officials, the following shall be
determined:



   (a)   That the size, location and design of the pipes, pumps, lift
stations or piping intended to serve the area shall be sufficient to insure
adequate flow and pressure, based upon the size, height and density of the
subject development. In addition, it shall be affirmatively determined that
the off-site utilities are sized to comply with the Master Comprehensive
Utilities Plan of the city; provided, however, that if said compliance
requires any oversizing of the pipes or piping necessary to serve the subject
development, the developer (or developers) by joint written agreement with
the City shall finance the needed areas' off-site utilities to a capacity
necessary to serve the property of the developer (or developers) in accord
with the master plan and; any oversizing of said off-site utilities
constructed in accord with the master plan shall be initially financed by the
developer (or developers) unless, in response to the developer's request, the
city council agrees to fund the oversizing costs in an amount equal to the
oversizing costs plus fifteen (15) percent administrative cost to be paid by
the developer (or developers); additionally provided that the owner may pay
the costs of such oversizing with such costs to be accounted as a credit
against the owner's capital facilities charge pursuant to section 30B-4(G)
hereof. In addition, the proposed system shall provide adequate fire
prevention needs and adequate safeguards in the proposed system to provide
emergency service in the event of accidental breakage and loss of pressure
within said system as determined by the city.



   (b)   That the proposed water system contains sufficient provision
for fire hydrants with relation to distance between said hydrants and
proximity to structures within the proposed development. Further, that said
hydrants will be located at points within the proposed development to enable
ready and direct access by mechanical apparatus of the municipal fire
department or if within the county, the appropriate fire district.



   (c)   The size, type, number and method of installation of any water
meter or meters proposed to be installed or added to the municipal water
utility system in connection with any building project as hereinabove
described, shall be determined and approved prior to installation thereof by
the municipal utilities director. In addition, all required water meters
serving the proposed development shall be placed at locations which will
enable municipal personnel to efficiently service and read said meters and
developer shall grant permission and legal authority to the city for the
purpose of city personnel having access to said meters.



   (d)   It is not the intent of this chapter to guarantee, for an
extended period of time, adequate capacity to serve the developer's (or
developers') property, however, the written agreement to be executed with the
city will state the time period of the guarantee. The capital facility charge
will remain as it is at the time of the execution of this agreement during
the time period of the guarantee and will thereafter be as from time to time
amended.



   (e)   The capital facility charge credits will be separately
accounted for in either the water portion or the sewer portion of the city's
utility fund, and will not be interchangeably used toward the other's
obligation.



(Code 1958, § 30B-1; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Secs. 26-17—26-26. Reserved.



DIVISION 2. CUMULATIVE PROVISIONS FOR EXPANSION OF WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS



Sec. 26-27.  Scope.



   The city has accepted the responsibility to provide water and sewerage
services within its “area” as a regional service agency as designated by
the Palm Beach County Area Planning Board; roughly from the Atlantic Ocean
and west to the E-3 canal, and from Hypoluxo Road on the north, south to the
north city limits of Delray or as specifically delineated by the area
planning board.



(Code 1958, § 30B-3; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-28.  Feasibility study.



   When a developer and/or property owner requests in writing utilities
service from the city, a feasibility study, the cost of which shall be borne
entirely by the developer and/or property owner, for the extension of
utilities shall be conducted by the city's engineers. Said feasibility study
shall include an analysis and estimate of:



   (a)   Projected operation costs;



   (b)   Projected maintenance costs;



   (c)   Projected revenue, related to this project.



   The city council shall authorize such feasibility study when the
developer and/or property owner shall escrow with the city monies sufficient,
in the discretion of the city, to conduct said feasibility study.



(Code 1958, § 30B-4; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-29.  Proposal and approval.



   (a)   All projects submitted by the developer after a feasibility
study and/or property owner proposing any improvement, extension or expansion
of any system shall be approved by the city manager, utility director and the
city's engineers. Any proposal will be in writing, describing in detail the
purpose, scope and an analysis of the feasibility of the project.



   (b)   Detailed plans and specifications may also be requested.



   (c)   The city manager, in conjunction with the city's engineers,
shall, within thirty (30) days, approve plans, or deny any proposals if:



      (1)   The proposal fails to comply with a requirement of the
city code or authorized regulations, or



      (2)   The proposal will result in an economic operating loss
to the city, or



      (3)   The proposal does not comply with the city's master
comprehensive utilities plan.



      (d)   Any denial may be appealed to the city council.



   (e)   If no city water: A sewerage system proposal to extend sewer
service to any area not served, and not to be concurrently served by the
city's water system, may be initiated only after approval by the city council.



   (f)   If no city sewerage system: A water system proposal to extend
water service to any area not served, and not to be concurrently served by
the city's sewerage system, may be initiated only after approval by the city
council.



(Code 1958, § 30B-4; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-30.  Responsibility for design.



   (a)   The city's engineers will design both the water treatment
plant, raw water supply facilities and the sewage treatment plant and
disposal facilities.



   (b)   The city's engineers will design all off-site water and sewage
facilities which shall be constructed by the city.



   (c)   The on-site sewage collection system and water distribution
system shall be designed by the developer and/or property owner (both as
found, i.e., in a development or a subdivision).



   (d)   In all cases, all designs for on-site facilities will comply
with city code requirements contained herein and will be approved by the city
and the city's engineers prior to construction  and be inspected by the city
or their representative, all at the expense of the developer and/or property
owner.



(Code 1958, § 30B-4; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-31.  Financing.



   (a)   Design by city.  In all cases, developers and/or property
owners will extend monies to the city to cover the cost of initiating and
designing all or any portions of the transmission, collection and treatment
facilities. This will be fifteen (15) percent of the total estimated cost of
any project as determined by the city's engineers.



   (b)   Construction by city. In all cases, developers and/or property
owners will pay the estimated cost of any project, such monies to be paid to
the city upon execution of an agreement between owners and/or developers and
the city to provide service and beginning of a construction project, plus
agreement in writing to pay on demand, any additional expenses actually
incurred by the city in construction.



(Code 1958, § 30B-4; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-32.  Design standards.



   All plans and specifications relating to sewerage and water systems
extension projects shall comply with established subdivision and building
regulations and shall have affixed to them the seal of a registered
professional engineer. With respect to on-site facilities, the property owner
and/or developer authorized to undertake the project shall file with the city
manager a reproducible set of plans showing the completed work, as built,
together with an affidavit of periodic and final inspections by a registered
professional engineer, certifying that the work as constructed complies with
established city standards, and shall obtain final project approval from the
city manager.



(Code 1958, § 30B-4; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-33.  Construction standards.



   All extensions of the city's sewerage and water systems shall comply
with “Appendix C” of the city Code and/or the following standards:



   (a)   Location. All sanitary sewers, sewerage pumping stations,
water mains and related appurtenances to be conveyed to the city, shall be
located only in public rights-of-way, on city owned property or in easements
acceptable to the city.  There the property is under development, sewerage
and water system extensions shall not be installed until:



      (1)   The finished grades of the rights-of-way or easements
have been established and approved by the city, and



      (2)   The rights-of-way or easements have been constructed to
at least design subgrade.



   (b)   Installation standards and inspection. All installations shall
be made in a manner and of such materials as are in accordance with standards
and requirements established by the city, and all plans, specifications,
premises, or construction sites shall be subject to inspection and approval
by the city manager or his designee at any time during or after completion of
construction prior to acceptance by the city.  No installation or
construction by a property owner and/or developer shall be accepted by the
city as finally approved until there is delivered to the city an affidavit
which adequately protects the city's interests against mechanics' liens or
other liens which might be asserted against the property under applicable
law; the form and conditions of the affidavit to be approved by the city
attorney.



   (c)   Building sewer or water line. Every “building” sewer or
water line shall terminate at the owner's property line and shall be
installed and connected to the building plumbing by the property owner at his
expense.



   (d)   Connection to city facilities. Actual interconnection of an
extension with the existing city sewerage or water system shall be prevented,
by omitting a connecting section or by placing a temporary bulkhead in the
connecting lines, until the extension project has been fully inspected and
approved and all other conditions for extension of service have been met.



   (e)   Ownership. All portions of a sewerage or water system
extension project located in a public right-of-way, city-owned property or a
public easement shall, upon installation and acceptance by the city, become
the property of the city, and the filing of an application for approval of
construction of such a project by a property owner and/or developer shall be
deemed to be consent to such transfer of ownership. The property owner shall
execute and deliver to the city such deeds or other evidences of ownership as
the city may require; provided, however, that no consideration shall be
authorized to be given by the city to such property owner for the execution
and delivery to the city of such deeds or other evidences of ownership unless
such consideration is first approved by the city council. (Code 1958, §
30B-4; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80)



Sec. 26-34.  Capital facilities charges and connection charges.



   (A)   CAPITAL FACILITIES CHARGE IMPOSED. When property receives
water and/or sewage service from systems owned or controlled by the city, the
owner of such property shall pay unto the city a water and/or sewage capital
facilities charge as follows:



   (1)   Water:



      (a)   Residential property located within the municipal limits
of Boynton Beach.  One thousand one hundred twenty-two dollars ($1,122.00)
per equivalent dwelling unit.  “Equivalent dwelling unit” is defined as
a unit of construction having the same water usage as a one-bedroom
single-family home, and the number of equivalent dwelling units, for the
purpose of this calculation, contained within the property shall be
determined in accordance with the schedule set forth below in subparagraph
(3).



      (b)   Nonresidential property located within the municipal
limits of Boynton Beach.  One thousand five hundred seventy dollars and
eighty cents ($1,570.80) per three-quarter inch by five-eighths inch (¾" x
5/8") meter equivalent (ME).  The table below indicates for various meter
sizes the numbers of ¾" x 5/8" MEs and the charges.



 


Meter Size

 
¾" x 5/8" ME
 
Water Capital Facilities Charge




¾" x 5/8"
 
1.0
 
$1,570.80


1"
 
2.5
 
$3,927.00


1-½"
 
5.0
 
$7,854.00


2"
 
8.0
 
$12,566.40


3"
 
17.5
 
$27,489.00


4"
 
31.5
 
$49,480.20


6"
 
65.0
 
$102,102.00


8"
 
140.0
 
$219,912.00


10"
 
210.0
 
$329,868.00




 



      (c)   Residential property located beyond the municipal limits
of Boynton Beach but within the utility service area.  One thousand four
hundred three dollars ($1,403.00) per equivalent dwelling unit. 
“Equivalent dwelling unit” is defined as a unit of construction having
the same water usage as a one-bedroom single-family home, and the number of
equivalent dwelling units, for the purpose of this calculation, contained
within the property shall be determined in accordance with the schedule set
forth below in subparagraph (3).



      (d)   Nonresidential property located beyond the municipal
limits of Boynton Beach but within the utility service area.  One thousand
nine hundred sixty-two dollars and fifty cents ($1,962.50) per three-quarter
inch by five-eighths inch (¾" x 5/8") meter equivalent (ME).  The table
below indicates for various meter sizes the numbers of ¾" x 5/8" MEs and the
charges.



 


Meter Size

 
¾" x 5/8" ME
 
Water Capital Facilities Charge




¾" x 5/8"
 
1.0
 
$1,952.50


1"
 
2.5
 
$4,906.25


1-½"
 
5.0
 
$9,812.50


2"
 
8.0
 
$15,700.00


3"
 
17.5
 
$34,343.75


4"
 
31.5
 
$61,818.75


6"
 
65.0
 
$127,562.50


8"
 
140.0
 
$274,750.00


10"
 
210.0
 
$412,125.00




 



   (2)   Sewage:



      (a)   Residential property located within the municipal limits
of Boynton Beach.  Six hundred sixty-five dollars ($665.00) per equivalent
dwelling unit.  "Equivalent dwelling unit" is defined as a unit of
construction generating the same amount of sewage as a one-bedroom
single-family home, and the number of equivalent dwelling units, for the
purpose  of this calculation, contained within the property shall be
determined in accordance with the schedule set forth below in subparagraph
(3).



      (b)   Nonresidential property located within the municipal
limits of Boynton Beach.  Nine hundred thirty-one dollars ($931.00) per
three-quarter inch by five-eighths inch (¾" x 5/8") meter equivalent (ME). 
The table below indicates for various meter sizes the numbers of ¾" x 5/8"
MEs and the charges.



 


Meter Size

 
¾" x 5/8" ME
 
Sewer Capital Facilities Charge




¾" x 5/8"
 
10
 
$931.00


1"
 
2.5
 
$2,327.50


1-½"
 
5.0
 
$4,655.00


2"
 
8.0
 
$7,448.00


3"
 
17.5
 
$16,292.50


4"
 
31.5
 
$29,326.50


6"
 
65.0
 
$60,515.00


8"
 
140.0
 
$130,340.00


10"
 
210.0
 
$195,510.00




 



      (c)   Residential property located beyond the municipal limits
of the City of Boynton Beach but within the utility service area.  Eight
hundred thirty-one dollars ($831.00) per equivalent dwelling unit. 
"Equivalent dwelling unit" is defined as a unit of construction generating
the same amount of sewage as a one-bedroom single-family home, and the number
of equivalent dwelling units, for the purpose of this calculation, contained
within the property shall be determined in accordance with the schedule set
forth below in subparagraph (3).



      (d)   Nonresidential property located beyond the municipal
limits of Boynton Beach but within the utility service area.  One thousand
one hundred sixty-three dollars and seventy-five cents ($1,163.75) per
three-quarter inch by five-eighths inch (¾" x 5/8") meter equivalent (ME). 
The table below indicates for the various meter sizes the numbers of ¾" x
5/8" MEs and the charges.



 


Meter Size

 
¾" x 5/8" ME
 
Sewer Capital Facilities Charge




¾" x 5/8"
 
1.0
 
$1,163.75


1"
 
2.5
 
$2,909.38


1-½"
 
5.0
 
$5,818.75


2"
 
8.0
 
$9,310.00


3"
 
17.5
 
$20,365.63


4"
 
31.5
 
$36,658.13


6"
 
65.0
 
$75,643.75


8"
 
140.0
 
$162,925.00


10"
 
210.0
 
$244,387.50




 



   Said capital facilities charge is designed to cover the cost of
existing or additional raw water production facilities, water treatment
facilities and water distribution facilities together with sewage
transmission facilities either existing or additions and improvements thereto
which will be utilized by the city to provide water and sewer service to said
property.  Said capital facilities charge shall be paid in full prior to the
execution of the Health Department applications or approval of the plans by
the Utilities Department or issuance of the first permit of the project on
the owner’s or development property or installation of the first water
meter on the owner’s property, whichever is achieved first, and shall be
computed based upon the rate in effect upon that date.



   If oversizing funding has been carried out by a developer (or
developers) that funding will have a capital facility charge credited in an
amount no greater than the oversizing charge portion of the cost of original
construction.  Oversizing costs shall be defined to be the relative carrying
capacity of the oversized lines as constructed versus the carrying capacity
of the minimum sized lines that would have been required to serve the
development (or developments) participating in the funding as follows:



 



A.*
Developer(s) Capital Facility Charge Credit as a Percent of Costs
 
B. 
Oversized Line  Constructed as Required by the Master Plan
 
C.
Minimum Sized Lines Required to Serve Participating Developer(s)


(Col. A x Col. B Costs)


44.444%
 
20
 
16


74.359
 
20
 
12


28.571
 
16
 
14


52.381
 
16
 
12


71.429
 
16
 
10


37.500
 
12
 
10


65.517
 
12
 
8


84.127
 
12
 
6




 



   *From “equation of pipe chart attached as Exhibit A” to Ordinance
Number 80-10, which exhibit is set out following this division.



   If in providing water or sewer service to an owner or developer, the
city utilizes a part or parts of already installed city facilities that have
been oversized pursuant to division 1 of this article, the responsibilities
of each developer receiving such service subsequent to the trunk line
construction agreement for connecting to a system that has been previously
oversized, will be to pay the proportional share (this developer(s)
equivalent dwelling units as a percent of total equivalent dwelling units to
be served by the oversize pipe) of the total cost (engineering, construction,
etc.) of the system plus the following:



      (a)   An adjustment equal to the engineering consumer price
index increase, if any, since the contract date of the construction of the
oversizing.



      (b)   An adjustment that represents the interest (assumed to
be 9%) that the city would have earned if the related capital facility charge
credits were not given to the developer or developers who funded the
oversizing.



      (c)   An adjustment that represents an administrative charge
to the city for handling the oversizing negotiations and procedures; the
amount to be fifteen percent (15%).



      (d)   Equivalent dwelling units capital facilities charge then
in effect for water and sewer services in accord with this chapter as amended.



Note: Example-Assume three (3) developers representing four thousand (4,000)
equivalent dwelling units require a twelve (12) inch line to serve them, and
the three (3) developers jointly agree with the city to fund a sixteen (16)
inch line which will serve twelve thousand (12,000) equivalent dwelling
units. The three (3) developers will pay the entire cost of the installation
of the line, but would receive credits against capital facility charges for
52.318% of the cost of the line divided among the three (3) developers
according to their individual share of the four thousand (4,000) units.
Developers tying-in to the system at a later date would pay a cost per unit
equal to 1/12,000 of the construction costs plus items (a), (b), (c), and (d)
above.



   (3)   The following tables shall be used to determine the number of
equivalent dwelling units and capital facilities charges for residential
property with the indicate number of bedrooms:



 


Single-Family

 

Inside City   

 

Outside City



# Bedrooms (Multiplier)
 
Water
 
Sewer
 
Water
 
Sewer


1 Bedroom Unit (1.0)
 
$1,122.00
 
$665.00
 
$1,402.50
 
$831.25


2 Bedroom Unit (1.4)
 
$1,570.80
 
$931.00
 
$1,963.50
 
$1,163.75


3 Bedroom Unit (1.8)
 
$2,019.60
 
$1,197.00
 
$2,524.50
 
$1,496.25


4 Bedroom Unit (2.0)
 
$2,244.00
 
$1,330.00
 
$2,805.00
 
$1,662.50


5 Bedroom Unit (2.2)
 
$2,468.40
 
$1,463.00
 
$3,085.50
 
$1,828.75



 



 


Apartments

 

Inside City

 

Outside City



# Bedrooms (Multiplier)
 
Water
 
Sewer
 
Water
 
Sewer


1 Bedroom Unit (0.8)
 
$897.60
 
$532.00
 
$1,122.00
 
$665.00


2 Bedroom Unit (1.2)
 
$1,346.40
 
$798.00
 
$1,683.00
 
$997.50


3 Bedroom Unit (1.6)
 
$1,795.20
 
$1,064.00
 
$2,244.00
 
$1,330.00



 



For single-family dwellings with greater than five bedrooms, an additional
0.2 equivalent dwelling units shall be added to the multiplier for each
additional bedroom beyond five, and the capital facilities charges shall be
computed employing said multiplier.



Any subdivision where each unit will be responsible for their own water will
be classified under single-family.



Duplexes are classified under apartments and multiplied by the number of
bedrooms. Example: if three bedrooms per apartment, multiply the cost of
three-bedroom apartment x 2.



Mobile homes and trailers are classified as having one equivalent dwelling
unit (per City Ordinance 80-10) and are charged the same as a one-bedroom
unit.



   (B)   USE OF FUNDS.  All revenues derived from the charges imposed
by this section, in excess of the sums required for actual reimbursement of
costs for connection, shall be placed in a separate capital improvement fund
to be known and designated as Capital Improvement Account of the Water and
Sewers Utilities Fund, and shall be used only for the construction,
acquisition, addition, extension, renewal and replacement of water and sewage
systems of the city, as appropriated from time to time by the Commission. 
If funds are not available in this fund either through revenue from capital
facility charges or balance from bond issue, for the city to approve a
project to extend water and sewer systems, the developer may advance fees to
the utility trust fund.



   (C)   WATER CONNECTION CHARGE.  When property receives water
service from the city facilities, the owner of such property shall pay unto
the city a water connection charge, based upon the size of the service line
and meters, for the cost of making the tap into the city system, installation
of the service lateral and meters, together with the cost of the meters
themselves.  Said water connection charge shall be provided by the city
commission, as same shall from time to time be amended.



   (D)   SEWER CONNECTION CHARGE.  When property receives sewage
service from the city facilities and the owner of such property requests that
the city install the service lateral and make the actual tap into the city
system, the owner shall pay to the city the total cost of all labor performed
and material supplied prior to the city performing such services.



   (E)   CAPACITY RESERVATION FEES.  Any person or property owner
requesting a firm reservation of water and/or sewage treatment capacity shall
pay the city a reservation fee for said capacity.  The reservation fee is
intended to equal the costs for financing the necessary capacity and
administering this program, and all revenues therefrom shall be placed in the
capital improvement fund described in this section.  As such, the
reservation fee is hereby established as denoted in the following table, for
each year that capacity is to be reserved.



 

Type of Dwelling
 
Conversion Factor No. of Equivalent Residential Units (ERU's)
 
Annual Reservation Fee




Residential:
 
 


Single-family, per meter
 
1.0
 
$ 138.60


Apartment, per meter:
 
 


   5/8" x 3/4"
 
1.0
 
138.60


   1"
 
2.9
 
401.94


   2"
 
9.8
 
1,358.28


Nonresidential, per meter:
 
 


   5/8" x 3/4"
 
1.4
 
194.04


   1"
 
5.7
 
790.02


   1½"
 
8.7
 
1,205.82


2"
 
15.2
 
2,106.72


3"
 
37.4
 
5,183.64


4"
 
59.5
 
8,246.70


6"
 
232.1
 
32,169.06




 



   In cases where the required information is not available in sufficient
detail to apply the above, a projected flow or demand for the project,
certified by a professional engineer registered in the State of Florida,
shall be required.  One (1) ERU shall then be equivalent to three hundred
eighty-six (386) gallons per day of flow or demand.



   The reservation fee shall be due and payable at any of the following
instances, whichever occurs first:



   (1)   At time of concurrency review and certification; or



   (2)   Upon request for written confirmation of capacity reservation;
or



   (3)   Upon request for the utilities director's signature on
department of health and rehabilitative services or department of
environmental regulation permit applications for water and/or sewer main
extensions; or



   (4)   Upon issuance of a development order by the city; or



   (5)   Upon renewal of an existing development order by the city.



   Reservation fees shall serve to reserve capacity for a period not to
exceed one (1) year.  If the property owner has not paid all applicable
capital facilities charges prior to expiration of the reservation fees, then
the fees must be renewed at the rate in effect at that time.  Reservation
fees are not refundable for any portion of the year during which construction
occurs.



   The property owner, may, at his discretion, pre-pay all required
capital facilities charges in lieu of paying reservation fees.  In such
instances, firm capacity would be reserved indefinitely without need for
annual renewal. (Code 1958, § 30B-4; Ord. No. 80-10, § 1, 4-1-80; Ord. No.
80-21, § 1, 6-3-80; Ord. No. 83-37, §§ 1—4, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 90-35, §
1, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 91-59, § 1, 8-20-91; Ord. No. 93-03, § 1, 4-8-93; Ord.
No. 97-02, § 1, 2-4-97; Ord. No. 02-045, § 4, 8-20-02; Ord. No. 07-023, §
4, 9-2-07; Ord. No. 07-034, § 2, 11- 13-07; Ord. No. 08-018, § 2, 7- 15-08;
Ord. 13-016, § 2, 6-18-13)



   Cross references-Service charges, § 26-8; monthly rates, § 26-9.



Secs. 26-35—26-37. Reserved.



   Editor’s note—Ord. No. 13-016, § 3, adopted 6-18-13, deleted
Section 26-35, Additional charge, regarding increased water and sewer
connection charges and capital improvement fees related to a change in
property use.



   EXHIBIT A



   It is frequently desired to know what number of pipe of a given size is
equal in carrying capacity to one pipe of a larger size. At the same velocity
of flow the volume delivered by two (2) pipes of different sizes is
proportional to the squares of their diameters; thus one four-inch pipe will
deliver the same volume as four (4) two-inch pipes. With the same head,
however, the velocity is less in the smaller pipe, and the volume delivered
varies about as their diameter ratio to the 2.65 power. This table is
calculated on this basis. The figure opposite the intersection of any two (2)
sizes is the number of the smaller-size type required to equal one of the
larger: thus, 1/6 unit equals 2.9 four-inch.



 

 

Equation of Pipe



Diameter Inches
 
1/2
 
3/4
 
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
 
5
 
6
 
7
 
8
 
10
 
12
 
14




2
 
39.4
 
13.5
 
6.3
 
1.0
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


3
 
115
 
39.4
 
18.4
 
2.9
 
1.0
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


4
 
247
 
84.4
 
39.4
 
6.3
 
2.1
 
1.0
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


5
 
447
 
153
 
71.2
 
11.3
 
3.9
 
1.8
 
1.0
 
 
 
 
 
 


6
 
724
 
247
 
115
 
18.4
 
6.3
 
2.9
 
1.6
 
1.0
 
 
 
 
 


7
 
1,090
 
372
 
174
 
27.7
 
9.4
 
4.4
 
2.4
 
1.5
 
1.0
 
 
 
 


8
 
 
530
 
247
 
39.4
 
13.5
 
6.3
 
3.5
 
2.1
 
1.4
 
1.0
 
 
 


10
 
 
957
 
447
 
71.2
 
24.3
 
11.3
 
6.3
 
3.9
 
2.6
 
1.8
 
1.0
 
 


11
 
 
 
575
 
91.6
 
31.3
 
14.6
 
8.1
 
5.0
 
3.3
 
2.3
 
1.3
 
 


12
 
 
 
724
 
115
 
39.4
 
18.4
 
10.2
 
6.3
 
4.2
 
2.9
 
1.6
 
1.0
 


13
 
 
 
895
 
143
 
48.7
 
22.7
 
12.6
 
7.8
 
5.2
 
3.6
 
2.0
 
1.2
 


14
 
 
 
1,090
 
174
 
59.3
 
27.7
 
15.3
 
9.4
 
6.3
 
4.4
 
2.4
 
1.5
 
1


15
 
 
 
1,308
 
208
 
71.2
 
33.2
 
18.4
 
11.3
 
7.5
 
5.3
 
2.9
 
1.8
 
1


16
 
 
 
 
247
 
84.4
 
39.4
 
21.8
 
13.5
 
8.9
 
6.3
 
3.5
 
2.1
 
1


17
 
 
 
 
290
 
99.2
 
46.3
 
25.6
 
15.8
 
10.5
 
7.4
 
4.1
 
2.5
 
1


18
 
 
 
 
338
 
115
 
53.8
 
29.8
 
18.4
 
12.2
 
8.6
 
4.7
 
2.9
 
1


19
 
 
 
 
390
 
133
 
62.1
 
34.4
 
21.2
 
14.1
 
9.9
 
5.5
 
3.4
 
2


20
 
 
 
 
447
 
153
 
71.2
 
39.4
 
24.3
 
16.2
 
11.3
 
6.3
 
3.9
 
2


22
 
 
 
 
575
 
196
 
91.6
 
50.7
 
31.3
 
20.8
 
14.6
 
8.1
 
5.0
 
3


24
 
 
 
 
724
 
247
 
115
 
63.8
 
39.4
 
26.2
 
18.4
 
10.2
 
6.3
 
4


30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33.2
 
18.4
 
11.3
 
7


36
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29.8
 
18.4
 
12


42
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44.8
 
27.7
 
18


48
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63.8
 
39.4
 
26




 



(Ord. No. 80-10, 4-1-80)



 


PALM BEACH COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT "GUIDELINES"




Estimated Sewage Flows





 

Sewage Flow
Gallons/Day

 

Equivalent
Dwelling Units

 

Water Usage
Gallons/Day

 

Equivalent Dwelling Units





Single-Family Homes:


 

(a) One-bedroom-One dwelling unit

 

250

 

1.0

 

312

 

1.0



 

(b) Two-bedroom

 

350

 

1.4

 

437

 

1.4



 

(c) Three-bedroom

 

450

 

1.8

 

562

 

1.8



 

(d) Four-bedroom

 

500

 

2..0

 

625

 

2.0



 

(e) Five-bedroom

 

550

 

2.2

 

687

 

2.2



 

(f) Additional bedroom, each

 

50

 


 

62

 




Apartment House:


 
(a) One-bedroom
 

200

 

0.8

 

250

 

0.8



 
(b) Two-bedroom
 

300

 

1.2

 

375

 

1.2



 
(c) Three-bedroom
 

400

 

1.6

 

500

 

1.6



Mobile Home Park, per unit:


 
Independent
 

250

 

1.0

 

312

 

1.0



 
Dependent
 

100

 

0.4

 

125

 

0.4




Motels or Hotels, with one-bedroom units, per unit

 

100

 

0.4

 

125

 

0.4




Laundries (coin- operated), per machine

 

400

 

1.6

 

500

 

1.6




Office Buildings, per employee

 

20

 


 

25

 




Schools, per pupil:


 

Day, cafeteria and showers

 

20

 


 

25

 




 

Day, cafeteria or lunch room

 

15

 


 

19

 




 
Boarding
 

75

 


 

93

 




Service Stations:


 
First bay
 

1000

 

4.0

 

1250

 

4.0



 
Each additional bay
 

500

 

2.0

 

625

 

2.0




Churches, per sanctuary seat

 

5-7

 


 


 





Restaurants (including toilets):



 

(a) Twenty-four-hour, per seat

 

50

 


 

62

 




 

(b) Not twenty-four- hour, per seat

 

35

 


 

44

 




 

(c) Bars and cocktail lounges, per seat

 

35

 


 

44

 




 

(d) Drive-in, per car space

 

50

 


 

62

 




 

(e) Vending machine restaurants, per seat

 

70

 


 

88

 




 

(f) Tavern (very little food service), per seat

 

20

 


 

25

 




Hospitals, per bed
 

200

 


 

250

 





Nursing and Rest Homes, per person person

 

200

 


 

250

 




Camps:


 

(a) Day (no meals), per person

 

20

 


 

25

 




 

(b) Luxury, private bath, per person

 

100

 


 

125

 






 

(c) Labor, per person

 

75

 


 

93

 






 

(d) Youth and recreation, per person

 

50

 


 

62

 





Vacation Cottages, per person

 

50

 


 

62

 




Institutions, per resident
 

100

 


 

125

 




Theaters:


 
Indoor, per person
 

3

 


 

4

 




 
Outdoor, per car
 

5

 


 

7

 




Travel Trailer, per unit
 

75

 


 

93

 




Stores
 

400

 

1.6

 

500

 

1.6




Factories, per person per shift

 

15

 


 

19

 





Picnic Parks (with floor toilets), per person

 

10

 


 

13

 




Airport, per passenger
 

3

 


 

4

 




Barbershop, per chair
 

85

 


 

107

 




Beauty Shop, per booth
 

100

 


 

125

 




Bowling Alley, (per lane)
 

200

 


 

250

 




Child Care Centers
 

20

 


 

25

 





Child Care Centers (with food)

 

35

 


 

44

 




Shopping Centers:


 

(a) Per square foot floor space (no food service or laundry)

 

0.1

 


 

0.125

 




Structured Not Listed Above:


 

Daily flow must be estimated by a registered professional engineer in
accordance with published rules of the State of Florida, Department of
Environmental Regulation.





 



(Ord. No. 80-10, 4-1-80)



ARTICLE III. WATER SHORTAGE PLAN*



   *Editor's note-Ord. No. 85-36, § 1, adopted May 7, 1985, provided for
the repeal of §§ 26-38—26-45, being Art. III, Curtailment of nonessential
uses of water during water shortage, as derived from Ord. No. 80-15, §§
1—7, 10, adopted May 14, 1981; and Ord. No. 81-24, § 1, adopted July 21,
1981; and enacted in lieu thereof new provisions relative to similar subject
matter to read as herein set out. Prior to the 1981 provisions, Art. III,
§§ 26-38—26-45, had pertained to water use in emergency situations as
derived from the 1958 Code, §§ 30C-1—30C-8.



Sec. 26-38.  Intent and purpose.



   It is the intent and purpose of this article to protect the water
resources of the City of Boynton Beach from the harmful effects of
over-utilization during periods of water shortage and allocate available
water supplies by assisting the South Florida Water Management District in
the implementation of its water shortage plan.



(Ord. No. 85-36, § 1, 5-7-85)



Sec. 26-39.  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein; when not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular
include the plural; the word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely
directory:



   District is the South Florida Water Management District.



   Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   Water resource means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the
ground, including natural or artificial water courses, lakes, ponds, or
diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath
the surface of the ground.



   Water shortage condition is when sufficient water is not available to
meet present or anticipated needs of persons using the water resource, or
when conditions are such as to require temporary reduction in total water
usage within a particular area to protect the water resource from serious
harm. A water shortage usually occurs due to drought.



   Water shortage emergency means that situation when the powers which can
be exercised under Part II of Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code,
are not sufficient to protect the public health, safety or welfare, or the
health of animals, fish or aquatic life, or a public water supply or
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other reasonable uses.



   Water shortage phase means a phase of water shortage declared by the
district and as established by Rule 40E-21.251, Florida Administrative Code.



(Ord. No. 85-36, § 1, 5-7-85; Ord. No. 02-045, § 5, 8-20-02)



Sec. 26-40.  Application of article.



   The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons using the
water resource within the geographical areas subject to the “water
shortage” or “water shortage emergency,” as determined by the district,
whether from public or privately owned water utility systems, private wells,
or private connections with surface water bodies. This article shall not
apply to persons using treated effluent or saltwater.



(Ord. No. 85-36, § 1, 5-7-85)



Sec. 26-41.  Incorporation of water shortage plan and amendments into Code.



   Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, as same may be amended
from time to time, is incorporated herein by reference, as part of the City
Code.



(Ord. No. 85-36, § 1, 5-7-85)



Sec. 26-42.  Declaration of water shortage; water shortage emergency.



   The declaration of a water shortage or water shortage emergency within
all or any part of the City of Boynton Beach by the governing board or the
executive director of the district shall invoke the provisions of this
article. Upon such declaration, all water use restrictions or other measures
adopted by the district applicable to the City of Boynton Beach, or any
portion thereof, shall be subject to enforcement action pursuant to this
article. Any violation of the provisions of Chapter 40E-21, Florida
Administrative Code, or any order issued pursuant thereto, shall be a
violation of this article.



(Ord. No. 85-36, § 1, 5-7-85; Ord. No. 02-045, § 6, 8-20-02; Ord. No.
07-018, § 2, 8-7-07)



Sec. 26-43.  Enforcement.



   Every police officer or sheriff having jurisdiction in the area
governed by this article shall, in connection with all other duties imposed
by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article. In addition, the
city manager may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this article to
agencies and departments of city government, or cities in the service areas
governed by this article, in accordance with state and local law.



(Ord. No. 85-36, § 1, 5-7-85)



Sec. 26-44.  Penalties.



   Violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to the
following penalties:



   First violation: twenty-five dollars ($25.00)



   Second and subsequent violations: Fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed sixty
(60) days



Each day in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. In
the initial stages of a water shortage or water shortage emergency, law
enforcement officials may provide violators with no more than one (1) written
warning. The city, in addition to the criminal sanctions contained herein,
may take any other appropriate legal action, including but not limited to
emergency injunctive action, to enforce the provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. 85-36, § 1, 5-7-85)



Sec. 26-45.  Water users to accept provisions of article.



   No water service shall be furnished to any person by a public or
private utility unless such person agrees to accept all the provisions of
this article. The acceptance of water service shall be in itself the
acceptance of the provisions thereof.



(Ord. No. 85-36, § 1, 5-7-85)



Secs. 26-46—26-55. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV. SEWERS



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 26-56.  “Fixture” defined.



   Within the meaning of this article, a fixture is a plumbing fixture or
drain that connects to the sewer, including a toilet, wash basin or lavatory,
bathtub or shower, laundry tub, kitchen sink, slop or wash sink, washing
machine drain, or any fixture, machine, equipment or device connected to or
discharging into the sewer.



(Code 1958, § 23A-1; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-19-13)



Sec. 26-57.  Connections required.



   (a)   The owner, tenant or occupant of each lot or parcel of land
within the city which abuts upon a street or other public way containing a
sanitary sewer served or which may be served by the sewage disposal system
and upon which lot or parcel a building has been or shall be constructed for
residential, commercial or industrial use, shall within thirty (30) days
after the placing of the sewage disposal system in operation and the
construction of all connections thereto from such sanitary sewer, or within
thirty (30) days after the construction of such building, connect such
building with such sanitary sewer, and shall cease to use any other method
for the disposal of sewage, sewage waste or other polluting matter.



   (b)   The owner shall be responsible to maintain, repair, and
replace, as necessary all sewer laterals and appurtenances serving the
owner's property, and which are not located within the city rights-of-way. 
The clearing of any blockages within the sewer lateral is included within
this obligation.



      (1)   A sewer lateral is that portion of sewer pipe, which
connects a structure to a sewer main. Appurtenances to the sewer lateral
include, but are not limited to the fitting to which the owner's plumbing is
connected, the clean-out and plug, and any markings or devices installed as
an aid to locating the service connection.



      (2)   Except as provided in this section, any portion of the
sewer lateral located within the city rights-of-way, once accepted by the
city, is the responsibility of the city. All other portions of the sewer
lateral are the responsibility of the property owner.



      (3)   Should the city determine that blockage in any portion
of the sewer lateral has occurred as a result of root intrusion from a tree
located on non-city property, the owner of the property where the tree is
located shall reimburse the city for any costs and expenses incurred by the
city in repairing or replacing the sewer lateral and restoring the streets,
sidewalks, or other areas affected by the necessitated repair or replacement.



      (4)   No modification, repair or replacement of a sewer
lateral within the public right-of-way shall be performed without the written
consent of the city utility department.



      (5)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the city
from performing any repairs or replacement of sewer laterals in the public
rights-of-way.



      (6)   The city shall not be responsible for, nor will the city
provide reimbursement for claims of costs incurred by property owners to
clear blockages to any sewer lateral, including any and all damage within the
residence or structure, without a written agreement, entered into prior to
the commencement of any work on the sewer lateral.



      (7)   In the event of an emergency and in order to protect the
public health and safety, the city may perform repairs to the sewer lateral
on private property. Wherever possible, the city shall, at a minimum, make
reasonable attempts to notify the property owner of the need for repairs to
the sewer lateral. In the event the city performs repairs under this
subsection, the city shall be entitled to reimbursement by the property owner
of all costs and expenses incurred for such emergency work.



(Code 1958, § 23A-2; Ord. No. 04-074, § 2, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2,
11-9-13)



Sec. 26-58.  Reserved.



   Editor's note-Ord. No. 82-37, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 1982, repealed §
26-58, prescribing service charges, derived from Code 1958, § 23A-3.



Sec. 26-59.  Additional charge for and treatment of industrial sewage.



   In cases where the character of sewage from any manufacturing or
industrial plant, building or premises is such that it imposes a burden upon
the sewage disposal system in addition to the burden imposed by the average
sewage entering the sewer system, such additional charge shall be made
therefor as the city commission shall, with the approval of the consulting
engineers, deem to be fair and equitable to meet the additional cost of
collection, treatment and disposal of such sewage, or the city commission
may, if it deems advisable, compel the owner, tenant or occupant of such
manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises to treat such sewage
in such manner as shall be specified by the city commission before
discharging such sewage into the sewer system of the city.



   In cases where the character of the sewage from any manufacturing or
industrial plant, building or premises is such that it imposes a burden upon
the sewage disposal system the city commission may, with the approval of the
consulting engineers, grant such reduction in the amount of the sewer service
charges as it shall deem fair and equitable.



(Code 1958, § 23A-4; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-60.  Free service prohibited.



   There shall be no free services rendered by the sewage disposal system
and all users of the service and facilities of the sewage disposal system
shall pay for the use of such services and facilities at the established
rates.



(Code 1958, § 23A-5; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-61.  Collection of service charge.



   (a)   The sewer service charges shall become effective, as to each
lot or parcel of land which may be connected with the sewage disposal system
by or through any part of the sewer system of the city, upon the placing of
the sewage disposal system in operation and the construction of all
connections thereto from the sanitary sewer serving such lot or parcel.



   (b)   In all cases where water is furnished by the water department
of the city, the amount of the sewer service charges shall be included in the
bills for water rendered by the city. In all cases where water is furnished
by any plant or system other than the water department of the city, bills
shall be rendered for the amount of such sewer service charges in the same
manner as bills are rendered for water.



   (c)   All bills for sewer service charges shall be either hand
delivered to the customer monthly, or by way of the United States Postal
Service, and shall be due when rendered. If not paid within thirty (30) days
of the original billing date, such sewer service charge shall be added to the
next monthly bill and shown thereon as a delinquent item. Should the customer
fail to pay said delinquent item immediately, the city may thereafter, and
without further notice to the customer, disconnect the service, discontinue
furnishing water to such premises, and, if the amount of the total bill
exceeds the amount of the customer's water meter deposit, it may also
disconnect such meter. Further, the city shall proceed forthwith to recover
the amount due on said bill in such lawful manner as it may deem advisable.



   (d)   If any bill for sewer service charges rendered in connection
with any premises not connected with the water system shall not be paid
within thirty (30) days from the rendition of such bill, the owner, tenant or
occupant of such premises shall cease to dispose of sewage or industrial
wastes originating from or on such premises by discharge thereof directly or
indirectly into the sewer system of the city until such sewer service
charges, with interest, shall be paid, and if such owner, tenant or occupant
shall not cease such disposal at the expiration of such thirty (30) day
period, the city shall disconnect such premises from the sewer system and the
city commission shall proceed forthwith to recover the amount of such sewer
service charges in such lawful manner as it may deem advisable.



(Code 1958, § 23A-7; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-62.  Trespass on property of system.



   Any person who wrongfully, or without authority enters any enclosure or
buildings of the sewage disposal system shall be deemed to have entered with
the intention of committing a trespass on said land or building, and every
person so trespassing shall be guilty of a violation of this Code.



(Code 1958, § 23A-8; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Secs. 26-63—26-72. Reserved.



DIVISION 2. RESERVED*



   *Editor's note-Formerly. Div. 2, §§ 26-73—26-92, pertained to
discharges to regional treatment facility. Such provisions, derived from Ord.
No. 86-59, § 2, adopted Dec. 16, 1986, and Ord. No. 89-40, §§ 1—5,
adopted Nov. 7, 1989, were repealed by Ord. No. 93-8, title, adopted May 18,
1993.



Secs. 26-73—26-99. Reserved.



DIVISION 3. RESERVED**



   **Editor's note-Ord. No. 93-8, adopted May 18, 1993, provided by title
for the deletion of Div. 3, §§ 26-100—26-104, which pertained to
wholesale user charge and industrial cost recovery. Such provisions were
derived from Ord. No. 79-31, §§ 1—5, adopted Nov. 21, 1979.



Secs. 26-100—26-111. Reserved.



DIVISION 4. INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTE



Subdivision A. General Provisions



Sec. 26-112.  Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate industrial waste
pretreatment facilities and discharge of industrial waste into the Wastewater
Facility (WWF) operated by the South Central Regional Wastewater Treatment
and Disposal Board and providing for pollutant limitations, data collection,
monitoring, and sampling, and providing for penalties for the violation
thereof for the following purposes:



   (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's
wastewater system which will interfere with the normal operation of the
wastewater collection system or the wastewater treatment plant, or which will
contaminate the resulting municipal sludge;



   (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's
wastewater collection system which do not receive adequate treatment by the
WWF, and which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the
atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;



   (c)   To protect the Wastewater Facility workers and the general
public;



   (d)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the
costs of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Wastewater Facility;



   (e)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater
and sludge from the system; and



   (f)   To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the WWF is subject.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-113.  Policy and scope.



   The policy is established that the provisions of this chapter will be
enforced to the fullest extent possible under the provisions of Federal
Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR Part 403 and Florida Administrative Code
Rules, 62-302, 62-600, 62-604, 62-610, and 62-625 issued by the Florida
Department of Environmental Protection. The standards set forth are minimum
requirements to ensure the general health and welfare of the public. Except
as otherwise provided herein, the city shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-114.  Application of chapter.



   (a)   The use of city wastewater facilities by any entity or local
government shall subject that entity or local government to the application
of this chapter. This shall include, but not be limited to, wholesale,
retail, and large agreement users, whether inside or outside the city limits.



   (b)   The regulations of this chapter shall apply to all users of
the sewer facilities of the city whether inside or outside the city,
including all other local governments such as, but not limited to, the Town
of Highland Beach, the Town of Gulf Stream, and contributions from
incorporated or unincorporated agencies of Palm Beach County. Furthermore,
all local government users shall be required, within 60 days after enactment
of this chapter and notice thereof, to enact ordinances substantially similar
to this chapter and to apply and enforce the same to all users of their
public and sanitary sewer systems.



(Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019, § 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.
13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-115.  Abbreviations and Definitions.



   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:



      BOD   Biochemical Oxygen Demand



      CFR   Code of Federal Regulations



      COD   Chemical Oxygen Demand



      DEP   Department of Environmental Protection



      EPA   United States Environmental Protection Agency



      FAC   Florida Administrative Code



      FDEP   Florida Department of Environmental Protection



      gpd   gallons per day



      mg/l   milligrams per liter



      NPDES   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System



      O&M   Operation and Maintenance



      POTW   Publicly Owned Treatment Works



      RCRA   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act



      SIC      Standard Industrial Classification



      TSS   Total Suspended Solids



      USC   United States Code



      WWF   Wastewater Facility



   For the purpose of this chapter, all definitions shall be applied and
interpreted in accordance with Rule 62-625, F.A.C., as amended.



   Act and The Act.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act of 1977, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.



   Approval authority.  The Florida Department of Environmental
Protection.



   Authorized representative of the user.



   (1)   If the user is a corporation, a responsible corporate officer.



   (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.



   (3)   If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility:
a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or
their designee.



   (4)   The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3),
above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization
is in writing by the individual described in (1) through (3) above, the
authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and
the written authorization is submitted to the city.



   Best Management Practices or BMPs.  Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in subsections
62-625.400(l)(a) and (2), F.A.C. BMPs also include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or
leaks, industrial sludge or waste disposal, or damage from raw materials
storage.



   Board.  The South Central Regional Wastewater Treatment and Disposal
Board, including, in the appropriate case, the regional treatment facilities,
and all its other attendant facilities.



   Board (WWF).  The Board of Directors of the South Central Regional
Wastewater Treatment and Disposal Board.



   B.O.D. (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand). The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as
a concentration (e.g., mg/l).



   Building sewer.  Sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a
user to the collection system which transmits wastewater to the WWF.



   Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.  Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1317)
which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.



   Categorical industrial users.  An industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under Rule 62-625.410, F.A.C., including
40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 - 471, as of July 1, 2009, hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference.



   Chemical oxygen demand (C.O.D.).  A measure of the oxygen required to
oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.



   City.  The City of Boynton Beach; all that land and water area
included within the boundaries of the "City" in which the Commission proposes
to acquire, establish, construct, extend, operate, and maintain sanitary
sewerage facilities, except as follows:



   (1)   All state and federally owned land and water area located in
the city or county, except where the state and federal government consent to
the provisions of this chapter.



   (2)   All land and water area duly franchised by the city or county
to privately owned sewer utility companies for the provisions of sewer
service, except where the privately owned sewer utility companies consent to
the provisions of this chapter.



   Collection system.  The system of public sewers to be operated by the
city and connected to the WWF facilities.



   Compatible pollutant.  A substance amenable to treatment in the
wastewater treatment plant such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants
identified in the NPDES permit if the wastewater facility was designed to
treat those pollutants, and in fact, does remove the pollutant to a
substantial degree.



   Composite sample.  A series of samples taken over a specific 24-hour
time period at intervals not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes in the waste
stream which are combined into one sample. Flow proportional sampling is
mandated unless circumstances do not permit it, then it shall be time
proportional. Samples shall be taken during effluent discharge times only.



   Cooling water.  The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.



   Direct discharge.  The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the State of Florida.



   Director of utilities, utilities director, or director. This refers to
the individual in charge of the Utilities Department for the city.



   Discharge.  Means disposal of, deposit, place, emit, unload, release
or cause or allow to be disposed of, deposited, placed, emitted, unloaded, or
released.



   Domestic wastewater.  Wastewater derived principally from dwellings,
commercial buildings, institutions, and industry resulting from household or
toilet waste resulting from human occupancy. It may or may not contain ground
water, surface water, or stormwater.



   Environmental Protection Agency or EPA.  The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of that
agency.



   Executive director.  The administrative director or his authorized
deputy, agent or representative of the South Central Regional Wastewater
Treatment and Disposal Board. The Executive Director is the authorized
administration authority of the South Central Regional Wastewater Treatment
and Disposal Board.



   Existing source.  Any source of discharge that is not a "New Source."



   Garbage.  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.



   Grab sample.  An individual, discrete sample collected at a specific
time. A grab sample includes all sub samples or aliquots (e.g. individual
containers for specific analytes or analyte groups), sample fractions (e.g.
total and filtered samples) and all applicable field quality control samples
(e.g. field sample duplicates or split samples) collected at the same
locations within a time not exceeding 15 minutes.



   Grantee.  Recipient of a federal grant for all or a portion of a
treatment works as administered by the Environmental Protection Agency.



   Holding tank waste.  Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.



   Indirect discharge or discharge.  The introduction of non-domestic
pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the
Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317) and F.S. Ch. 403, into the WWF (including holding tank
waste discharged into the system).



   Industrial or commercial waste.  The liquid wastes from industrial,
commercial, or institutional processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary
sewage.



   Industrial and commercial waste discharge permit. A permit issued to
control the process flows from industry, commerce, or institutions that may
be discharged into the sanitary sewer system.  This permit is issued in
addition to any other types of permits. When issued, the permit will define
the characteristics and volume of the flow and acceptance or rejection of
individual waste components and/or require high strength waste surcharges.



   Industrially classified user.  An industrial or commercial user whose
liquid wastes are, in part, made up of flows related to industrial or
commercial activities, as distinct from an industrial or commercial user
whose waste flows are primarily domestic or resulting from human occupancy.



   Industrial user.  A source of indirect discharge and discharge of
industrial and commercial waste which does not constitute a discharge of
pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act. (33
U.S.C. 1342).



   Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent
of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.



   Interference.  A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the WWF, its
treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal;
and thereafter, is a cause of a violation of the NPDES permit or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits hereunder, or any more
stringent state or local regulations: F.S. Ch. 403; Section 405 of the Act;
the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances
Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.



   Local limit.  Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
Director upon industrial and commercial facilities to implement the general
and specific discharge prohibitions listed in Rule 62-625.400, F.A.C.



   Medical waste.  Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.



   Milligrams per liter (mg/l). The number of units of minor constituents
present with each one million (1,000,000) units of the major constituent of a
solution or mixture. Milligrams per liter shall be considered equivalent to
parts per million.



   Monitoring costs.  Those costs incurred by the City in performing
monitoring and/or sampling as prescribed by 40 CFR 403.



   National categorical pretreatment standard.  Any federal regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA which applies to
a specific category of industrial users.



   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES Permit.  A
permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).



   National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge
standard.  Any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act
and 40 CFR, Section 403.5



   Natural outlet.  Any ditch, canal, stream, waterway, lake, river,
pond, well, gully, or other water body.



   New source.



   (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



      a.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site which no other source is located; or



      b.   The building, structure, facility, or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



      c.   The production of wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent
of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source, should be considered.



   (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of Section (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds
to existing process or production equipment.



   (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph
has commenced if the owner or operator has:



      a.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:



         (i)   any replacement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment; or



         (ii)   significant site preparation work including land
clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the replacement, assembly, or installation
of new source facilities or equipment; or



      b.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the
purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this paragraph.



   Noncontact cooling water.  Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.



   Non-significant categorical industrial user. An industrial user that
discharges 100 gallons per day (gpd) or less of total categorical wastewater
(excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater,
unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and:



   (1)   Has consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements;



   (2)   Annually submits the certification statement required in Sec.
26-157(h) of this Chapter together with any additional information necessary
to support the certification statement; and



   (3)   Never discharges any untreated categorical process wastewater.



   Pass through.  A discharge which exits the Treatment Works into waters
of the State in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the wastewater treatment plant permit, including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.



   Permit.  A permit issued to a wastewater treatment plant in accordance
with Chapter 62-620, F.A.C.



   Person.  Any individual, partnership, co- partnership, firm, company,
association, society, corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate,



governmental entity, group, or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal,
State, and local entities.



   Point source.  The initial point of discharge into a sewer system.



   pH.  Logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution; a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a
solution, expressed in standard units.



   Pollutant.  Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, and
agricultural wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g. pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).



   Pollution.  The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.



   Pretreatment.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing those pollutants into a WWF. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological
processes, or process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40
CFR Section 403.6(d) and 62-625.410(5), F.A.C.



   Pretreatment requirements.  Any substantive or procedural requirement
for treating of a waste prior to inclusion in the WWF.



   Pretreatment standards.  National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
or alternative discharge limits, whichever is applicable.



   Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges.  Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in Section 26-142.



   Properly shredded garbage.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2-inch (1.27 centimeters) in
any dimension.



   Public sewer.  A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.



   Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW).  In this case, the regional
treatment plant operated by the South Central Regional Wastewater Treatment
and Disposal Board, and the collection sewer system owned and operated
separately by the Cities of Delray and Boynton Beach. (Also see Wastewater
Facility—WWF.)



   Regional treatment facilities.  The South Central Regional Wastewater
Treatment Plant transmission and disposal facilities as operated by the South
Central Regional Wastewater Treatment and Disposal Board of Palm Beach
County, Florida.



   Replacement.  Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the treatment process facilities to maintain the capacity and performance for
which those facilities were designed and constructed.



   Responsible Corporate Officer.



   (1)   A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principle business function, or any other person
who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the
corporation; or



   (2)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager:



      a.   Is authorized to make management decisions which govern
the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or
implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations;



      b.   Is authorized to initiate and direct other comprehensive
measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations;



      c.   Can ensure that the necessary systems are established or
actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control
mechanism requirements;



      d.   Has been assigned or delegated the authority to sign
documents in accordance with corporate procedures.



   Sanitary sewage.  The household and toilet wastes resulting from human
occupancy.



   Sanitary sewer.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground water are not intentionally admitted.



   Septic tank waste.  Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.



   Sewage.  A combination of the water carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with ground, surface, and stormwater that may be present.



   Sewage works.  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of wastewater including the WWF.



   Sewer.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   Shall is mandatory; May is permissive.



   Significant industrial user.  Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and
(4) below:



   (1)   Categorical industrial users; and



   (2)   Any other industrial user that:



      a.   Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000)
gallons per day (gpd) or more of process wastewater to the Treatment Works
(excluding domestic wastewater, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater);



      b.   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five
(5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the treatment plant; or



      c.   Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it
has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the Treatment Works
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



   (3)   The City may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under Rule 62-625.410, F.A.C. including 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, is a non-significant categorical
industrial user.



   (4)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Section (B)
of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
Treatment Works operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the City may at any time, on its own initiative or in response
to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in
62-625.500(2)(e), determine that such user should not be considered a
significant industrial user.



   Significant non-compliance.  Means that violations of this chapter by
a user subject to pretreatment standards meet one or more of the following
criteria:



   (1)   Chronic violation: 66% or more of all measurements taken for
the same pollutant during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instant;



   (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violation: 33% or more of all
measurements taken for the same pollutant during a six-month period equal or
exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable TRC. (TRC equals
1.4 for BOD, TSS and Oil and Grease; and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);



   (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
(daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative
standard) that the City determines has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the
health of city or wastewater treatment plant personnel or the general public);



   (4)   A discharge that caused imminent endangerment to human health,
welfare or to the environment and resulted in the city exercising its
emergency authority;



   (5)   Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone date within 90
days or more after the scheduled date contained in a control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;



   (6)   Failure to submit a required report within forty-five (45)
days of its due date;



   (7)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or



   (8)   Any other violation or group of violations, including a
violation of best management practices, which the Director determines may
cause interference or pass through or will adversely affect implementation of
the city's pretreatment program.



   Significant violation.  A violation that remains uncorrected 45 days
after notification of noncompliance; which is part of a pattern of
non-compliance over a 12-month period; which involves a failure to accurately
report non-compliance; or which resulted in the WWF exercising its emergency
authority under Section 403.8 (F)(l)(vi)(B) of the Act.



   Slug load or slug discharge.  Any discharge of non-routine, episodic
nature, which has reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through,
or in any other way violate the treatment works regulations, local limits or
permit conditions.



   Standard industrial classification (SIC). Classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office
of the President, Office of Management and Budget, as amended.



   State.  State of Florida.



   Storm drain or storm sewer.  A sewer that carries stormwater and
surface water, street wash, and other wash waters or drainage, but excludes
domestic wastewater and industrial and commercial waste.



   Stormwater.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.



   Superintendent.  The person designated by the WWF to supervise the
operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or his or her duly
authorized representative.



   Surcharge.  An extra charge levied to a user for treatment of
compatible wastewaters that contain substances in excess of specified maximum
allowable limits.



   Suspended solids.  Solids that are in suspension in water, sewage, or
other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering.



   Toxic pollutant.  Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts.



   Treatment plant.  That portion of regional treatment facilities
designed to provide treatment to wastewater and is operated by the South
Central Regional Wastewater Treatment and Disposal Board.



   Treatment works.  The wastewater treatment plant, interceptors, force
mains, lift stations, and collection systems.



   User.  Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution
of wastewater into the WWF.



   User charge or user fee.  A charge levied on the users of the
treatment process facilities for the cost of operation and maintenance of
those facilities and other equitable and necessary charges.



   Wastewater. The liquid and water carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or
permitted to enter the WWF.



   Wastewater facility (WWF).  Any or all of the following: the
collection/transmission system, the treatment plant, and the reuse or
disposal system.



   Wastewater treatment plant.  Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating wastewater, such as the WWF.



   Watercourse.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. 10-002, §
2, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 12-019, § 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-116.  Compliance with provisions or more stringent regulations.



   (a)   The use of public sanitary sewers shall be as outlined in this
chapter or through other regulations as may be promulgated by the city or the
WWF under the authority of this chapter.



   (b)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by health
agencies.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-117.  Disposal of sewage other than through regional facilities.



   (a)   The disposal of sewage by means other than use of the
available regional wastewater facilities shall be in accordance with city,
county, state, and federal law.



   (b)   The disposal of sewage to the WWF shall be as outlined in this
chapter and shall be subject to standards which meet or exceed the city
industrial and commercial waste ordinance requirements as they shall exist
from time-to-time.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-118.  Right to refuse waste upon noncompliance.



   The city shall have the right to refuse waste from any user where
wastewater does not comply with this chapter.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-119.  Depositing objectionable wastes on public and private property.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited, in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human excrement,
garbage, or other objectionable waste.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-120.  Discharging into natural outlets.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-121.  Privies, septic tanks, and other facilities.



   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-122.  Suitable toilet facilities.



   The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city
are required, at their expense, to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect those facilities directly with the proper public
sewer, in accordance with applicable state and county regulations, within 90
days after date of official notice to do so.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-123.  Discharge prohibited in storm sewer system.



   Under no condition shall the discharge of domestic, sanitary,
industrial, or commercial waste be permitted into the storm sewer system.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-124.  Damaging or tampering with sewage works.



   No person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the sewage works.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Subdivision B. Private Sewage Disposal System



Sec. 26-125.  Connecting building sewer to private sewage disposal system.



   Where a public, sanitary, or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of Section 26-122, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this
subchapter.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-126.  Written permit to be obtained, application, inspection fee.



   Before the commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall obtain a written permit signed by the authorized city
official. The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the city which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications,
and other information as are deemed necessary by the authorized city
official. A permit and inspection fee of $50 shall be paid to the city at the
time the application is filed.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-127.  County to inspect installations.



   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
county.  The county shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify
the county when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-128.  Compliance with state department of environmental protection
and other current regulations.



   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department of
Environmental Protection.  No permit shall be issued for any private sewage
disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities unless it
conforms to all current regulations.  No septic tanks or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-129.  Connecting private sewage disposal system to public sewer.



   At a time when a public sewer becomes available to a property served by
a private sewage disposal system, as provided herein, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any
septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall
be abandoned and filled with suitable material.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-130.  Maintenance of private sewage disposal facilities.



   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Subdivision C. Installations and Connections



Sec. 26-131.  Written permit required for use of public sewer; application;
fee.



   (a)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.



   (b)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the city.  A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time
the application is filed.  The permit fee for those establishments
discharging industrial wastewater is further explained in this chapter.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-132.  Costs and expense of installation and connection of building
sewer; indemnification.



   All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner or user. The owner and user
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-133.  Separate building sewer provided for every building.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-134.  Use of old building sewers with new buildings.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and tested by the Building Official, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-135.  Building sewer specifications.



   (a)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, joining, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city.  In the absence of code provisions, or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No. 9, as same may be
amended from time-to-time, shall apply.



   (b)   All connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by
the Building Department before installation.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-136.  Gravity flow of building drain to public sewer.



   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at any elevation below the basement floor.  In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by that building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-137.  Surface runoff or groundwater.



   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or any other connected appurtenances, or other
sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building
drain which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-138.  Inspection of connection to public sewer.



   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city
officials or city representatives.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-139.  Barricades and lights around sewer excavations.



   All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Subdivision D. Use of Public Sewers



Sec. 26-140.  Wastes discharged into sanitary sewers to meet criteria.



   All waste discharged to public sanitary sewers, which in turn discharge
to the regional treatment facilities (WWF), shall meet or exceed the
following criteria of this subchapter.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-141.  Discharge of stormwater and other unpolluted drainage.



   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, ground water, uncontaminated cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters to the sanitary sewer.



   (b)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to those sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or
to a natural outlet approved by the proper city or county official.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on
approval of the Utilities Director to a storm sewer or natural outlet.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-142.  Prohibited discharges to sewers.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any pollutant which
causes pass through, interference, or the below described materials, waters,
or wastes (collectively, the substances) if it appears likely that acceptance
of those wastes can harm the wastewater treatment process or equipment, the
public sewers, the sanitary sewer systems, or have an adverse effect on the
receiving water body, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property,
or constitute a nuisance. The decision shall be based on those factors as the
quantities subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the wastewater treatment
process, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability
of waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The
substances restricted are:



   (a)   Flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases, including,
but not limited to, gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other materials
with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.



   (b)   Pollutants having a pH of less than 5.5, or greater than 9.5,
or otherwise causing corrosive damage to the WWF or its equipment or
personnel.



   (c)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or concentration which, either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the WWF.



   (d)   Any liquid having a temperature higher than 150° F. or
causing the wastewater treatment plant influent to exceed 104° F.



   (e)   Any water or waste containing petroleum oils, mineral oils, or
non-biodegradable cutting oils in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through, or any fats, wax, grease, or other oils, whether emulsified or
not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. (0°
C. and 60° C).



   (f)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the WWF in quantities that may cause acute worker
health or safety problems.



   (g)   Any trucked or hauled wastes, except at discharge points
designated by the Director. Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only
at locations designated by the Director. No load may be discharged without
prior consent of the Director. The Director may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The Director may
require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load
prior to discharge.



   (h)   Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous or
pathogenic solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance or an acute health or safety hazard, interfere with the ability to
repair or maintain the WWF, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of
the wastewater treatment plant.



   (i)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders. Penalties, see Sec. 26-177



   (j)   Wastes which impart color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consistently impart color to the treatment plant's
effluent.



   (k)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.



   (l)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment
of industrial wastes.



   (m)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Director.



   (n)   Wastes causing, either alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.



   (o)   Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which
may cause excessive foaming in the WWF.



   (p)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.



   (q)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in a concentration exceeding limits which may be
established by the POTW as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage
to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for that discharge to the receiving waters.



   (r)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, which shall
mean particles in size no greater than 1/2 inches measured in any dimension.



   (s)   Any waste containing restricted substances in quantities in
excess of the City's local limits, measured at the point of discharge into
any sewer system, as adopted by the South Central Regional Wastewater
Treatment and Disposal Board and contained in the Interlocal Agreement
entered into between the City of Boynton Beach and the City of Delray Beach.
Such local limits are incorporated herein by reference. The City may also
develop best management practices (BMPs) to implement local limits. Such BMPs
shall be considered local limits and pretreatment standards for the purpose
of this Article.



   (t)   Any waste from sodium-cycle action exchange (water softening)
units from industrial or commercial users where the chloride content exceeds
645 milligrams per liter.



   (u)   Any water or waste with a chlorine demand greater than 15
milligrams per liter.



   (v)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes or half- life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the POTW in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.



   (w)   Volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a slug
discharge as defined in Section 26-115.



   (x)   Any waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to that degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirement of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



   (y)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids in excess of
400 milligrams per liter unless the user is approved by the city and provided
further that the user complies with the requirements of the city's high
strength sewer surcharge system.



   (z)   Any waters or wastes with a five-day, 20° C. B.O.D. greater
than 400 milligrams per liter unless the user is approved by the city and
provided further that the user complies with the requirements of the city's
high strength sewer surcharge system.



   (aa)   Any waters or wastes containing chemical oxygen demand (COD)
greater than 800 mg/l unless the user is approved by the city and provided
further that the user complies with the requirements of the city's high
strength sewer surcharge system.



   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the WWF. Except where expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement, no user shall ever increase the use of process
water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement. The City may impose mass limitations on
users that are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.  13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-143.  Pretreatment, equalization of waste flows.



   (a)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 26-142, and which, in the
judgment of the Utilities Director, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Utility Director
may:



      (1)   Reject the wastes.



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers.



      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge.



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing fees or sewer charges as
contained in the strength charge system.



   (b)   If the WWF permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the plans for the design and installation of the equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the WWF and the city and subject to the
requirements of applicable codes, ordinances, laws, and compliance schedules
as established by the city.  In addition, any major contributing industry as
defined by 40 CFR 403 shall comply with 40 CFR 403 12 and any other
regulation as shall from time-to-time be established by EPA or other
appropriate regulating governmental agency.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 01-58,
§ 2, 12-4-01; Ord. 10-002, § 2, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 12-019, § 2, 12-4-12;
Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-144.  Interceptors.



   (a)   Grease, oil, hair, lint and sand interceptions are to be
provided when, in the judgement of the Utilities Director, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease or any other
restricted substance in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or
other harmful ingredients, except that those interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units.  All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be so located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.



   (b)   All new and existing businesses or industries that wash cars
will be required to install and maintain an oil/water separator in the sewer
service discharge.  For outdoor car washing, the wash pad must be sheltered
so stormwater will not be discharged to the sanitary sewer system.  Complete
containment of all car wash areas using curbing or mountable traffic bumps as
required to prevent runoff of wash discharge to storm drainage facilities. 
All new and existing businesses or industries that use petroleum based
products in day to day activities will be required to install an oil/water
separator in the sewer service discharge if floor drains connect to the
sanitary sewer.  No domestic effluent shall be allowed to discharge through
the oil/water separator as stated in the plumbing code section of the Florida
Building Code.



   (c)   All units have to meet the standards of the Florida Plumbing
Code effective March 1, 2009.  If a later edition of this code or subsequent
amendments is made to the applicable minimum code, then those revisions or
subsequent amendments shall automatically become the adopted code under this
chapter.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-145.  Maintaining flow-equalizing facilities and/or interceptors for
preliminary treatment.



   Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities and/or
interceptors are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the user at his or
her expense.  Use of solvents and/or detergents and/or soaps, and/or
degreasers is restricted to those levels which do not interfere with the
proper functions of the interceptors.  Interceptors like, but not limited
to, grease traps, lint traps, or grit traps must have a watertight closure
for their inspection covers.  The covers themselves must be of a type to
conform with the plumbing codes of the city’s Building Department.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-146.  Admission of industrial and commercial waste.



   All users of the public sewers or sanitary sewers shall recognize and
comply with the following:



   (a)   The economy and desirability of the combined treatment of
industrial and commercial wastes and sanitary sewage is recognized. 
However, not all types and quantities of industrial and commercial wastes can
be so treated. It shall be the policy to admit the types and quantities of
industrial and commercial wastes that are not harmful or damaging to the
structures, processes, or operation of the sewage works or are not
specifically prohibited. In all cases, a special permit will be issued which
will state specific conditions and requirements to be maintained.  It is
also recognized that to provide this service, additional facilities or
treatment are required, and the cost of that must be borne by the user
receiving the benefits.



   (b)   (1)   Approval in advance by the city is required for the
anticipated admission of industrial or commercial wastes into the public
sewers having:



         a.   A five-day, 20° C. B.O.D. greater than 220
milligrams per liter, or chemical oxygen demand (COD) greater than 440
milligrams per liter.



         b.   A suspended solids content greater than 175
milligrams per liter.



         c.   An oil/grease content greater than 100 milligrams
per liter.



      (2)   The user shall provide chemical analyses of the
discharge according to a schedule to be established by the WWF and continued
discharge shall be subject to approval of the city.



   (c)   Samples shall be collected so as to be a representative sample
of the actual quality of the wastes. Samples for analysis may be collected by
the user or his or her representative. Analysis shall be made by a registered
sanitary engineer or graduate chemist whose qualifications are acceptable to
the city or a wastewater treatment plant operator licensed and registered in
the state, or a water testing laboratory certified by the state, using the
laboratory methods for the examination of wastewater as set forth in 40 CFR
136, Chapter 62-160, F.A.C., and Chapter 62-625.600, F.A.C. (also see 26-158).



   (d)   When required by the Utilities Director, any establishment
discharging industrial or commercial wastes into the sewer system shall
construct and maintain at its sole expense a suitable control manhole or
other suitable control station downstream from any treatment, storage, or
other approved works to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of
all wastes including all domestic sewage from the establishment. The location
and methods of construction of the control station shall be approved by the
Utilities Director. The control station shall be maintained by the
establishment so as to be safe and accessible at all times. If any
establishment wishes to meter its waste discharge into the sewer system to
verify in-product water retention or other uses of metered flow, they may, at
their sole expense, install a flow-metering device as approved by the
Utilities Director. The control station shall be accessible to city personnel
at all times for sampling. All authorized WWF or city employees shall be
permitted, upon suitable notice to the user, to enter upon all properties for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in
accordance with provisions of this chapter. When required, construction of
those facilities shall be completed within 90 days following written
notification by the city.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-147.  Oil and grease management and surcharge programs.



   (a)   Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to provide
for the implementation of the oil and grease management program and the
surcharge program. The objective of the oil and grease management program is
to minimize the introduction of fat-soluble wastes to the collection system.
The objective of the surcharge program is to recover the costs from users for
receiving and treating abnormally high-strength compatible wastes, such as
CBOD and total suspended solids (TSS).



   (b)   Oil and Grease Prevention Program.



      (1)   The discharge by a user to the public sewer of certain
liquids or wastes is prohibited unless authorized under the provisions of
this section.



      (2)   Wastes which contain oil and grease may be discharged to
the public sewer in accordance with the conditions set forth in this section.



      (3)   Wastes containing oil and grease, including materials
processed through garbage grinders, shall be directed to a grease interceptor
or trap.



      (4)   Wastes containing residual (trace amounts]
petroleum-based oil and grease shall be directed to an oil/water separator.



      (5)   Sanitary facilities and other similar fixtures shall not
be connected or discharged to an oil and grease interceptor or an oil/water
separator.



      (6)   Liquid wastes shall be discharged to an oil and grease
interceptor or oil/water separator through the inlet pipe only and in
accordance with the design/operating specifications of the device.



      (7)   Oil and grease interceptors and oil/water separators
shall be installed in an outdoor location that provides easy access at all
times for inspections, cleaning and proper maintenance, including pumping.



      (8)   Minimum removal efficiency for oil and grease
interceptors for animal fats and vegetable oils shall be eighty (80) percent.
Minimum removal efficiency for oil/water separators for trace petroleum based
wastes shall be ninety (90) percent.



      (9)   The Utilities Director may request that the
nonresidential user provides documentation on the design and performance of
the oil and grease interceptor or oil/water separator, including but not
limited to catalog cuts, performance data, materials of construction,
installation instructions and operation and maintenance manual.



   (10)   The Utilities Director at his/her discretion may assign a
nonresidential user to the surcharge program if, in his/her opinion,
discharges from the nonresidential connection will have a negative impact on
the Treatment Works.



   (c)   Design.



      (1)   Oil and grease interceptors and oil/water separators
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this section, the
Utilities' Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards, latest
edition and other applicable state and local regulations. Design and
construction shall be approved by the Utilities Director.



      (2)   The design of oil/water separators shall be based on
peak flow and, where applicable, capable of treating and removing emulsions.
Oil/water separators shall be sized to allow efficient removal (retention) of
the petroleum-based oils and grease from the user's discharge to the public
sewer.



      (3)   Alternative oil, and grease removal devices or
technologies shall be subject to written approval by the Utilities Director
and shall be based on demonstrated (proven) removal efficiencies.
Under-the-sink oil and grease interceptors are prohibited for new facilities,
except as approved bv the Utilities Director for existing facilities with
limited food preparation and cooking such as some bakeries and warming
kitchens.



      (4)   An adequate number of inspection and monitoring points,
such as a control manhole or inspection box, shall be provided.



   (d)   Capacity.  The capacity of the approved oil and grease
interceptor and oil/water separator shall be in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the latest edition of the Utilities' Engineering
Design Handbook and Construction Standards. The Utilities Director may modify
the requirements on a case by case basis.



   (e)   Maintenance.



      (1)   Cleaning and maintenance shall be performed by the user.
Cleaning shall include the complete removal of all contents including
floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludge and solids.



      (2)   Decanting, backflushing or discharging of removed wastes
back into the oil and grease interceptor of (for) oil/water separator from
which the waste was removed or any other oil and grease interceptor or
oil/water separator, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled and
disposed is prohibited.



      (3)   Oil and grease interceptors and oil/water separators
shall be pumped out completely at a minimum frequency of once every ninety
(90) days, or more frequently as needed to prevent carryover of oil and
grease into the collection system. Under-the-sink oil and grease traps shall
be cleaned at a minimum frequency of once per week, or more often as
necessary to prevent pass through of grease and other food solids to the
collection system. Cleaning and maintenance shall include removal of
materials from the tank walls, baffles, cross pipes, inlets and outlets.



      (4)   Pumping frequency shall be determined by the Utilities
Director based on flows, quantity of oil and grease in the discharge, volume
of business, hours of operations and seasonal variations. However, in no
event shall the time frame between the pumping of the oil/water interceptor
or oil/water separator exceed ninety (90) days. The user shall be responsible
for maintaining the oil and grease interceptor or oil/water separator in a
satisfactory condition for efficient operation. An interceptor shall be
considered to be out of compliance if the grease layer on top exceeds six (6)
inches and the solids layer on the bottom exceeds twelve (12) inches or if
removal efficiencies as determined through sampling and analysis indicate
less than eighty (80) percent.



      (5)   Wastes removed from each oil and grease interceptor or
oil/waste separator shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive
such washes or a location designated by the city for such purposes in
accordance with the provisions of this section. In no way shall the pumpage
be returned to any private or public portion of the collection system or the
treatment plants without prior written approval from the Utilities Director.



      (6)   Additives placed into the oil and grease interceptor,
(oil/water separator) or building discharge line on a constant, regular or
scheduled basis shall be reported to the Utilities Director in writing at
least five (5) days prior to use. Such additives include, but are not limited
to, emulsifiers, enzymes, commercially available bacteria or other additives
designed to absorb, purge, consume, treat or otherwise eliminate grease and
oils. Any use of additives shall be approved in writing by the Utilities
Director prior to introduction into the waste stream, interceptor or
separator. The use of additives, shall, in no way be considered as a
substitution for the maintenance procedures required herein.



   (f)   Facility information.



      (1)   A log of pumping activities shall be maintained by the
user for the previous twelve (12) months The log of pumping activities shall
be posted in a conspicuous location for immediate access by city personnel.
The log shall include the date, time, volume pumped, hauler's name and
license number and hauler's signature. The user shall report pumping
activities within forty-eight (48) hours to the Utilities Director on the
form so designated by the city for such purposes.



      (2)   The user shall maintain a file on site of the records
and other documents pertaining to the facility's oil and grease interceptor
or oil/water separator. Required file contents shall include, as a minimum,
the record (as-built) drawings, record of inspections, log of pumping
activities and receipts, log of maintenance activities, hauler information,
disposal information and monitoring data. The file shall be available at all
times for inspection and review by the Utilities Director.



   (g)   Enforcement and Noncompliance.



      (1)   Noncompliance with the requirements of this section may
result in enforcement action by the city including, but not limited to,
termination of water service.



      (2)   The user shall pay all outstanding fees, penalties and
other utility charges prior to reinstatement of water and sewer service.



      (3)   Any user in the oil and grease management program found
in violation of the provisions in this section, and any orders, rules,
regulations and permits that are issued pursuant to the chapter, shall be
served by the Utilities Director with written notice by personal delivery or
by registered or certified mail that states the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction of the
violation. The affected user shall permanently cease all violations within
the time period specified in the notice.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. 10-002, §
2, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 12-019, § 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13) 
Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Subdivision E. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards



Sec. 26-148.  Compliance.



   (a)   Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment
as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all
national categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as
specified by the federal pretreatment regulations and as required by the
city. Industrial users with integrated facilities shall comply with any
alternative discharge limits as set by the city. Any facilities required to
pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided,
operated, and maintained solely at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing
the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
the city for review at the request of the city. The review of those plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to
the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the city
prior to the user's initiation of the changes.



   (b)   The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter
1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated.



   (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.6(C) and Rule 62-625.410(4), F.A.C.



   (2)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Director shall
impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR
403.6(E) and Rule 62-625.410(6), F.A.C.



   (3)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13 and Rule 62-625.700, F.A.C., that factors
relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors
considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (4)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are
expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the
Director may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as
mass of pollutant discharges per day or effluent concentration for purposes
of calculating effluent limitations applicable to Individual Industrial
Users, in accordance with 62-625.401(4), F.A.C.



   (5)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15 and Rule 62-625.820, F.A.C.



   (c)   Dilution.  No user shall ever increase the use of process
water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge
limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard
or requirement. The Director may impose mass limitations on users who are
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or
in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.



   (d)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards
shall be available to officials of the city, the WWF, EPA, or FDEP upon
request.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-149.  Application of more stringent requirements; city shall notify
affected users.



   Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment
standards or alternative discharge limits for a particular industrial
subcategory, the pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations
imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately
supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter and shall be considered
part of this chapter. After the city receives notice, the city shall notify
all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR
403.12.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-150.  City's right of revision.



   The city reserves the right to establish by further ordinance or
regulation more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
sewage works if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in
this chapter.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-151.  Excessive discharge.



   All users are prohibited from increasing the use of process water or,
in any way, attempting to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, alternative
discharge limits, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by
the city or state.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-152.  Prevention of accidental and slug discharges.



   (a)   A user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
restricted and prohibited materials or other substances required by this
chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited and
restricted materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's expense.



   (b)   Prevention of accidental discharges requires, but is not
limited to, providing secondary containment for storage of potentially
hazardous and/or regulated materials. The containment requirements are those
specified in, but not limited to, 40 CFR 264.170 through 176 and the Palm
Beach County Wellfield Protection Ordinance 88-7 Section 5.01 through 5.04.
Containment requirements must meet or exceed the following criteria of this
subchapter:



   (1)   Containment Volume to be provided shall be in accordance with
the regulations and ordinances listed and shall meet or exceed the largest of
the volume requirements found in those regulations and ordinances.



   (2)   Storage Sheltering. All outdoor storage shall be sheltered
from rainfall, or a suitable means of removing rainwater from secondary
containment areas shall be provided.



   (3)   Conditions of the Stored Vessel. All stored containers shall
be maintained in sound condition; no rust, corrosion, or other signs of
deterioration of the primary containment wall shall be permitted. All stored
containers shall be closed and sealed during storage.



   (4)   Segregation of Chemically Reactive Contents. Materials which
are potentially reactive with each other shall not be stored in the same
containment area, unless physical barrier separations are provided within the
common area.



   (5)   Stand-by Materials/Equipment.  Absorbents and pumps for
pumping out spills shall be available when needed.



   (6)   Design of Containment Floor/Base. The floor or base of the
containment area on which the stored vessels rest shall either be sloped or
raised or provided with a drain faucet to prevent or minimize contact between
the storage container wall and spilled content.



   (7)   Materials of Construction for Containment. The walls, sidings,
and floor or base of the containment area shall be constructed of materials
which are chemically inert with the stored materials and which render the
provided containment volume leak proof.



   (c)   On the request of the city, the user shall be required to
submit detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
this protection. All required users shall complete this plan within ninety
(90) days after notification by the city. If further required by the city, a
user who commences contribution to the public sewers after the effective date
of this chapter shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the
system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city.
Review and approval of those plans and operating procedures shall not relieve
the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as
necessary to meet the requirements.



   (d)   The City shall evaluate, at least once every two years,
whether each significant industrial user needs a plant to control slug
discharges. New significant industrial users must be evaluated within 1 year
of being designated a significant industrial user. Significant industrial
users are required to notify the City immediately of any changes at its
facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. If the City decides
that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall be prepared in accordance
with the requirements of Rule 62-625.500(2)(b)(6), F.A.C.



   (e)   In the case of an accidental discharge, including slug
discharges and prohibited discharges, it is the responsibility of the user to
immediately notify by telephone, the Utilities Director, the Executive
Director of the WWF, and the WWF. The notification shall include location of
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and correction actions.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-153.  Written report required describing cause of discharge.



   Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the WWF and the city a written report describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken to prevent similar future occurrences.
The notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
public/sanitary sewer system, the sanitary sewer system, the WWF, fish kills,
or any other damage to person or property; nor shall the notification relieve
the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be
imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-154.  Notice to employees in event of dangerous discharge; emergency
notification procedure.



   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees of whom to call, in the event of a
dangerous discharge.  Furthermore, all employers shall ensure that all
employees who may cause a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-155.  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.



   (a)   Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous
waste shall notify the Director of Utilities, the Executive Director of the
WWF, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, the State hazardous
waste authorities, and the State's pretreatment authorities in writing of any
discharge into the City Sewer System of a substance which is a listed or
characteristic hazardous waste under Section 3001 of RCRA or 40 CFR part 261,
or Chapter 62-730, F.A.C. Such notification must include a description of any
such wastes discharged, the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40
CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch, or other). Any notification under this paragraph need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. This requirement
shall not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitory
requirements. Notification is required no later than thirty (30) days after
the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. If the
industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the WWF, the notification shall also contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the industrial user;



   (1)   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in
the waste,



   (2)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and



   (3)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.



   (b)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (a)
above during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes
as specified in 40 CFR Part 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) or Chapter 62-730, F.A.C.
Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous waste in a
calendar month, or any quantity of acute hazardous waste, requires a one-time
notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges
more than 15 kilograms of hazardous waste do not require additional
notification, except for the acute hazardous wastes specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e) or Chapter 62-730, F.A.C.



   (c)   In the case of new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify
the Utilities Director, the Executive Director of the WWF, the EPA Regional
Waste Management Division Director, and the State hazardous waste authorities
of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of
such regulations, except for the exemption in paragraph (b) of this section.



   (d)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practicable and that it has selected the method of treatment,
storage, or disposal currently available which minimizes the present and
future threat to human health and the environment.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Subdivision F. Reporting, Inspections, and Monitoring



Sec. 26-156.  Compliance reporting requirements.



   (a)   Baseline Report.  Within ninety (90) days after the effective
date of a pretreatment standard, existing industrial users currently
discharging to, or scheduled to discharge to the Treatment Works shall submit
to the Director a baseline report that meets the requirements of Rule
62-625.600(1), F.A.C. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of
discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent
to the promulgation of an applicable pretreatment standard, shall submit to
the Director a baseline report that meets the requirements of Rule
62-625.600(1), F.A.C. New sources shall include in this report information on
the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment
standards.



   (b)   Compliance Schedule and Progress Reports. If additional
pretreatment of O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the
industrial user shall provide such additional pretreatment or O&M as
specified in a compliance schedule. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. The compliance schedule shall contain increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standard
(e.g. hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction,
completing construction). No increment of progress shall exceed nine (9)
months. Within fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report
to the Director including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date, and, if not, the date on which
it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay,
and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction
to the schedule established. Compliance schedule reports shall meet the
requirements in Rule 62-625.600(2), F.A.C. In no event shall more than nine
(9) months elapse between such progress reports to the Director.



   (c)   Final Compliance Report.  Within thirty (30) days following
the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in
the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the public/sanitary sewer system, the user shall submit to
the Utilities Director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of
all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited
by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily
flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by those
pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall meet the
requirements of Rule 62-625.600(3). The report shall state whether the
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional pretreatment is necessary to
bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative
of the industrial user.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-157.  Other reporting requirements.



   (a)   Periodic Compliance Report.  Each significant user and/or
permittee, except nonsignificant categorical industrial users, shall submit
to the city during the months of June and December, unless required more
frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the city, a report indicating
the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited
by those pretreatment standards or this chapter. The reports must be based on
sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report. Periodic
compliance reports shall meet the requirements of Rule 62-625.600(4) and (7),
F.A.C. If an industrial user monitors any regulated pollutant at the
appropriate monitoring location more frequently than required by the City,
the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.  In
addition, this report shall include a record of daily water consumption
which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily water
consumption reported in the submission information. At the discretion of the
city and in consideration of those factors as local high or low flow rates,
holidays, budget cycles, and the like, the city may agree to alter the months
during which the above reports are to be submitted. The City may also reduce
the reporting requirements to a frequency no less than once a year, unless
required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by FDEP, if the
industrial user meets the requirements of Rule 62-625.600(4)(d), F.A.C. The
user shall be responsible to quantify that fraction of daily water
consumption designated for discharge to the sanitary sewer, if different from
the total water consumption. In cases where the pretreatment standard
requires compliance with best management practice (BMP) or pollution
prevention alternative, the industrial user shall submit documentation
required by the City or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the
compliance status of the industrial user. The City may authorize an
industrial user to waive sampling of a regulated pollutant if the industrial
user provides a certification statement and demonstrates compliance with Rule
62-625.600(4)(b) and (c), F.A.C.



   (b)   Reports of Changed Conditions.  Each user must notify the
Director and the Executive Director of any planned significant changes to the
user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume
of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.



   (1)   The Director may require the user to submit such information
as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission under Section 26-161.



   (2)   The Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under
Section 26-160 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under
Section 26-160 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.



   (3)   For purpose of this requirement, significant changes include,
but are not limited to, flow 20% percent or greater, and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.



   (c)   Reports of Potential Problems.



   (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, a slug discharge, or prohibited discharge,
that may cause potential problems for the WWF, the user shall immediately
telephone and notify them of the incident. This notification shall include
the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if
known, and corrective actions taken by the user.



   (2)   Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived in writing by the Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter.



   (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event
of a discharge described in  paragraph (a), above. Employee shall ensure
that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of
the emergency notification procedure.



   (d)   Report from Unpermitted Users.  All users not required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
Director as required.



   (e)   Timing.  Written reports will be deemed to have been
submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage
prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service,
the date of receipt of the report shall govern.



   (f)   Signatory Requirements. Signatory requirements for all
industrial user reports shall be as stated under Section 26-161(e).



   (g)   Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the Director
within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat
analysis to the Director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the
violation. If the Director has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of
the industrial user, the Director must perform the repeat sampling and
analysis unless the user is notified of the violation and the Director
requires the user to perform the repeat analysis. The user is not required to
resample if the Director monitors at the user's facility at least once a
month, or if the Director samples between the user's initial sampling and
when the user receives the results of this sampling.



   (h)   Annual Certification by Non-Significant Categorical Industrial
Users.  An industrial user determined to be a non-significant categorical
industrial user as defined in Section 26-115, must annually submit the
following certification statement, signed in accordance with the signatory
requirements of paragraph (f) above. The certification must accompany any
alternative report required by the City: "Based on my inquiry of the person
or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical
pretreatment standards under 40 CFR [specify applicable national pretreatment
standard part(s)] I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that
during the period from [month, day, year] to [month, day, year]:



   (1)   The facility described as [industrial user name] met the
definition of a non-significant categorical industrial user as defined in
Section 26-115;



   (2)   The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements during this reporting period; and



   (3)   The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.



   This compliance certification is based upon the following information:
[documentation of basis to continue exemption].



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-158.  Inspection and sampling.



   (a)   The city, through its employees, is authorized to inspect the
facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is
being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants
of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or
its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination,
records copying, or in the performance of their duties. The city, WWF, state
DEP, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property those
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance
monitoring, or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in
force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry
into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their
security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the city, WWF, DEP, and EPA will be permitted to enter,
without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities
(also see Section 26-168). Penalty, see Sec. 26-177.



   (b)   Analytical Requirements. All pollutant analyses, including
sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the requirements
of 40 CFR Part 136, Chapter 62-160, F.A.C, and Rule 62-625.600(6)(d) and (e),
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain appropriate sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, the laboratory, with
approval of the industrial user, the City and FDEP, shall identify and
propose a method for use in accordance with Rules 62-160.300 and 62-160330,
F.A.C



   (c)   Sample Collection. Except as indicated in subsection (1)
below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow
proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional
sampling is not feasible, the Director may authorize, in writing, the use of
time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent
being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. The City shall require the
number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by
industrial users with the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
Sample collection shall meet the requirements of Rule 62-625.600(6)(c)-(f),
F.A.C.



   (1)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab sample
techniques.



   (2)   All samples shall be representative of daily operations. Both
daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be
reported. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the industrial
user shall submit documentation as required by the City or the applicable
standards to determine compliance with the standard.



   (3)   Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities, if such exist, or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed
with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the industrial user
shall measure flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined
waste stream formula of Rule 62-625.410(6), F.A.C., in order to evaluate
compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration
or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with Rule 62-625.410(6),
F.A.C., this adjusted limit, along with supporting data, shall be submitted
to the City.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-159.  Information and data to be made available.



   (a)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and
from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency in accordance with applicable state statutes or federal law. All
reports submitted to the city shall be signed by an authorized representative
and contain the certification statement found in Section 26-161(e).



   (b)   Information and data obtained from reports, surveys, permit
applications, permits, monitoring requirements, and inspection and sampling
activities shall be made available to the public without restriction, unless
the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Director, that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets under applicable State law. Any such request must
be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.



   (c)   When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing that
such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which
might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics and
other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be made available to the public without
restriction. A copy of the procedure for handling confidential information
will be kept on file at the WWF.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Subdivision G. Waste Discharge Permits



Sec. 26-160.  Special permit required; term.



   A special permit will be required for each Significant Industrial User,
and all other Industrial Users identified as having other than domestic
wastes or waste from sanitary conveniences at the discretion of the Utilities
Director. The fixed life of a permit is set up to five years from date of
issue, and a renewed waste discharge permit will have a fixed life of up to
five years. These permits may involve the implementation of a formula for
surcharge for wastes which exceed the sewage parameters for strength as set
forth in Sections 26-162 through 26-165. Penalties, see Sec. 26-177



   (a)   Wastewater Analysis.  When requested by the Director, a user
must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater
within sixty (60) days of the request. The Director is authorized to prepare
a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this
information.



   (b)   Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement.



   (1)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into
the WWF without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the
Director, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely
application pursuant to section (c) of this section may continue to discharge
for the time period specified therein.



   (2)   The Director may require other users to obtain wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.



   (3)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a waste water
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Section 26-177.
Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its
obligation to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment standards or
requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State, and local law.



   (c)   Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections. Any
user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging
waste water into the WWF prior to the effective date of this ordinance and
who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within thirty
(30) days after said date, apply to the Director for a wastewater discharge
permit in accordance with Section 26-161, and shall not cause or allow
discharges to the WWF to continue after thirty (30) days the effective date
of this ordinance except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit
issued by the Director.



   (d)   Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections.  Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the WWF must obtain such permit prior to the
beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this
wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with Section 26-161, must be filed
at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will
begin or recommence.



   (e)   Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration.  A wastewater discharge
permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5)
years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit
may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the
Director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon
which it will expire.



   (f)   Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents.  A wastewater discharge
permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by
the Director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of
the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect against
damage to the WWF. Wastewater discharge permits must contain:



   (1)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit
duration, which in no event shall exceed (5) five years.



   (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the City of Boynton Beach in
accordance with paragraph (h) of this section, and provisions for furnishing
the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge
permit;



   (3)   Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;



   (4)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law;



   (5)   Process for seeking a waiver for a pollutant neither present
nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with Rule
62-625.600(4)(b), F.A.C., or a specific waived pollutant in the case of an
individual control mechanism;



   (6)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, or local law.



   (7)   Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the
City to be necessary.



Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the
following conditions:



   (8)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time
of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



   (9)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices,
designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the treatment works;



   (10)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine
discharges;



   (11)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the WWF;



   (12)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the WWF;



   (13)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment;



   (14)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with
all applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those
which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and



   (15)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director to
ensure compliance with the ordinance, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations.



   (g)   Wastewater discharge permit modification. The Director may
modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not
limited to, the following reasons:



   (1)   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or Local
pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, process, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;



   (3)   A change in the WWF that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



   (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the City of Boynton Beach WWF, City personnel, or the receiving
waters;



   (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit;



   (6)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;



   (7)   Revisions of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;



   (8)   To correct typographical or others errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; or



   (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership to a new owner
or operator.



   (h)   Wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge
permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee
gives at least thirty (30) days advance notice to the Director and the
Director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the
Director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator
which:



   (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate
intent to change the facility's operations and processes;



   (2)   Identifies the specific dates on which the transfer is to
occur; and



   (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing wastewater discharge permit.



Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.



   (i)   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an
expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance
with Section 26-161, a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of
the user's existing wastewater discharge permit.



   (j)   Permit Revocation. The City may revoke an individual
wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to,
the following reasons:



   (1)   A failure to notify the Director of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;



   (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the Director of
changed conditions pursuant to Section 26-157(b);



   (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;



   (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification
statements;



   (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;



   (6)   Refusing to allow the Director, or authorized personnel,
timely access to the facility premises and records;



   (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



   (8)   Failure to pay fines;



   (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;



   (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



   (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;



   (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or



   (13)   Violation of any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance.



Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse,
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual
wastewater discharge permits issued to a User are void upon the issuance of a
new individual wastewater discharge permit to that User.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-161.  Application for permits; contents.



   (a)   Contents of Application.  All users required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The Director
may require all users to submit as part of an application the following
information:



   (1)   All information required by Section 26-156 and F.A.C.
62-625.600(1);



   (2)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on
the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or
stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be
discharged to the WWF;



   (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of operation;



   (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes,
and rate of production;



   (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);



   (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size,
location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;



   (7)   Time and duration of discharges; and



   (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. Incomplete
or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the
user for revision.



   (b)   This application will define all of the pertinent data
concerning the acceptance of industrial and commercial waste flows and will
provide the basis for the issuing of a permit certificate specifying
limitations on what the user may discharge. The Permittee may appeal specific
conditions of the permit for a period of 30 calendar days following the date
of issuance. After this period, the Permittee waives all right to appeal the
conditions of the permit.



   (c)   The initial permit shall be effective for a period of up to
five years from date of issuance and must be renewed annually by the
applicant in order to continue that waste discharge.



   (d)   An application for an initial permit shall be accompanied by a
cashier's check for the first year's fees in the amount of $500 plus the
City's monitoring costs as prescribed by 40 CFR 403.



   (1)   Industrial and commercial waste discharge permit form. The
form of permit for industrial and commercial wastes shall be as specified by
the city. Specific provisions for continued acceptance by the city of the
waste shall be attached to and made a part of the permit to discharge. The
city may prescribe those items as equalized flow discharge, prechlorination,
or additional limitations on waste characteristics not adequately described
in this ordinance or may prescribe pretreatment quality, requirements for the
waste flow in detail.



   (2)   Renewal of industrial and commercial waste discharge permit.
The application for a renewed waste discharge permit shall be of a form
specified by the city.



   (e)   Application signatories and certification.  All wastewater
discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the user, as defined in F.A.C. 62-625.600(1l)
and contain the following certification statement:



      "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."



   (f)   Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The Director will
evaluate the date furnished by the user and may require additional
information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, the Director will determine whether or not to
issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Director may deny any application
for a wastewater discharge permit.



   (g)   Administration of permits.



   (1)   The administration of the industrial and commercial waste
discharge permit program and the application of the surcharge formula imposes
additional obligations of the cities.



   (2)   The city, in addition to determining the waste flow volumes
and analyzing the waste strengths for development of the surcharge, must also
maintain an accurate record of the permit applications, permits, meter
installation details, meter calibrations, and shall make available to each
establishment the necessary renewal application forms.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Subdivision H. User Charge and Industrial Cost Recovery System



Sec. 26-162.  User charges; wholesale sewer rates; calculation of sewer
surcharge.



   (a)   There is imposed upon the owners or upon the users of each
retail and wholesale customer served by the sewer system, a monthly user
charge for the use thereof as follows:



   (1)   Sewer rates.  A charge for waste resulting from human
occupancy which shall include all of the following factors for the operation
of the collection system and treatment of wastewater by the regional
wastewater facility:



      a.   Operation and maintenance;



      b.   Debt service;



      c.   Capital costs;



      d.   System expansion;



      e.   Others as applicable



      Consult the Water/Sewer Billing Department for the prevailing
rates expressed as $/l,000 gallons of water consumption.



   (2)   Sewer surcharge. A surcharge for waste in excess of the
parameters for strength established in the industrial and commercial waste
ordinance, and set forth in Section 26-162(b) which may be assessed to
applicable customers.



   (b)   Wholesale sewer rates.



   (1)   This section is applicable to those wholesale customers which
maintain their own wastewater collection systems. They shall be charged a
flat rate per 1,000 gallons, the quantity of which shall be determined by the
metering of the wastewater discharge from each wholesale customer's
individual wastewater collection system.



   (2)   The metering device shall be satisfactory to the city and
shall provide for a separate remote 30-day recording device which shall have
a totalizer. Location of the metering device shall be at an accessible
location as agreed upon by the parties involved and as further explained and
stipulated in an agreement to be executed by both parties.



   (3)   All costs incident to the furnishing, installation, initial
calibration, and maintenance on a continuing basis of the meter, are and
shall be, the wholesale customer's responsibility. The wholesale customer
will provide to the city or its designated representative full details on the
proposed meter installation and assurance that the installation will commence
only upon the written authorization of the city. The city shall provide an
authorization within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of the details
of the above proposed meter installation.



   (4)   The meter shall be read monthly by a duly authorized agent of
the city, and the wholesale customer shall provide access to the meter for
this purpose. In the event of suspected inaccuracy in meter readings, the
city shall have the right to request that the meter be tested by an
independent organization in accordance with standard practices. If the meter
shall be found inaccurate or defective, the cost of the meter test shall be
borne by the wholesale customer. If the meter shall be found to be accurate
and in good condition, the cost of the meter test shall be borne by the city.



   (5)   In the event of extenuating circumstances, the Commission may,
at its discretion, direct that sufficient proof other than the installation
of a metering device may be acceptable to determine the quantity of
wastewater discharge.



   (c)   Calculation of sewer surcharge.



   (1)   Calculation of the sewer surcharge shall be in accordance with
the following:



 

Parameter
 
Percent of Effect on Costs
 
Allowable Level of Sewage Strength


BOD-5   
 
41
 
400 mg/l (ppm)


TSS
 
15
 
400 “  ”


COD
 
41
 
800 “  ”



 



   Let:



   F = F1 + F2



   Where:



      F   =   The factor to multiply the sewer rate for a
surcharge due to excess strengths.



      F1   =   The strength factor for BOD-5 or COD, whichever is
higher.



      F2   =   The strength factor for TSS (total suspended
solids)



   (2)   The surcharge will be added to the sewer rate to develop the
monthly cost per customer. As an example of sewer charge calculations
utilizing sewer rate and the strength surcharge formula, assume the following
with respect to Ajax Manufacturing Company: total monthly flow of 100,000
gallons; COD of 900 mg/l; BOD5 of 500 milligrams per liter; total suspended
solids of 900 milligrams per liter; Prevailing monthly sewer rate is $1.52
per 1,000 gallons.



      i.   Sewer rate:



         $1.52/1000 gallons (100,000 gallons/month) = $152/month



      ii.   Sewer surcharge calculation:



         F1 = 0.41 (900-800) = 0.051



                800



         F2 = 0.15 (900-400) = 0.188



                400



         F = 0.051 + 0.188 = 0.239



      iii.   Total monthly charge (sewer rate plus surcharge):



      $152/month + $152/month( 0.239) = $ 188.33



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. 10-002, §
2, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 12-019, § 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-163.  Application of surcharge over standard use fee.



   (a)   A surcharge shall be applied over and above the standard sewer
use fee when the wastes from any lot or parcel of land, upon which there is
located any building or activity, contain B.O.D., C.O.D., ammonia, or
suspended solids concentration higher than defined herein.



   (b)   The surcharge in dollars shall be computed by the formulas
included in this subchapter established for the user charge and industrial
cost recovery system. Computation of surcharges will be based on effluent
analyses at a frequency determined by the user's water consumption as follows:



   (1)   Monthly effluent analyses for water usages at more than
100,000 gallons per month.



   (2)   Semi annual effluent analyses for water consumption less than
100,000 gallons per month.



   Surcharges will remain in effect until a new effluent analysis is
required or changed based on interim analyses by the user using a Certified
Water Testing Laboratory at the user's expense.



   Sewer surcharges will constitute a new line item on the prevailing
water/sewer bill prepared monthly per user of the system and subject to
prevailing regulations/penalties for late or nonpayments. Reimbursements of
surcharge related monitoring expenses initiated by the City of Boynton Beach
are required.



   (c)   Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the city from making
additional adjustments in rates if it is found that the nature or quantity of
the waste creates an additional burden on the system or if those adjustments
are necessary to comply with regulations of the State Department of
Environmental Protection or the United States Environmental Protection Agency.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-164  Industrial cost recovery system.



   (a)   At the discretion of the Director of the Public Utilities
System, there is imposed upon all users of each industrially and commercially
classified property served by the sewer system an annual cost recovery
assessment.



   (b)   The annual cost recovery is as follows:



   (1)   SIU Industrial Permit Fee—$500 plus monitoring costs.



   (2)   Commercial/Industrial User Fee—$50 plus monitoring costs.



   Permit fees, commercial/industrial user fees and related monitoring
costs reimbursements must be paid within 30 days of permit issuance or
receipt of monitoring cost recovery notice.



   Commercial/industrial user fees will be billed as a new line item on
the prevailing water/sewer bill prorated over a period of 12 months, but
billed monthly; a monthly payment of $4.17 will be added to the prevailing
water/sewer bill.



   (c)   SIU industrial permit fees and commercial/industrial user fees
shall be prorated for existing permit holders and users upon enactment of
this division.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-165.  Review and amendment on annual basis.



   This subchapter shall be subject to review and revision on the minimum
of an annual basis, and the city reserves the right to modify this subchapter
or any parts thereof at any time or from time-to-time.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-166.  Notice of violation; liability for expense, loss, or damage.



   (a)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this
subchapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature
of the violation. The person shall provide a written plan within 30 days for
the satisfactory correction thereof.



   (b)   The Director may enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to this
ordinance and shall be judicially enforceable.



   (c)   Any person violating any of the provisions of the subchapter
shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned
the city by reason of that violation.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Subdivision I. Administration



Sec. 26-167.  Responsibility for treatment and disposal.



   The WWF is responsible for the proper treatment and disposal of all
waste that is proper to process through the regional treatment facilities,
beginning at the point source.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-168.  Right to enter premises and obtain information concerning
discharges.



   (a)   To the extent permitted by general law, the proper official
and other duly authorized employees of the city or the WWF bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purposes of inspection, observations, measurement, sampling, and testing
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The official or his or her
representatives will not inquire into any processes including metallurgical,
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that
point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.



   (b)   To the extent permitted by general law, the proper official
and other duly authorized employees of the city or the WWF bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but
not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within that easement.
Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



   (c)   If the Director or designee has been refused access to a
building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program to verify compliance with this
chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Director may
seek issuance of an inspection warrant pursuant to Sections 933.21-933.26,
Florida Statutes, from the Palm Beach County Court.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-169  Suspension of wastewater treatment service; notice to stop
discharge; failure to comply.



   (a)   When the Director finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the
user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service
may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders
also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including
additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the
amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not
extend the deadline for compliance established by a pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for
any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.



   (b)   The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service to any
user, including other local governments, when the suspension is necessary, in
the opinion of the Utilities Director, in or DEP to stop an actual or
threatened violation which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, causes
interference to the WWF, caused the WWF to violate any condition of its NPDES
permit, or causes the city to be in violation of any of its agreements with
the WWF.



   (c)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of
a failure of the user to cause the user to voluntarily comply with the
suspension or DEP, the city shall take steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the city or WWF systems or endangerment to any individuals. The city may
reinstate the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of
the non-complying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the
user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken
to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15
days from the date of the occurrence.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. 10-002, §
2, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 12-019, § 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13) 
Penalties, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-170.  Publication of users in significant violation.



   The city shall publish annually a list of the industrial users which,
during the previous 12 months, were in "significant noncompliance" with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements as defined in Sec. 26-115.
Public notification shall be included in a newspaper(s) of general
circulation within the jurisdiction served by the WWF that meets the
requirements of Sections 50.011 and 50.013, F.S.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Subdivision J. Violations; remedies



Sec. 26-171.  False statements of documents prohibited.



   No person shall knowingly make any false statements, representations,
or certification in any application record, report, plan, or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or falsify,
tamper with, or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this division.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-172.  Show cause hearing.



   (a)   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement
action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in
Section 26-142 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have
reason to know, that its discharge alone or in conjunction with discharges
from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:



   (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



   (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when
the City of Boynton Beach was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit,
and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use
or disposal requirements.



   (b)   Any user subject to enforcement action under the provisions of
this division may request a hearing before the Utilities Director within ten
days of receipt of notification or proposed enforcement action. A hearing is
to be held by the Utilities Director concerning the violation, the reasons
why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing
the user to show cause before the Utilities Director why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken.



   (c)   The Utilities Director may conduct the hearing and take the
evidence, or, at the Utilities Director's sole discretion, may designate the
City Attorney or an independent arbitrator to:



   (1)   Issue, in the name of the city, notices of hearing requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence
relevant to any matter involved in that hearing.



   (2)   Take evidence and hear testimony (the strict rules of evidence
shall not apply to any hearing).



   (3)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendation to the Utilities
Director or his or her designee for action thereon.



   (d)   At any hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony taken
must be under oath and recorded stenographically, with the costs thereof to
be borne by the user. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to
any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the
usual charges thereof.



   (e)   After the Utilities Director or his or her designee has
reviewed the evidence, he or she may issue an order to the user responsible
for the noncompliance(s) stating that, following a 30-day time period to
provide remediation of noncompliance(s), penalties as per Section 26-177 will
go into effect. Further orders as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.



   (f)   The city shall also establish and assess against the user,
appropriate surcharges or fees to reimburse the city for the additional cost
of operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment works due to the
violation of this division.



   (g)   Costs for conducting a show cause hearing shall be borne by
the user requesting the hearing if the enforcement action is upheld.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. 10-002, §
2, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 12-019, § 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-173.  Legal action against use for appropriate relief.



   If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes
into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the
city, the City Attorney may commence an action against the user for
appropriate legal relief, in the appropriate court which has jurisdiction;
and to the extent permitted by law, shall seek recovery of all city costs and
expenses related to those actions against the user by the city.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-174.  Retention of records required.



   All users are required to retain and preserve for no less than three
years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence,
documentation associated with best management practices, and any and all
summaries thereto, relating to monitoring, sampling, waste hauling and
chemical analyses made by or on behalf of a user in connection with its
discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of
administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities
brought by the WWF or the city pursuant hereto shall be retained and
preserved by the user until all enforcement activities have concluded and all
periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. Users
shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the City
and/or FDEP. All sampling and analysis activities shall be subject to the
record-keeping requirements specified in Chapter 62-160, F.A.C.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)  Penalty, see Sec. 26-177



Sec. 26-175.  Enforcement plan.



   An escalating enforcement strategy shall be used by the city to
maintain compliance with this chapter. The various types of enforcement
actions shall be used as determined by the Director and/or Code Enforcement
Division and/or the City Attorney depending on the type or severity of the
violation. A copy of the enforcement plan will be kept on file at the WWF.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019,
§ 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-176.  Remedies.



   (a)   Prohibited Discharge Standards. A User shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in Section 26-142 or the specific
prohibitions in subsection 26-142(a) through 26-142(aa) if it can be proven
that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or
interference and that either:



   (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
User was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interferences; or



   (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the User's prior discharge when
(the City) was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case
of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.



   (3)   Consent orders.  The Director may enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing
an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will
include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to this
ordinance and shall be judicially enforceable.



   (b)   Upset.



   (1)   For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless
or improper operation.



   (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements for paragraph (c), below are met.



   (3)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:



      a.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;



      b.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workman- like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and



      c.   The user has submitted the following information to the
Director within 24



         hours of becoming aware of the upset if this information is
provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days:



         i.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause
of noncompliance;



         ii.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and time or, if not corrected; the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and



         iii.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



      d.   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



      e.   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.



      f.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. 
The requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.



   (c)   Bypass.



   (1)   For the purpose of this section,



      a.   "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams
from any portion of a user's treatment facility.



      b.   "Severe property damage" means substantial physical
damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources
which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



   (2)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are
not subject to the provision of paragraphs (b)(3) and (4) of this section.



   (3)   a.   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass,
it shall submit prior notice to the Director, at least ten days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.



      b.   A user shall submit oral notice to the Director of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of
the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Director may waive the written report
on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.



   (4)   a.   Bypass is prohibited, and the Director may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



         i.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage.



         ii.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



         iii.   The user submitted notices as required under
paragraph (b)(3) of this section.



      b.   The Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the Director determines that it will meet
the three conditions listed in paragraph (b)(4)a. of this section.



(Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 12-019, § 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No.
13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-177.  Penalties.



   Failure to comply with any Chapter 26 ordinances that relate to the
actual and/or potential introduction of prohibited and/or restricted
effluents into the sanitary sewer system requires penalties as mandated by
federal law; e.g. Federal Pretreatment Regulations Section 403.8(f)(l)(vi)(A)
requires penalties in at least the amount of $1,000.00 per day per violation
which goes uncorrected.



   (a)   Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city or
who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not provided, and the orders, rules, and regulations issued
hereunder, shall be penalized in at least the amount of $1,000 per day for
each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense. Such fines shall be assessed on a per
violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average
discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of
violation. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid
charges, fines and penalties. In addition to the penalties provided herein,
the city may recover all reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court
reporters' fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate motions or
suit at law against the user or person found to have violated this chapter or
the orders, rules, regulations, and permit issued hereunder.



   (b)   Penalties for continuing violations. Any person who shall
continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Section
26-166(a) shall be guilty of a violation, and on conviction thereof, shall be
penalized in the amount not exceeding $5,000 for each offense. Each day in
which any violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



   (c)   Whoever violates Section 26-171 shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine in at least the amount of $1,000 or by imprisonment for
not more than 60 days, or by both.



   (d)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the
user must notify the Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the Director within 30 days after
becoming award of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the
Director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month or if the
Director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling.



   (e)   The remedies and penalties provided for in this chapter are
not exclusive. The Director may take any, all, or any combination of these
actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations
will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan.
However, the Director may take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the Director is empowered to take more than
one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.



(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. 10-002, §
2, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 12-019, § 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Secs. 26-178 — 26-204. Reserved.



ARTICLE V. CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION*



   *Editor's note-Formerly, Art. V contained §§ 26-105—26-111. Such
sections were renumbered as §§ 26-205—26-211 by Ord. No. 93-8, title,
adopted May 18, 1993.



Sec. 26-205.  Short title.



   This article shall be known as “The Boynton Beach Cross-Connection
Control and Backflow Prevention Ordinance”.



(Ord. No. 90-51, § 1, 11-7-90; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-206.  General.



   The purpose of this section is to establish the city’s requirements
for the prevention of backflow and the control of cross connections in the
interest of protecting the city’s public water system.



   In accordance with Florida Administrative Code, 62-555.360(2),
community water systems are required to establish a routine cross-connection
control program for the purpose of detecting and controlling cross-connection
and to prevent backflow of contaminants into the public water system.



   (a)   Cross-connections, as defined in Rule 62-550.200, F.A.C., are
prohibited.  The Utilities Department maintains an ongoing backflow
prevention and cross-connection control program to protect its public water
system from the hazards originating on the premises of its customers and from
temporary connections that may impair or alter the water in the public water
system.  The return of any water to the Utilities Department’s public
water system after the water has been used for any purpose on the
customer’s premises or has been within the customer’s piping system is
not permitted.



   (b)   New services of potable or reclaimed water will not be
activated until the Department is satisfied that no uncontrolled
cross-connection exists.  No customer shall create or allow others to create
a cross-connection involving potable and reclaimed water lines.  In
addition, the customer’s auxiliary water supplies shall not be
interconnected with the Department’s public water supply system.



   (c)   In the event of contamination of the utilities department’s
or customer’s water system due to backflow on the customer’s premises,
the customer shall promptly take steps to confine further spread of
contamination and shall immediately notify the Utilities Department.



(Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-207.  Definitions.



   The following terms and phrases when used in this article shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning. Words used in the present tense shall include
the future, and the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.



   (1)   Air-gap: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of such
vessel. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the
supply pipe; measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the vessel and,
in no case, less than two inches. When an air-gap is used at the service
connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable
water system, an emergency bypass shall be installed in the bypass system
which shall include an approved back-flow prevention device.



   (2)   Approved: Accepted by the director of utilities as meeting an
applicable specification stated or cited in this section, or as suited for
the proposed use.



   (3)   Auxiliary water supply: Any water supply on, or available to,
the premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply.
These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's spring,
river, stream, harbor, or the like, or “used waters” or “industrial
fluids”. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or they may be
objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the
water purveyor does not have sanitary control.



   (4)   Backflow: The flow of water or other liquid, mixture or
substance under pressure into the distributing pipes of a potable water
supply system from any source or sources other than its intended source.



   (5)   Backflow preventer: A device or means designated to prevent
backflow or back-siphonage.



   (6)   Back-siphonage: The flow of water or other liquid, mixture or
substance into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply stream from
any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of
pressure in the potable water supply system.



   (7)   Contamination: Any impairment of the quality of potable water
by sewage, industrial fluids, waste liquids, compounds, or other materials to
a degree which creates a potential actual hazard to the public health through
poisoning or through the spread of disease.



   (8)   Cross-connection: Any physical connection or  arrangement of
piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of
which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial
fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow
or back-siphonage may occur into the potable water system. A water service
connection between a public potable water distribution system and  a
customer’s  water distribution system which is cross-connected to a
contaminated fixture, industrial fluid system, or with a potentially
contaminated supply or auxiliary water system, constitutes one type of
cross-connection. Other types of cross-connections include connectors such as
swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy
sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices, sliding multiport tube, solid
connections, and the like.



      a.   Cross-connection control by containment: The installation
of an approved backflow prevention device at the water service connection to
any customer's premises where it is not physically and economically feasible
to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential
cross-connections within the customer's water system; or the installation of
an approved backflow prevention device on the service line leading to and
supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or
potential cross-connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or
controlled at the point of cross-connection.



      b.   Cross-connection controlled: A connection between a
potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow
prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the
protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.



   (9)   Double check valve assembly: An assembly of two (2)
independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shutoff
valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for
the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design
and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city-approved
testing agency for backflow prevention devices. To be approved, these must be
readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing.



   (10)   Hazard, degree of.  The term is derived from an evaluation
of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard
upon the potable water system, and shall include:



      a.   Hazard, health: Any condition, device or practice in the
water supply system and its operation which could create or, in the judgment
of the director of utilities, may create a danger to the health and
well-being of the water consumer. An example of a “health hazard” is a
structural defect, including a cross-connection, in the water supply system.



      b.   Hazard, plumbing: A plumbing-type cross-connection in a
consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by a
vacuum breaker, air-gap separation, or backflow prevention device.
Unprotected plumbing-type cross-connections are considered to be a health
hazard.



      c.   Hazard, pollutional: An actual or potential threat to the
physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or
the consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or
be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its
appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.



      d.   Hazard, system: An actual or potential threat of severe
damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the
consumer's potable water system or of a pollutant or contaminant which would
have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.



   (11)   Industrial fluids system: Any system containing a fluid or
solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or
polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health,
system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water
supply. This may include, but shall not be limited to: polluted or
contaminated waters; all types of process waters and “used waters”
originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated
in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalis;
circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling
waters that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic
substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams,
rivers, bays, harbors, irrigation canals or systems, and the like; and oils,
gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions, and other liquid and
gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for fire-fighting
purposes.



   (12)   Pollution: The presence of any foreign substance (organic,
inorganic or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a
degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which
does adversely and reasonably affect such waters for domestic use.



   (13)   Pressure-type vacuum breaker: An assembly used to isolate
entire irrigation lines from potable water systems. It has the ability to
withstand supply pressure for long periods and to prevent backflow of toxic
and nontoxic water into the potable water system in back-siphonage
conditions. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for
in-line maintenance and testing.



   (14)   Purveyor or Water purveyor. The owner or operator of the
public potable water system supplying an approved water supply to the public.



   (15)   Reduced pressure principle device: An assembly of two (2)
independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating
differential relief valve between the two (2) check valves, tightly closing
shutoff valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test
cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly
shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a
recognized and city approved testing agency for backflow prevention
assemblies. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone
between the two (2) check valves at a level less than the pressure on the
public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the
pressure between the two (2) check valves shall be less than the pressure on
the public water supply system side of the device. In case of leakage of
either of the check valves, the differential relief valve shall operate to
maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by
discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two (2) pounds per
square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be
approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance
and testing and be installed in a location where no part of the device will
be submerged.



   (16)   Water:



      a.   Water, nonpotable: Water which is not safe for human
consumption or which is of questionable potability.



      b.   Water, potable: Any water which, according to recognized
standards, is safe for human consumption.



      c.   Water, service connections: The terminal end of a service
connection from the public potable water system; that is, where the water
purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point
of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the
end of the service connection, the service connection shall mean the
downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the
service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the
point of delivery to the customer's water system. “Service connection”
shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other
temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable
water system.



      d.   Water, used: Any water supplied by a water purveyor from
a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has
passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary
control of the water purveyor.



   (17)   Water system: The water system shall be considered as made up
of two (2) parts: The customer system and the utility system.



      a.   The “customer system” shall include those parts of
the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system
which are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of
use.



      b.   The “utility system” shall consist of the source
facilities and the distribution system; and shall include all those
facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up
to the point where the customer's system begins (meter). The “source”
shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production,
treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system. The
“distribution system” shall include the network of conduits used for the
delivery of water from the source to the customer's system.



(Ord. No. 90-51, § 1, 11-7-90; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-208.  Backflow prevention devices; when required; specifications.



   (a)   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed
or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as
required by state law and regulation (Chapter 17-555(b1), Florida
Administrative Code) and this article. Service of water to any premises shall
be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention device
required by this article is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is
found that a backflow prevention device has been removed, bypassed, or if an
unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be
restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.



   (b)   It is the responsibility of the customer and/or his or her
designees to determine the size of the backflow prevention assembly.  In
order to adequately handle the maximum flow of the water meter, the assembly
should be the same size as the meter or larger.  It is recognized that if
the service line is sized smaller than the meter, the assembly should be the
same size as the service line.



   (c)   All residential potable water services with 1-1/2" meters or
larger shall have a reduced pressure assembly (RPZ) installed.



   (d)   All non-residential potable water services shall have a
reduced pressure assembly installed.



   (e)   All new residential potable water meters 1" or less must be
equipped with a residential dual check valve (RDC).



   (f)   All residential 5/8" and 1" meters with access to a
master-metered reclaimed water irrigation system which is not isolated from
the potable water system shall have a residential dual check valve.



   (g)   All temporary construction meters shall have a reduced measure
assembly (RPZ) installed by the contractor.  A combination 5/8" hydrant
meter with a built in backflow preventer can be provided by the city at a
higher cost for pressure cleaning or non-construction projects.



   (h)   Dedicated closed fire sprinkler systems shall have as a
minimum a double check detector assembly.



   (i)   Fire sprinkler systems with a pressure/storage tank, booster
pumps, chemical injection, or any auxiliary water supply shall have a reduced
pressure detector assembly.



   (j)   The customer's system should be open for inspection at all
reasonable times to authorized representatives of the utilities department to
determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards,
including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition
becomes known, the director of utilities shall deny or immediately
discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the
service line until the customer has corrected the condition in conformance
with state and city laws relating to plumbing and water supplies and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.



   (k)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on
all temporary water services that are supplied by fire hydrant meter
installations.  The following requirements shall apply:



   (1)   Only city personnel with the appropriate authority can set,
lock, move, and relocate fire hydrant meters.



   (2)   In the case of short term installations, ten (10) days or
shorter durations, the city shall furnish a combined meter and backflow
prevention device for normal flow volume requirements.  For larger flows
requiring more than three (3) inch meter the customer shall supply the
backflow prevention device for the meter installation.



   (3)   In the case of long-term installations, over ten (10) days
period, the customer will be required to supply his/her own back flow
prevention device.



   (4)   The backflow prevention devices shall be tested and approved
by a certified plumbing contractor certified by the State of Florida and/or
approved by the city, as consistent with the intent of this section.



   (l)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on
all new multi-family and commercial construction(s) and renovation(s).  The
owner of such installation(s), or the designee of the owner, shall report the
installation to the Utilities Director within five (5) days after the
installation.



   (m)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on
each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line
or immediately inside the building being served and, in all cases, before the
first branch line leading off the service line, whenever the following
conditions exist:



   (1)   In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which
is not or may not be safe bacteriologically or [in] chemical quality and
which is not acceptable as an additional source by the director of utilities.
The public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises
by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to
the degree of hazard.



   (2)   In the case of premises upon which any industrial fluids or
any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create
an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system
shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a
backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of
hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters
originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration
in quality.



   (3)   In the case of premises having internal cross-connections that
cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, intricate plumbing and piping
arrangements, or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily
accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to
ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water
system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a
backflow prevention device in the service line. The type of protective device
required shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists, as follows:



      a.   In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary
water supply as stated in this section, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device.



      b.   In the case of any premises where there is water or some
substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if
introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved double check valve assembly.



   (4)   In the case of any premises where there is any material
dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual
or potential hazard to the public water system the public water system shall
be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where
these conditions may exist include wastewater treatment plants, wastewater
pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and
metal plating plants.



   (5)   In the case of any premises where there are “uncontrolled”
cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall
be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection.



   (6)   In the case of any premises where, because of security
requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or
impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public
water system shall be protected against backflow or back-siphonage from the
premises by the installation of a backflow prevention device in the service
line. In this case, maximum protection will be required; that is, an approved
air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed in each service to the premises.



   (7)   An approved backflow prevention device of the type designated
shall be installed on each water service connection to the following types of
facilities. This list is presented as a guideline and should not be construed
as being complete.



      Abbreviations are as follows:



      A.G.      —Air-gap separation



      R.P.      —Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer



      D.C.V.A.   —Double check valve assembly



      P.V.B.      —Pressure vacuum breaker



      A.V.B.      —Atmospheric vacuum breaker



Type of Facility               Minimum Type of Protection



Automotive repair facilities            R.P.



Breweries, distilleries, bottling plants      R.P.



Car wash with recycling system and/or wax educator [applicator]   R.P.



Chemical plants                  R.P.



Dairies                        R.P.



Dentist offices                  R.P.



Fertilizer plants                  R.P.



Film laboratory or processing plants      R.P.



Fire hydrants                  D.C.V.A. (?)



Fire sprinkler lines, without pumps      D.C.V.A.



Fire sprinkler lines, with booster pumps      R.P.



Food or beverage plants            R.P.



Hospitals, clinics, medical buildings      R.P.



  (parallel)



Irrigation systems (Non-residential)                  R.P.
or D.C.V.A



Laboratories                     R.P.



Laundries and dry cleaning plants      R.P.



Machine tool plants (health or system hazard)      R.P.



Machine tool plants (pollution hazard)   R.P.



Metal processing plant (health or system hazard)      R.P.



Metal processing plant (pollution hazard)      R.P.



Metal plating plant               R.P.



Morgues or mortuaries               R.P.



Nursing homes                  R.P.



Packing houses or rendering plants      R.P.



Paper products plants               R.P.



Pesticides (exterminating companies)      A.G. or R.P.



Petroleum processing plants            R.P.



Petroleum storage yards (health or  system hazard)      R.P.



Petroleum storage yards (pollutional hazard)      R.P.



Pharmaceutical or cosmetic plants      R.P.



Piers, docks or waterfront facilities      R.P.



Power plants                     R.P.



Radioactive material plants            R.P.



Restaurants                     R.P.



Sand and gravel plants               R.P.



Schools                        R.P.



Sewage treatment plants            R.P.



Sewage pumping stations            R.P.



Swimming pools with piped fill line (at pool)   A.G. or R.P.



Tall buildings over three (3) stories      R.P.



Veterinary establishments            R.P.



   (8)   For all premises (including residential) in areas serviced by
irrigation water from a wastewater reuse system, the public water system
shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly at the service
connection.



   (n)   Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a
model and size approved by the director of utilities. The term “approved
backflow prevention device” shall mean a device that has been manufactured
in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water
Works Association and entitled “AWWA C510 Double Check Valve Backflow
Prevention Assembly” or “AWWA C511 Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow
Prevention Assembly” and which has met completely the laboratory and field
performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and
Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by
the Manual of Cross-Connection Control, 8th Edition, dated June 1988, or the
most current issue.



   (1)   Such AWWA and FCCC and HR standards and specifications have
been adopted by the director of utilities. Final approval shall be evidenced
by a certificate of approval issued by an approved testing laboratory
certifying full compliance with such AWWA standards and FCCC and HR
specifications.



   (2)   It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises
where backflow prevention devices are installed, to have certified
inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those
instances where the director deems the hazard to be great enough, he may
require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections
and tests shall be at the expense of the customer and shall be performed by
the device manufacturer's representative, or by a certified tester approved
by the director of utilities.



   (3)   These devices shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at
the expense of the customer-user whenever such devices are found to be
defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls, shall be submitted
to the director of utilities.



   (4)   All presently installed backflow prevention devices which do
not meet the requirements of this section but were approved devices for the
purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been
properly maintained shall, except for the inspection maintenance
requirements, be excluded from the requirements of those rules so long as the
director of utilities is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the
public potable water supply system. Wherever the existing device is moved
from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance, or when
the director of utilities finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to
health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting
the requirements of this section.



(Ord. No. 90-51, § 1, 11-7-90; Ord. No. 01-28, § 2, 7-3-01; Ord. No.
13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-209.  Program administration, installation, maintenance,
certification.



   (a)   The Utilities Department shall be responsible for the
protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination
or pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or
pollutants through the water service connection.



   (b)   If, in the judgment of the Department, an approved backflow
prevention device is required at the city’s water service connection to any
customer’s premises for the safety of the water system, the director of
utilities or his designated agent shall give notice in writing to the
customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at each
service connection to his or her premises.  The customer shall immediately
install such approved device or devices at his own expense, the failure,
refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to install such device or
devices immediately, shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water
service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly
installed.



   (c)   In the case of installation a copy of the test report and
permit shall be furnished by the customer to the city with 60 days of
installation, replacement, or relocation of a backflow prevention assembly. 
The customer and/or his designee shall be responsible for obtaining all
applicable permits.



   (1)   All backflow prevention assemblies and devices on the potable
water service shall be installed by a plumbing contractor who is licensed by
the State of Florida and/or approved by the city.



   (2)   All backflow prevention assemblies installed as part of a fire
suppression system should be installed by a fire protection contractor I, II
or V who is licensed by the State of Florida.  (Reference: F.S. §§ 
633.021 and 633.541.)



   (3)   Single check valves and all R.P.(s) on the water service shall
be installed by the customer’s contractor, with the appropriate state
certification and/or approved by the city, on the type of service
installation required.



   (d)   In the case of testing and maintenance, all backflow test for
new potable water services (domestic and fire line) shall be performed by a
certified plumbing contractor certified by the State of Florida and/or
approved by the city, at the time the service is activated.  An additional
backflow certification fee will be billed by the city for each test.



   (e)   In the case of recertification the customer’s responsible
for hiring an appropriately licensed, certified backflow prevention assembly
tester to test and maintain all of their backflow prevention assemblies on an
annual basis after the initial test.  All backflow prevention assemblies and
devices on the customer’s side of the potable water service shall be tested
by a plumbing contractor who is licensed by the State of Florida and/or
approved by the city.



   (1)   The technician performing any repairs must hold a repair
certification issued by an American Water Works Association approved course.



   (2)   A valid backflow prevention assembly recertification must
contain, at minimum, the following information:



      a.   The name and license number of the Plumbing Contractor
performing the testing.



      b.   The address of the tested assembly.



      c.   The date the assembly was tested.



      d.   The make, model, size and serial number of the assembly
tested.



      e.   The water meter serial number the assembly is protecting
(if applicable).



      f.   Clearly identified test results as outlined below:



         i.   RP - the relief valve opening reading, the
differential reading across the #1 check valve, the differential reading
across the #2 check valve, and if the #2 check valve leaked during the
backpressure test.



         ii.   DC - the differential reading across the #1 check
valve and the differential reading across the #2 check valve.



         iii.   PVB - the air inlet reading, the reading the
check valve holds at, and a comment or remark if backpressure was present at
the time of testing.



         iv.   The name of the tester along with the tester’s
certification number.



   The annual recertification shall be received by the city prior to the
expiration of the previous certification.  In the event the assembly tested
does not perform to manufacturer’s specification, a failing test report
shall be submitted to the Department.  This will afford the customer
additional time to acquire estimates for repair; ordering of parts, and the
scheduling of necessary shut-down, for the repair or replacement of the
failing assembly.



   Upon completion of testing, the tester shall affix to the assembly in a
semi-permanent manner a weather-proof tag that identifies the plumbing or
fire protection company performing the test and the month and year of the
recertification.



   The customer shall be notified by the city in writing approximately 60
days prior to the next inspection date of the backflow assembly.  If the
customer fails to provide the city with a passing backflow preventer test and
maintenance report by the due date, the city may assign testing and
recertification process to a city authorized certified backflow prevention
device technician.  See Section 26.2010, Fees and Permits.



   (f)   In the case of non-compliance, upon discovery that an
unapproved cross-connection exists, the city shall immediately disconnect the
cross-connection or terminate the customer’s potable water service. 
By-passing an existing backflow prevention assembly shall be considered an
unapproved cross-connection.  The customer’s potable water supply will be
turned off if the customer fails to adequately maintain the backflow
prevention assembly(ies) or provide annual certification to the city.



(Ord. No. 90-51, § 1, 11-7-90; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-210.  Fees and permits.



   The city shall levy a fee for testing (and re-testing as necessary) all
devices based upon program cost administration, as shown in Fee Schedule A:



FEE SCHEDULE A



 

Type of Unit
 
Fee




Reduced pressure backflow preventer
 


   Annual test
 
$50.00


   Each re-test due to failure
 
$50.00


Double check valve assembly
 


   Annual test
 
$50.00


   Each re-test due to failure
 
$50.00


Pressure vacuum breaker
 


   Annual test
 
$50.00


   Each re-test due to failure
 
$50.00


5/8" Temporary Construction Meter w/ Backflow
 


   Annual test
 
$50.00


   Deposit
 
$200.00


   Penalty for Nonread/month
 
$150.00




 



   NOTE: For billing purposes, units mounted in parallel on a single
service line or fire line will be considered as one unit. Other units at the
same site, but on separate lines, will be billed as separate units.



(Ord. No. 90-51, § 1, 11-7-90; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-211.  Notice of violation; failure to remedy.



   The director of utilities shall notify the owner or authorized agent of
the owner of the building or premises in which there is found a violation of
this article, of such violation. The director shall set a reasonable time for
the owner to have the violation removed or corrected (thirty (30) days
maximum, or as determined by degree or hazard). On failure of the owner to
have the violation corrected by the end of a specified time interval, the
director may, if in his judgment an imminent health hazard exists, cause the
water service to the building or premises to be terminated and/or recommend
such additional fines or penalties to be involved as are provided in section
26-112.



(Ord. No. 90-51, § 1, 11-7-90; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Sec. 26-212.   Penalties.



   (a)   Any person who knowingly fails or refuses to obey or comply
with, or willfully violates any of the provisions of this article, or any
lawful rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, or any lawful order of the
director issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall, upon
conviction of such offense, be subject to punishment as provided by law. Each
day during which the knowing or willful failure or refusal to comply with
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.



   (b)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article
shall be liable to the city for all costs and damages incurred by the city as
a proximate result of such violation plus a fine up to five hundred dollars
($500.00) per day.



(Ord. No. 90-51, § 1, 11-7-90; Ord. No. 13-032, § 2, 11-9-13)



Secs. 26-213—26-299. Reserved.



ARTICLE VI. STORMWATER SYSTEM



Sec. 26-300.  Purpose and intent.



   The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Boynton Beach. This article
is intended to comply with federal and state law and regulations regarding
water quality.



(Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 5-4-93)



Sec. 26-301.  Definitions.



   [As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meaning ascribed thereto:]



   Authorized official: Any employee or agent of the city authorized in
writing by the director to administer or enforce the provisions of this
article.



   Director: Director of utilities.



   Discharge: Any direct or indirect entry of any solid, liquid or gaseous
matter.



   Person: Any natural individual, corporation, partnership, institution,
or other entity.



   Site of industrial activity: Any area or facility used for
manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage, as defined under 40 CFR
Section 122.26(a)(14) of regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, as amended.



   Stormwater:  Any stormwater runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.



   Stormwater system:  The system of conveyances used for collecting,
storing and transporting stormwater owned by the City of Boynton Beach but
not including any facilities intended to be used in accordance with
applicable law for collecting and transporting sanitary or other wastewater.
Any discharge into the stormwater system in violation of any federal, state,
county, municipal or other law, rule, regulation or permit is prohibited.



(Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 5-4-93)



Sec. 26-302.  Industrial activity.



   (a)   General prohibitions [Reserved.]



   (b)   Specific prohibitions. By adoption of industrial activity
stormwater regulations or by issuance of industrial activity stormwater
permits, or both, the director may impose reasonable limitations as to the
quality of stormwater (including without limitation the designation of
maximum levels of pollutants) discharged into the stormwater system from
sites of industrial activity. Any promulgation of such regulations and
issuance of permits by the director shall be in accordance with applicable
law.



   (c)   Administrative orders. The director may issue an order to any
person to immediately cease any discharge determined by the director to be in
violation of any provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation
or permit issued hereunder.



   (d)   NPDES permits. Any person who holds a national pollutant
discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit shall provide a copy of such
permit to the director no later than the later of: sixty (60) calendar days
after the effective date of this article or sixty (60) calendar days after
issuance.



(Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 5-4-93)



Sec. 26-303.  Illicit discharges.



   (a)   General prohibitions. Except as set forth under subsection (c)
of this section or in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to
the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is
prohibited.



   (b)   Specific prohibitions. Any discharge to the stormwater system
containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste materials, or
containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal or
other laws, rules, regulations, orders or permits, is prohibited.



   (c)   Authorized exceptions. Unless the director determines that it
is not properly managed or otherwise is not acceptable, the following
discharges are exempt from the general prohibition set forth under subsection
(a) of this section: flows from fire fighting, water line flushing and other
contributions from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn
watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters,
direct infiltration to the stormwater system, uncontaminated pumped
groundwater, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washings,
flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and dechlorinated swimming pool
contributions.



   (d)   Illicit connections. No person may maintain, use or establish
any direct or indirect connection to the stormwater system that results in
any discharge in violation of this article. This prohibition is retroactive
and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under
a permit, or other authorization, or whether permissible under laws or
practices applicable or prevailing at the time the connection was made.



   (e)   Administrative order. The director may issue an order to any
person to immediately cease any discharge, or any connection to the
stormwater system, determined by the director to be in violation of any
provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued
hereunder.



(Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 5-4-93)



Sec. 26-304.  Spills and dumpings.



   (a)   General prohibitions. Except as set forth under section
26-303(c) of this article with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the
stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is prohibited.



   (b)   Specific prohibitions. Any discharge to the stormwater system
containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste materials, or
containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal,
or other laws, rules, regulations, orders or permits, is prohibited.



   (c)   Notification of spills. As soon as any person has knowledge of
any discharge to the stormwater system in violation of this article, such
person shall immediately notify the director by telephoning 407-738-7460, and
if such person is directly or indirectly responsible for such discharge, then
such person shall also take immediate action to ensure the containment and
cleanup of such discharge and shall confirm such telephone notification in
writing to the director at City of Boynton Beach, 124 East Woolbright Road,
Boynton Beach, Florida 33435, within three (3) calendar days.



   (d)   Administrative order. The director may issue an order to any
person to immediately cease any discharge, or connection to the stormwater
system, determined by the director to be in violation of any provision of
this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder.



(Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 5-4-93)



Sec. 26-305.  Enforcement.



   (a)   Injunctive relief. Any violation of any provision of this
article, or of any regulation or order issued hereunder, shall be subject to
injunctive relief if necessary to protect the public health, safety or
general welfare.



   (b)   Continuing violation. A person shall be deemed guilty of a
separate violation for each and every day during any continuing violation of
any provision of this article, or of any regulation or permit issued
hereunder.



   (c)   Enforcement actions. The director may take all actions
necessary, including the issuance of notices of violation, the filing of
court actions and/or referral of the matter to the local code compliance
board to require and enforce compliance with the provisions of this article
and with any regulation or permit issued hereunder.



(Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 97-51, § 3, 11-18-97)



Sec. 26-306.  Inspections and monitoring.



   (a)   Authority for inspections. Whenever necessary to make an
inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or regulation or
permit issued hereunder, or whenever an authorized official has reasonable
cause to believe there exists any condition constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of this article, or regulation or permit issued hereunder,
any authorized official may enter any property, building or facility at any
reasonable time to inspect the same or to perform any duty related to
enforcement of the provisions of this article or any regulations or permits
issued hereunder; provided that:



      (1)   If such property, building or facility is occupied, such
authorized official shall first present proper credentials and request
permission to enter; and



      (2)   If such property, building or facility is unoccupied,
such authorized official shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner
or other person having charge or control of the property, building or
facility, and shall request permission to enter.



Any request for permission to enter made hereunder shall state that the owner
or person in control has the right to refuse entry, and that in the event
entry is refused, the authorized official may enter to make inspection only
upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. If the
owner or person in control refuses permission to enter alter such request has
been made, the authorized official is hereby authorized to seek assistance
from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining entry. Routine or
area-wide inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes
as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, including but
not limited to random sampling and sampling in areas with evidence of
stormwater contamination, nonstormwater discharges, or similar factors.



   (b)   Authority for monitoring and sampling. Any authorized official
may establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling or metering of discharges to the stormwater system. During any
inspections made to enforce the provisions of this article, or regulations or
permits issued hereunder, any authorized official may take any samples deemed
necessary.



   (c)   Requirements for monitoring. The director may require any
person engaging in any activity or owning any property, building or facility
(including but not limited to a site of industrial activity) to undertake
such reasonable monitoring of any discharge(s) to the stormwater system and
to furnish periodic reports.



(Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 5-4-93)



Secs. 26-307—26-399. Reserved.



ARTICLE VII. STORMWATER UTILITY FEES



Sec. 26-400.  Purpose and intent.



   The purpose and intent of this article is to establish stormwater
utility fees sufficient to plan, control, operate, and maintain the city's
stormwater management system.



(Ord. No. 93-72, § 1, 12-21-93)



Sec. 26-401.  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply;
words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural, the
singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The
word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is
permissive. Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meanings
given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of
Webster's Dictionary.



   Board means the administrative hearing board, comprised of a
representative from the finance department, a representative from the
engineering department and a representative from the city manager's office.



   Director means the director of the utilities department or his designee.



   Dwelling unit means any residential space identified for habitation by
members of the same family or as classified by the city building code.



   Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means that unit of construction
consisting of one (1) dwelling unit (whether single-family, condominium,
mobile home, or townhouse unit) for residential purposes; or for commercial
or industrial sites, an impervious area equal to one thousand nine hundred
thirty-seven (1,937) square feet.



   Impervious area or impervious surface means a horizontal surface which
has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly
resistant to infiltration by water. It includes, but is not limited to,
semi-impervious surfaces such as compacted clay, as well as streets, roofs,
sidewalks, parking lots and other similar surfaces.



   Residential property means any lot or parcel existing in the city or in
the future annexation reserve area as defined in the city's comprehensive
plan developed exclusively for residential purposes including, but not
limited to, single-family homes, manufactured homes, multifamily, apartment
buildings and condominiums and transient rentals such as hotels and motels.



   Nonresidential means any developed property not otherwise defined as
residential.



   Undeveloped property means that which has not been altered from its
natural state by the addition of any improvements such as a building,
structure, impervious surface, change of grade or landscaping. For new
construction, a property shall be considered developed pursuant to this
chapter.



      (1)   Upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon
completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is
issued; or



      (2)   Where construction is at least fifty (50) percent
complete and construction is halted for a period of three (3) months.



(Ord. No. 93-72, § 1, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 94-31, § 1, 10-18-94)



Sec. 26-402.  Stormwater management utility fee.



   A stormwater fee is hereby imposed upon each lot and parcel within the
city for services and facilities provided by the storm- water management
utility. For purposes of imposing the stormwater fee, all lots and parcels
within the city are classified into the following three (3) customer classes:



      (1)   Residential.



      (2)   Nonresidential, which includes governmental;
institutional (tax exempt); commercial; industrial and other.



      (3)   Undeveloped.



(Ord. No. 93-72, § 1, 12-21-93)



Sec. 26-403.  Schedule of rates.



   (a)   The Director is directed to prepare a list of lots and parcels
within the city and assign a classification of residential, nonresidential or
undeveloped to each lot or parcel.



   (b)   The monthly charge per ERU for all improved properties within
the City of Boynton Beach corporate limits shall be set by commission. The
monthly rates and charges for water and wastewater shall be reviewed annually
by the Utilities Management and the rates set by the Commission during the
annual budget setting process. Such rates shall become effective on October 1
of each year.



   (c)   The fee imposed for residential properties shall be the rate
for one ERU multiplied by the number of individual dwelling units existing on
the property (ERU rate) (number of dwelling units).



   (d)   The fee imposed for nonresidential properties as defined
herein shall be the rate for one ERU for each 1,937 square feet of impervious
area.



   (e)   The Director shall be responsible for determining the
impervious area, based on data supplied by the county property appraiser, or
by the property owner, tenant or developer if such information is
unavailable. The Director may require additional information as necessary to
make the determination. The billing amount shall be updated by the Director
based on any additions or deletions to the impervious area as approved
through the building permit process.



   (f)   The minimum fee for any nonresidential parcel shall be equal
to the rate for one ERU.



   (g)   There shall be no fee for undeveloped property.



   (h)   For a period of two years commencing January 1, 2010, and
ending December 31, 2011, a $0.25 per ERU per month surcharge shall be
collected to fund a five-year fresh water canal aquatic vegetation removal
and control program. The surcharge funds collected shall be deposited in a
separate “fresh water canal maintenance account” in the stormwater
utility enterprise fund.



(Ord. No. 93-72, § 1, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 94-31, § 2, 10-18-94; Ord. No.
00-14, § 2, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2, 4-2-02; Ord. 09-047, § 2,
12-15-09; Ord. No. 18-020, § 4, 9-20-18)



Sec. 26-404.  Billing and payment; penalties.



   (a)   Bills or statements for the stormwater utility fee shall be
rendered monthly, in accordance with the regular utility billing cycle, by
the utility billing division of the city for all properties subject to the
fee. Bills shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner and
subject to the same penalties as set forth for water. Any partial payment of
a combined utility bill shall be applied first to the stormwater utility fee.



   (b)   For properties normally receiving monthly utility bills for
other services, the stormwater utility fee shall be included in the monthly
utility bill rendered to the established customer. At the discretion of the
city Finance Director, fee waivers for short-term inactive utility accounts
accruing fees of $10 or less in a six-month period may be made for purposes
of administrative convenience.



   (c)   For properties not receiving monthly utility bills for other
services, the bill or statement for the stormwater utility fee shall be sent
to the owner of the property as determined from the tax rolls. The utility
billing division may render annual or semiannual billing at the beginning of
the defined period on such properties if determined to be in the best
interest of the city.



   (d)   The owner of a property is ultimately responsible for all fees
imposed under this chapter.



(Ord. No. 93-72, § 1, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 16-005, § 2, 3-1-16)



Sec. 26-405.  Adjustment of fees.



   (a)   Requests for adjustment of the stormwater management utility
fee shall be submitted through the Director, who shall be given authority to
administer the procedures and standards and review criteria for the
adjustment of fees as established herein. All requests shall be judged on the
basis of the amount of impervious area on the site, or additional/enhanced
stormwater facilities. No credit shall be given for the installation of
facilities required by city or county development codes or state stormwater
rules. The following procedures shall apply to all adjustment requests of the
stormwater utility fee:



      (1)   Any owner who has paid his or her stormwater management
utility fees and who believes the contribution rate component of his or her
stormwater management utility fee to be incorrect may, subject to the
limitations set forth in this chapter, submit an adjustment request to the
Director.



      (2)   Request for adjustment of stormwater fees paid by an
owner making the request shall be in writing and set forth, in detail, the
grounds upon which relief is sought.



      (3)   Adjustment requests made during the first calendar year
that the stormwater management utility fee is imposed will be reviewed by the
Director within a four-month period from the date of filing of the adjustment
request. Adjustments resulting from such request shall be retroactive to the
beginning of billings but shall not exceed one year.



      (4)   The owner requesting the adjustment may, at his or her
own cost, provide supplemental information to the Director including, but not
limited to facts, opinions or engineering services to substantiate his or her
case.



      (5)   Adjustments to the stormwater management utility fee
will be made upon the granting of the adjustment request, in writing, by the
Director. Denials of adjustment requests shall be made in writing by the
Director.



   (b)   Upon receipt of the written denial of the adjustment request,
the owner who initially requested the adjustment may, within 30 days of
receipt of such denial, appeal to the Board for review of the denial.



      (1)   The Board shall complete its review within 60 days of
receipt of said request for appeal. The Board’s determination on the appeal
shall be in writing and set forth in detail the reason for its decision.



      (2)   In evaluating the appeal, the Board shall be bound by
the standards and review criteria contained herein.



      (3)   All determinations of the Board arising out of this
section shall be final.



(Ord. No. 93-72, § 1, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 94-31, § 3, 10-18-94)



Sec. 26-406.  Capital contributions.



   Procedures and standards developed by the Director shall define
appropriate means by which to optimize development capital contributions in
the implementation of basic specific stormwater systems. These basic specific
capital contributions shall take the form of “fee-in-lieu-of” or
“availability charges”. Each situation will be analyzed by the Director,
and a specific written decision will be developed. The application is defined
as follows:



      (1)   Fee-in-lieu-of is applied to a site-specific negotiated
procedure, wherein a development's stormwater contribution (quantity and
quality) is assessed its share of the capital needs of the facilities
required to serve the development in question. This capital contribution
would be used to implement city-owned stormwater facilities. The process does
not apply wherein the stormwater facilities are privately held. Each
application is evaluated against the city's stormwater master plan for the
watershed involved or, while the master plan is incomplete, the cumulative
impacts from the development.



      (2)   Availability charge is administered on a site- specific
basis identical to the fee-in-lieu-of procedure noted above; the only
difference is that the capital investment advanced by the city in
implementing a stormwater facility is not recovered through an availability 
charge.  The  capital  charge is determined on a pro rata share of the
capacity used by the new applicant or by the cumulative impact from the
development upon all impacted facilities.



      (3)   The “fee-in-lieu-of” capital contribution for
properties redeveloping within the Downtown Stormwater Improvement Watershed,
and utilizing the installed stormwater treatment and/or conveyance facilities
within that watershed, shall be levied as follows:



         a.   Capital cost per impervious square foot for Water
Quality            $2.05



         b.   Capital cost per impervious square foot for Water
Quantity            $0.18



         c.   Total Capital cost per impervious square foot for
Water Quality and Quantity   $2.23



   This fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit for
new construction and/or redevelopment in the Downtown Watershed.



(Ord. No. 93-72, § 1, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 00-54, § 4, 10-17-00; Ord. No.
02-045, § 7, 8-20-02)



Sec. 26-407.  Program administration.



   It shall be the duty of the Director to administer the stormwater
utility program. The Director shall keep an accurate record of all persons
using the services and facilities of said stormwater management utility of
the city and make changes in accordance with the rates and charges
established in this chapter or by ordinance.



(Ord. No. 93-72, § 1, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 94-31, § 4, 10-18-94)



Sec. 26-408.  Stormwater utility enterprise fund.



   There shall be established a stormwater utility enterprise fund for the
deposit of all fees and charges collected by the stormwater utility. These
funds shall be for the exclusive use of the city's stormwater management
utility including, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Stormwater management services, such as studies, design,
permit review, plan preparation and development review.



      (2)   Operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the
stormwater collection, storage, treatment and conveyance infrastructure.



      (3)   Project costs related to constructing major or minor
structural improvements to the stormwater-related infrastructure as provided
in the city-wide stormwater management plan.



      (4)   Administrative costs associated with the management of
the stormwater utility fee. A maximum of $2,000 may be transferred to the
general fund annually for administrative costs.



      (5)   Debt service financing of stormwater-related capital
improvements defined in the city-wide stormwater management plan.



      (6)   Funding of studies including water quantity and quality
monitoring, aerial photography, and geotechnical work associated with the
planning of the stormwater-related infrastructure.



(Ord. No. 93-72, § 1, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 94-31, § 5, 10-18-94)



Secs. 26-409—26-499. Reserved.



ARTICLE VIII. RECLAIMED WATER



Sec. 26-500.   Authority and purpose.



   (a)   This article is created in accordance with F.S. § 403.064,
and provides for the encouragement and use of reclaimed water to protect the
environment and conserve the city’s potable water supply.



   (b)   Subject to the city’s Code of Ordinances and established
policies, all powers, duties, and authorities relating to the operation of
the facilities of the Utilities Department are vested in the Utilities
Director, unless specifically vested elsewhere by the provisions of this
chapter. In the absence of the Director of the Utilities Department, an
individual specifically appointed by the City Manager may assume the powers,
duties and authority vested by this section.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-501.   Applicability.



   This chapter shall apply within the utility service area of the City of
Boynton Beach, as hereinafter defined and amended from time to time, and
shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes set forth herein.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-502.   Objective.



   The objective of this chapter is to set forth requirements for the use
of reclaimed water and the construction of reclaimed water facilities within
the city  that are in compliance with all applicable federal and state laws,
rules and regulations as they pertain to reclaimed water.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-503.   Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following words and phrases have the
meaning ascribed herein, unless a different meaning is set forth in another
section of this chapter or the context clearly indicates otherwise.



   Backflow prevention assembly: A device and/or method of construction
used to prevent backflow into  a potable and/or reclaimed water system. The
type of assembly used shall be based on the degree of hazard, either existing
or potential.



   City: The City of Boynton Beach, Florida, a municipal corporation.



   Cross connection: Any physical arrangement whereby a potable and/or
reclaimed water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with another
system capable of imparting contamination to the potable and/or nonpotable
water supply as the result of backflow.



   Customer: Any property owner, developer, user, company, municipal
corporation, political subdivision, homeowners’ association or other entity
that accepts or receives reclaimed water service or benefits directly from
services rendered by the Department.



   Department: The City of Boynton Beach Utilities Department.



   Development:  All projects with nonresidential connections and all
residential projects including 20 or more dwelling units.



   Director: The Director of the City Utilities Department or the
Director’s duly authorized representative.



   Dwelling unit: A single unit designated or intended for one-family
occupancy (a household of one or more persons), including but not limited to,
one single-family house, one-half of a duplex, one  apartment or one mobile
home.



   Irrigation: The use of water to maintain and enhance the growth of
lawns, shrubs, trees or edible crops, as set forth in Chapter 62-610, Florida
Administrative Code.



   Person: Includes individuals, firms, associations, joint ventures,
partnerships, estates, trusts, corporations, and all other groups or
combinations.



   Point of service: The outlet side of the Department's reclaimed water
meter box or other point identified on construction plans, which ends the
Department's ownership, operation and maintenance responsibility.



   Property owner: One in whom the legal title to real estate is vested,
as recorded in the public records of the State of Florida.



   Reclaimed water: Water that has received at least secondary treatment
and basic disinfection and is reused after flowing out of a wastewater
treatment facility, as set forth in Chapter 62-610, Florida Administrative
Code.



   Reclaimed water distribution system: A network of pipes, generally
eight (8) inch diameter and smaller, along with valves, meters and related
appurtenances, designed to convey and distribute reclaimed water from a
reclaimed water transmission system to the Department's side of the point of
service.



   Reclaimed water irrigation system: A network of pipes, pumping
facilities, storage facilities, sprinkler heads, and appurtenances on the
customer's side of the point of service, designed to convey and apply
reclaimed water.



   Reclaimed water transmission system: A network of pipes, generally ten
(10) inch diameter and larger, along with pumping facilities, storage
facilities and related appurtenances, designed to convey and transmit
reclaimed water from one (1) or more wastewater treatment facility to the
reclaimed water dislribution system. Service connections will generally not
be made to the transmission system.



   Service: The readiness and ability on the part of the Department to
furnish reclaimed water to the property.



   Service initiation: The date a reclaimed water meter is installed.



   Utility service area: The area encompassed by the City's planning area
as shown on the future land use map in the City's Comprehensive Plan, unless
otherwise excluded.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-504   Adoption of Chapter 62-610, Florida Administrative Code.



   The rules and regulations appearing in Chapter 62-610, F.A.C., as may
be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference as though fully
set forth within this article, and shall apply within the City as an
ordinance. In the event of any variation between the provisions of Chapter
62-610. F.A.C., and the provisions of this article, the more strict provision
shall prevail. A violation of Chapter 62-610, F.A.C., shall be deemed a
violation of this section.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-505.   Use of reclaimed water within the City’s utility service
area.



   (a)   Reclaimed water service will be made available within the
City's utility service area as the reclaimed water transmission system is
extended and treatment capacity becomes available.



   (b)   Not all property owners within the City will have access to
the City's reclaimed water distribution system. The City shall have the final
decision in determining a customer's entitlement to connect to the reclaimed
water distribution system, which shall be based upon the customer's capacity
needs, as well as the customer's ability to be responsive to local and state
regulations. Once the service is made available, the City will provide
qualified property owners with notice of their right to utilize the reclaimed
water distribution system.



   (c)   Connection of an irrigation system to the customer's side of
the reclaimed water meter is the responsibility of the customer and shall be
performed at the customer's expense.



   (d)   Should the customer require reclaimed water of quality or
pressure varying from that normally supplied by the City, the customer shall
be responsible for any devices necessary to make these adjustments; provided,
however, that such devices will require prior approval by the City.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-506.   Connection to the reclaimed water distribution system.



   (a)   Meters required. Meters are required on all reclaimed water
service connections. No person or property shall have access to the reclaimed
water distribution system or use reclaimed water without delivery of same
through a meter. All reclaimed water meters shall be furnished and installed
by an employee or authorized person of the Department, and shall remain the
property of the Department. The minimum meter size for connection to the
City's reclaimed water system is three-fourths (3/4) of one inch. Required
meter size for any connection will be determined by the Utilities Department
on the basis of the irrigation system's required pressure and flow
characteristics as provided by the customer.



   (b)   Rules, regulations and fees. The City may establish, revise,
modify and enforce rules, regulations and fees pertaining to the provision of
reclaimed water service. Such rules, regulations and fees, which are subject
to the approval of the City, are set forth in this article, and shall be
binding upon all property owners, customers, agents and assigns required to
use and/or using reclaimed water.



   (c)   Operation and maintenance responsibilities for the reclaimed
water irrigation system. The operation and maintenance of the reclaimed water
irrigation system shall be the sole responsibility of the customer and/or
property owner utilizing reclaimed water from the system. The customer and/or
property owner shall provide reasonable access to the  Department for
periodic inspections of the operation and maintenance of the reclaimed water
irrigation system. Failure by the customer and/or property owner to properly
operate and maintain the reclaimed water irrigation system in accordance with
federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations, shall constitute a
violation of this article and be subject to enforcement action as set forth
herein below.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-507.   Access to water meters.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, effectively
deny, or to restrict in any manner, full access to City reclaimed water
meters or their appurtenances by the City's agents or employees, for the
purposes of making necessary periodic readings, repairs, removal or
disconnection of service on the meters or their appurtenances. Such
interference may include, but shall not be limited to, use of locked gates or
fences, presence of animals, physical barriers, or overgrown vegetation.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-508.   Fees, rates and charges.



   (a)   Charges for reclaimed water use will be based on metered flows
and will be billed on a monthly basis per one thousand (1,000) gallons in
accordance with the approved rate schedule.



   (b)   The monthly rates and charges for water and wastewater shall
be reviewed annually by the Utilities Management and the rates set by the
Commission during the annual budget setting process. Such rates shall become
effective on October 1 of each year.



   (c)   Meter installation charges and deposits, when applicable,
shall be as listed in Chapter 26, Article 1 of the City Code of Ordinances.



   (d)   The City Manager or Utilities Director is authorized to
execute Large Reclaimed Water Service Agreements.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09; Ord. No. 18-020, § 3, 9-20-18; Ord. No.
19-008, § 2, 2-5-19)



Sec. 26-509.   Inspections.



   (a)   To ensure that the provisions of the City's ordinances,
regulations and procedures are being observed, the City shall inspect, secure
or remove, as necessary, any or all devices, including but not limited to,
backflow preventers, valves, fittings, pipes and sprinklers that connect to
or control the reclaimed water.



   (b)   The refusal by a consumer to permit an authorized City agent
or employee to enter a premises for the purpose of inspecting an irrigation
system may, at the discretion of the City, result in the immediate
discontinuance of the reclaimed water service.



   (c)   The City shall inspect all connections to the reclaimed water
system prior to the connection being placed in service.



   (d)   The customer shall be responsible to the City for all costs
incurred by the City for any required inspections and/or monitoring of any or
all devices that connect to or control the reclaimed water, to ensure
compliance with this article and/or any state or federal statutes or
regulations; the charge shall be determined on an hourly basis, in addition
to any administrative costs.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-510.   Control of backflow and cross connection.



   Refer to Chapter 26, Article 5 of the City Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-511.   Damage to the reclaimed water distribution system.



   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover or deface any structure, appurtenance or equipment that is
part of the reclaimed water distribution system. All costs to repair any
damage to the reclaimed water distribution system, and/or all costs
associated with additional treatment or alternative disposal requirements
resulting from such action, shall be assessed to the person(s) responsible.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-512.   Approved uses of reclaimed water.



   Reclaimed water shall be used in accordance with applicable federal,
state and local laws, rules and regulations. Pursuant to this chapter,
reclaimed water may be used for irrigation of residential and nonresidential
lawns, golf courses, cemeteries, parks, landscaped areas, edible crops (as
set forth in Chapter 62-610, Florida Administrative Code), highway medians,
dust control on construction sites, mixing of concrete, and cleaning of roads
and sidewalks. Any other use of reclaimed water must be approved in writing
by the Director prior to such usage.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-513.   Prohibitions on use of potable water, reclaimed water and
the reclaimed water distribution system.



   No person shall use reclaimed water unless in accordance with federal,
state or local laws, rules or regulations. Pursuant to this article, no
person shall:



   (a)   Utilize aboveground hose bibs. Hose bibs shall be located in
lockable, below-grade vaults, and clearly marked as being of non-potable
quality. All vault covers shall be color-coded purple, and shall be kept
locked when not in use.



   (b)   Use reclaimed water for the filling of swimming pools, hot
tubs, wading pools, or decorative fountains.



   (c)   Pipe reclaimed water into or use reclaimed water inside of any
building or structure used for residential purposes.



   (d)   Cut and/or remove a Department-installed lock: tamper with the
meter, bypass or reverse a reclaimed water meter; use, alter or make any
connection to the reclaimed water distribution system, unless prior written
approval has been given by the Director, and an employee or authorized person
of the Department is present at the time of the approved action.



   (e)   Sell, barter, trade or otherwise transfer reclaimed water to
any other person or entity.



   (f)   Cause a cross connection between a potable water supply and
the reclaimed water distribution system or the reclaimed water irrigation
system, or violate a provision or requirement of City ordinances pertaining
to backflow prevention or cross connection control.



   (g)   Cause a connection to the reclaimed water distribution system
or reclaimed water irrigation system to be constructed or maintained in
violation of the setback distances as required in Chapter 62-610, F.A.C.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-514.   Interruption and/or discontinuation of service.



   (a)   Right to discontinue service. The City reserves the right to
discontinue service to any portion of, or the entire, reclaimed water system,
as deemed necessary by the Director.



   (b)   Authority to establish restricted use schedules. The Director
shall have the authority to establish schedules that restrict the use of the
reclaimed water system at certain times, in order to reduce maximum pressure
demands on the system, and to regulate usage during periods of limited
reclaimed water availability.



   (c)   Immediate threat to public health. The Director may issue a
stop usage notice, requiring the customer and/or property owner to
immediately cease using reclaimed water, if such usage is deemed to present
or cause an immediate threat or substantial endangerment to the health,
safety or welfare of the public, to the environment, or to the operations of
the City's reclaimed water distribution system. Any such finding shall be
included in the Director's notification to cease usage of the reclaimed
water. Should the customer not comply with the stop usage notice, the
Department may immediately discontinue service of reclaimed water to the
property. All expenses incurred by the Department to discontinue such
service, and/or any and all damages associated with the use of the reclaimed
water, shall be borne by the customer and/or property owner.



   (d)   Other violations. Notwithstanding the provisions as set forth
in this section hereinabove, the Director shall, upon discovery of a
violation of this article, notify the customer and/or property owner of the
violation, by certified mail or by placing a notice on the property or by any
other reasonable means. The notice of violation shall set forth the specific
violation, the corrective action to be taken by the customer and/or the
property owner, and the period of time by which the customer and/or property
owner must correct the violation. Should the customer and/or property owner
not correct the violation within the designated period of time, the
Department shall discontinue service of reclaimed water to the property until
the violation is corrected, and all fees associated with the disconnection
and/or reconneetion of service to the property are paid in full by the
customer and/or property owner.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-515.   City responsibility.



   The City will reasonably attempt to deliver an adequate supply of
reclaimed water of good quality at all times. However, no assurances or
guarantees shall be provided to customers or to others regarding the quantity
or quality of the water due to circumstances beyond their control.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-516.   Location.



   The location of reclaimed water service lines and points of delivery to
private property shall be determined by the City.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-517.   Meter requirements.



   Appropriately sized meters shall be required lor all commercial,
industrial and multi-family dwelling unit uses as determined by the Director.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-518.   Shallow potable wells.



   (a)   The City shall not provide reclaimed water service where
shallow wells, the existence of which is known by the City, are a source of
potable water, and where buffer zone requirements of the Florida Department
of Environmental Protection cannot be maintained.



   (b)   No person shall install a shallow well intended for use as a
source of potable water for property, where reclaimed water and potable water
connections are available.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-519.   Use of reclaimed water for purposes other than irrigation.



   Reclaimed water service may be provided as a source of water for
cooling and miscellaneous process applications. However, reclaimed water may
not be piped into any building used for residential purposes. Any effluent
reclaimed water from cooling and/or process use must be discharged to the
sanitary sewer or other approved location, and must meet all city, state and
federal discharge regulations. A sewer charge for processing of such
discharge will be applied in addition to the cost of the reclaimed water. Any
discharge to the City's sanitary system must meet the City's minimum
pretreatment standards.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-520.   Runoff control.



   To ensure that neither ponding nor runoff from the system occurs,
customers shall be responsible for the operation of their private reclaimed
water systems in a prudent manner.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



Sec. 26-521.   Penalty.



   See Section 1-6 of the City Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. No. 09-022, § 2, 5-5-09)



PART III  LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS*



   *Editor's note—Ordinance No. 095-02, adopted April 4, 1995, created
comprehensive land development regulations through repeal, revision and
renumbering. Ordinance No. 10-025, passed December 7, 2010, subsequently
completely replaced and amended Part III, Land Development Regulations. Since
the ordinance did not follow the format used in this Code, it has been set
out as enacted herein.



CHAPTER 1.  GENERAL ADMINISTRATION



Article I.   General Provisions



Article II.   Definitions



Article III.   Comprehensive Plan



Article IV.   Redevelopment Plans



Article V.   Housing Initiatives



Article VI.   Concurrency Management System



Article VII.   Decision Making and Administrative Bodies



Article VIII.   Due Process and Appeals



Article IX.   Notice of Intent



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 1.   Short Title.



   The regulations embraced in the following chapters, articles, sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases shall constitute and
be designated the "Land Development Regulations, City of Boynton Beach,
Florida," and may be so cited.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Purpose and Intent.



   It is the purpose of the City Commissioners of the City of Boynton
Beach to establish the standards, regulations, and procedures for review and
approval of all proposed development of property, and to provide a
development review process that will be comprehensive, consistent, and
efficient in the implementation of the goals, objectives, and policies of the
city's Comprehensive Plan.



   It is the intent to foster and preserve public health, safety, comfort,
morals, and welfare, and to aid in the harmonious, orderly, and progressive
development within the municipal boundaries.  These regulations are also
intended to accomplish or actuate the following: 1) promote efficiency, in
terms of time and expense; 2) effectiveness, in terms of addressing the
natural resource and public facility implications of proposed development;
and 3) equitably, in terms of consistency with established regulations and
procedures, respect for the rights of property owners, and consideration of
the interests of the citizens of Boynton Beach. 



   Lastly, the City Commissioners deem it to be in the best public
interest for all development to be conceived, designed, and built in
accordance with good planning and design practices, equal or superior to the
minimum standards set forth in these Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Designation and Citation.



   For clarification and citation purposes, the terms "land development
regulations," "Regulations," and "LDR's" shall mean and refer to Part III
Land Development Regulations, as contained in the City of Boynton Beach,
Florida, Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Catch Lines.



   The catch lines of this Code, which are printed in boldface type, are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall
not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catch lines, are amended or re-enacted.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 5.   Repeal.



   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.  The repeal of an
ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the
repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending at the
time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under
the ordinance repealed.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 6.   Severability.



   The chapters, article, sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses, and phrases of these land development regulations are severable. 
If any such phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section,
article, or chapter is declared unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable
by the valid judgment or decree of the court of competent jurisdiction, then
such unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable regulation shall not affect
any of the remaining portions of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 7.   Penalties.



   A.   General Penalties.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate or fail to comply with any provision of these Regulations or other
ordinance of the city and where no specific penalty is provided therefore,
the maximum penalty which may be imposed upon any person who shall be
adjudged to have violated any provision of this Regulation or other ordinance
of the city shall be a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or a
term of imprisonment not in excess of sixty (60) days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment; provided, however, that this section shall not conflict
with any penalties imposed for any offense under the laws of the State of
Florida, and no penalty for violation of these Regulations or any ordinance
of the city shall exceed the maximum penalty provided for the violation of a
comparable state law.  Each day any violation of any provision of these
Regulations or any other ordinance of the city shall constitute a separate
offense.  In addition to any penalty provided herein, the person or
organization may be subject to any other penalty as provided in the city's
Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise provided by Florida law.



   B.   Time.  Whenever the judgment of a court of appropriate
jurisdiction shall, under any of the ordinances of the city, adjudge a person
to pay a fine, or a fine and costs of prosecution, such judgment shall also
provide a period of time for which such person shall be imprisoned in default
of the payment of the same.



   C.   Imprisonment.  Whenever the sentence shall be one of both fine
and imprisonment, it shall also provide for an additional period of
imprisonment, for which such person shall be held in default of payment of
the fine and/or costs of prosecution imposed.  Such additional period shall
commence to run from the expiration of the other period of imprisonment fixed
by the sentence, provided that in no case shall the imprisonment for failure
to pay a fine, or fine and costs, together with any other imprisonment in the
same case, exceed the period of six (6) months.  Nothing in this section
shall exempt a prisoner from being put to labor during the period of such
additional imprisonment.



   D.   Civil Enforcement.  In case any building or structure is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, or maintained, or any
building, structure, land, or water is used in violation of this Regulation
or any ordinance or other regulation made under authority conferred hereby,
the authorized city official, in addition to other remedies, may institute
any appropriate action or proceedings in a civil action in the circuit court
to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance, or use and to restrain, correct, or abate
such violation to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, land or
water, and to prevent any illegal act, conduct of business, or use in or
about such premises.



   E.   Stoppage of Work.  Failure to comply with any city approved
development order or development permit, or any applicable city ordinance or
land development regulation may result in an order to stop work from the
authorized city official.  Damage to public property resulting from work
performed may result in a stop work order if a threat exists to the health
and safety of the public.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 8.   Ordinances Not Affected by Regulation.



   Nothing in this Regulation or the ordinance adopting this Regulation
shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the
following when not inconsistent with this Regulation:



   A.   Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any
evidence of the city's indebtedness;



   B.   Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy
of taxes or for a budget;



   C.   Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or excluding
territory as a part of the city;



   D.   Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right;



   E.   Any ordinance approving, authorizing, or otherwise relating to
any contract, agreement, ease, deed or other instrument;



   F.   Any administrative ordinance not inconsistent with this
Regulation;



   G.   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating or repairing any street or
public way or lawfully established bulkheads or bulkhead lines;



   H.   Any ordinance regulating, restricting or prohibiting traffic on
particular streets or in particular localities;



   I.   Any ordinance prescribing the street grades of any street in
the city;



   J.   Any ordinance providing for local improvements or making
assessments therefore;



   K.   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision
in the city;



   L.   Any ordinance zoning or rezoning specific property;



   M.   Any ordinance providing for the compensation of officers and
employees; and



   N.   Any temporary or special ordinance.



   All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force
and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 9.   Ordinances; City Laws and Codification.



   Ordinances of the City Commission adopted in a manner provided by law
shall constitute the laws of the city and shall be in full force and effect
until repealed.  The City Commission shall have the power to have the city
ordinances codified, and published in book form.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE II.  DEFINITIONS



   Terms in this chapter shall have the following definitions, if not
previously accepted pursuant to the Unabridged Dictionary of the English
Language.  Supplemental definitions for specific technical terms should be
defined at the reference location at which they first appear in this
chapter.  If a conflict exists in terms of the supplemental definitions with
these definitions, the specific definition for the specific applicable
condition shall apply.



   ABUTTING PROPERTY - The condition of two (2) adjoining properties
having a common property line or boundary, including cases where two (2) or
more lots adjoin only on a corner or corners.



   ACCESS - The principal or secondary means of ingress and egress to a
lot from a dedicated public or private right-of-way.



   ACCESS WATERWAYS - A waterway which is developed or constructed for the
purpose of providing access by water to lots within a subdivision.



   ACCESS WAY - A non-dedicated area, which is permitted for ingress or
egress of vehicles or pedestrians.



   ACCESS, LEGAL - A dedicated and recorded right-of-way, or easement,
excluding utility or drainage easements, affording perpetual ingress and
egress from a subject property to a public thoroughfare.



   ACCESSORY APARTMENT - A habitable living unit added to or created
within a single-family dwelling or its accessory structure that provides
basic requirements for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
Accessory apartments shall comprise no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of
the total floor area of the single-family dwelling, and shall in no case be
more than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.  Specific design and
parking requirements may apply.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE - A detached, subordinate building, the
use of which is clearly incidental and related to that of the principal
building or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as that of
the principal building or use.  Additional design recommendations and/or
standards may be applied to the accessory building or structure.



   ACCESSORY GARDEN - See "Garden."



   ACCESSORY USE - See "Use, Accessory."



   ACRE - Land or water consisting of forty-three thousand, five hundred
sixty (43,560) square feet.



   ADDITION - An expansion, extension, or increase in the usable space
within a building or facility.



   ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES - Public facilities available to serve a
development project so as to meet the levels of service and the conditions
set forth in the concurrency regulations.



   ADEQUATE SCREENING - To conceal from public view, materials on private
property, with a physical screen made of one (1) or more of the following:
dense landscape material, metal, wood, or masonry.



   ADULT CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITY (ACLF) - See "Group Home."



   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT - An establishment that predominately limits
admission to "adults only" owing to the sexual nature of its merchandise or
entertainment.  Such establishments may include, but not be limited to,
adult bookstores, adult theatres, adult lounges, adult health studios, adult
motels, adult hotels, or the like with nude, bottomless, or topless
entertainment or employees.



   AFFECTED PARTIES - Includes persons owning property or persons owning
or operating a business within the boundaries of the city whose development
application or application for a permit or license is pending.



   AFFORDABILITY CONTROLS - Restrictions placed on workforce housing units
by which the price of such units and/or the income of the purchaser or lessee
will be restricted in order to ensure that the units remain affordable to low
and moderate income households.



   AFFORDABILITY TERM - The time a workforce housing unit is required to
remain affordable to income qualified buyers or renters.



   AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURES - Structures, such as coldframes, greenhouses,
hoophouses, or shadehouses that are used to grow plants and commonly
associated with accessory gardens and "community gardens".  For
clarification, agricultural structures are not considered sheds and storage
structures and are regulated differently.  See Chapter 3, Article V, Section
3.Y. for the provisions regarding agricultural structures.



   AGRICULTURE - See "Garden."



   AISLE - The hard-surfaced lanes in a parking lot which connect the
parking stalls with a public or private street, alley or interior driveway.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENT - Any business or commercial
establishment, whether open to the public at large or entrance is limited by
cover charge or membership requirements, including those licensed by the
state for sale and or service of alcoholic beverages, which include, but are
not limited to, any stand-alone bar, bottle club, hotel, motel, restaurant,
night club, country club, cabaret, and meeting facility located in the city
in which alcoholic beverages, beer or wine are, or are available to be, sold,
dispensed, served, consumed, provided, possessed or offered for sale or
consumption on the premises.



   ALLEY - A right-of-way providing a secondary means of access and
service to abutting property.  It is not intended or used for general
traffic circulation.



   ALTERATION



      1.   BUILDING - Any change in the structure which will
increase the number of useable units, the floor area or height of the
structure. 



      2.   ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LANDS - Any activity which
results in the modification, variation or transformation of environmentally
sensitive lands, including but not limited to placement of vehicles,
structures, debris, or any other material objects thereon, introduction or
injection of water or other substance, and removal, displacement or
disturbance of plant or animal species, soil, rock, minerals or water.



      3.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION - See "Historic Preservation,
Alteration."



   AMUSEMENT ARCADE - A commercial establishment containing four (4) or
more video gaming, pinball, or similar player-operated amusement machines, in
any combination.  This definition specifically incorporates those machines
described in F.S. § 849.161.  See "Entertainment, Indoor."



   ANCILLARY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE - See "Accessory Building or Structure."



   ANCILLARY USE - See "Use, Accessory."



   AND/OR - "And" may be read "or" and "or" may be read "and" if the sense
requires it.



   ANTENNA - See "Wireless Communication Facility (WCF), Antenna."



   ANTENNA ARRAY - See "Wireless Communication Facility (WCF), Antenna
Array."



   ANTENNA ELEMENT - See "Wireless Communication Facility (WCF), Antenna
Element."



   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE - See "Wireless Communication Facility (WCF),
Antenna Support Structure."



   ANTIQUE STORE or AUCTION HOUSE - See "Merchandise, Used."



   APARTMENT - See "Dwelling, Multi-family."



   APARTMENT, EFFICIENCY - A type of dwelling unit containing no more than
one (1) habitable room to be used for living, cooking, eating, and
sleeping.  Each efficiency apartment must have a bathroom.



   APPLICANT - Generally, an "applicant" is a property owner or person(s)
or entity acting as an agent on behalf of the property owner, in a formal
application for a development proposal, permit, or approval.  For the
purposes of determining parks and recreation impact fees, the term
"applicant" is the person or entity applying, or required by the city code to
apply for a building permit for the construction of three (3) or more
dwelling units, or for the construction of one (1) or more dwelling units
within a development of three (3) or more units.  Applicant is synonymous
with owner.



   ARCADE, AMUSEMENT - See "Entertainment, Indoor."



   ARCADE, PEDESTRIAN - A passage or walkway covered over by a succession
of arches or vaults connecting two (2) buildings or supported by stand-alone
columns on one (1) or both sides.  It also more commonly describes a
roof-like structure open to the weather on one (1) or more sides, constructed
of rigid materials, which are cantilevered from the exterior building wall to
provide a covered walkway for the public along small shops, vendors and/or
offices.









 



   ART STUDIO - Work space for one (1) or more artists or artisans,
including the accessory sale of art produced on the premises and related art
instruction.  This use excludes tattooing and body art.



   ART, ARTWORK OR WORKS OF ART - Tangible creations by artists exhibiting
the highest quality of skill and aesthetic principles and includes all forms
of the visual arts conceived in any medium, material, or combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, paintings, sculptures, engravings, carvings,
frescos, stained glass, mosaics, mobiles, tapestries, murals, photographs,
video projections, digital images, bas-relief, high relief, fountains,
kinetics, collages, drawings, monuments erected to commemorate a person or an
event, functional furnishings, such as artist designed seating and pavers,
unique or original architectural elements, and artist designed landforms or
landscape elements.  The following shall not be considered artwork or works
of art for purposes of this chapter:  reproductions or unlimited copies of
original artwork; art objects, which are mass-produced; and works that are
decorative, ornamental, or functional elements of the architecture or
landscape design, except when commissioned from an artist or designed as an
integral aspect of a structure or site.



   ART, BOOK, CRAFT, HOBBY, MUSIC, SPORTING GOOD, & TOY STORE - 
Establishments primarily engaged in the retail sale (including accessory
repair service) of one or more of the following: 1) art for retail sale in
art galleries; 2) new books or magazines; 3) craft and hobby items, including
sewing machines and supplies, new fabrics, patterns, yarns, needlework and
the like; 4) new compact and digital video disks, musical instruments, and
sheet music; 5) sporting goods and supplies, including scuba equipment,
bicycles, mopeds, and motor scooters (with engines not exceeding 150 cubic
centimeters), camping equipment, boats, trailers and recreational vehicles;
or 6) toys.  Any motorized moped or scooter with an engine in excess of 150
cubic centimeters is classified as a "motorcycle" and regulated as a NEW or
USED AUTO DEALER.  This use excludes any merchandise that would be
classified as adult entertainment.



   ARTIST OR PROFESSIONAL ARTIST - A practitioner in the visual arts,
generally recognized by critics and peers as a professional of serious intent
and ability.  Indications of a person's status as a professional artist
include, but are not limited to, income realized through the sole commission
of artwork, frequent or consistent art exhibitions, placement of artwork in
public institutions or museums, receipt of honors and awards, and training in
the arts.



   ARTS CAMPUS - Various principal and accessory components of the art
creation process, including art production, education, residences for the
artists and/or students, and display space, concentrated within two (2) or
more buildings within a single geographic area.



   ARTS COMMISSION - The advisory board established by the City Commission
pursuant to Ordinance 01-64.



   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY (ALF) - See "Group Home."



   AUTO BROKER - Principally an office use primarily engaged in
facilitating the retailing, leasing, or wholesaling of new or used
automobiles, motorcycles, and light trucks; such as passenger and cargo vans
and sport utility vehicles.  Typical broker activities include but are not
limited to the following: researching and locating a desired vehicle or
buyer; price negotiations; processing the transaction, including securing the
necessary financing; and arranging vehicle delivery.  Unlike an "Auto
Dealer," this use does not include on-site vehicle inventories.  If a
vehicle is temporarily stored on-site during the transaction, the vehicle
must be stored indoors.



   AUTO/CAR WASH (POLISHING, WAXING, DETAILING) - Establishments providing
for the cleaning of private automobiles, recreational vehicles (personal
watercraft), or other light duty equipment through manual detailing and/or
mechanical resources.  Business activity is to be conducted indoors, but the
establishment may have an outdoor component if approved through the site plan
or site plan modification process.



   AUTO/CAR WASH (SELF-SERVE BAY) - An establishment where washing,
drying, polishing, or vacuuming of a passenger automobile or marine vessel is
performed by the driver or the occupant.  This use is not intended to serve
a commercial or industrial fleet. 



   AUTO DEALER, NEW OR USED - An establishment, licensed by the State of
Florida, which is primarily engaged in retailing or leasing new or used
automobiles, mopeds, scooters, and motorcycles (with engines in excess of one
hundred fifty (150) cubic centimeters, and light trucks, including passenger
and cargo vans and sport utility vehicles.  Although it is common for
dealers operations to rely upon the exterior display of vehicles and on-site
transactions, given limited land availability, redevelopment and economic
development initiatives, including concerns for visual impacts along main
roadway corridors, the City’s regulations limit the size and types of auto
sales businesses, by restricting them to the indoor storage and display of
vehicles, while accommodating those businesses that can operate using
electronic sales resources and that are not dependent upon on-site visitation
and sales.



   AUTOMOBILE - An automobile, motorcycle, or the like as defined by the
rules of the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles.



   AUTOMOBILE RENTAL - An establishment primarily engaged in renting new
automobiles, which includes light trucks, sport utility vehicles,
motorcycles, and passenger vans.  This term excludes those establishments
engaged in auto dealing and leasing (long-term basis) and taxi and limousine
services (short-term basis).



   AUTOMOTIVE, MAJOR REPAIR - An establishment primarily engaged in minor
automotive repair services as well as complete engine overhaul and/or
replacement of internal parts of engines.  Also included is the repair of
any portion of the drive mechanism, body and fender work, upholstering,
painting and customizing.



   AUTOMOTIVE, MINOR REPAIR - An establishment primarily engaged in minor
automotive repair services such as oil change, lubrication, engine tune-up,
battery replacement, carburetor repairs, tire mounting and balancing, and the
replacement and/or repair of external parts of engines.



   AUTOMOTIVE PARTS STORE - An establishment primarily engaged in the
retail sales of new auto parts and accessories.  Sale of auto parts from a
commercial establishment for installation and use off-premises.



   AUTOMOTIVE WINDOW TINTING/STEREO INSTALLATION/ALARMS - An establishment
primarily engaged in tinting automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars,
trucks, and vans.  They may also include establishments that are primarily
engaged in retailing and installing automotive accessories, such as stereos
and alarm systems.



   AWNING - A structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame attached
to a building, when the same is so erected as to permit its being raised to a
position flat against the building when not in use.









 



   BAKERY, COMMERCIAL - An establishment primarily engaged in the
manufacturing of bread and other bakery products.



   BALLOON - A container made of non-rigid material filled with air or gas
and designed to be tethered.



   BANK AND FINANCIAL OFFICE - A financial institution that is open to the
public and engaged in deposit banking, and that performs closely related
functions such as making loans, investments, and fiduciary activities.



   BANNER - See "Sign, Banner."



   BAR AND NIGHTCLUB - Any licensed premises that is devoted predominately
or totally, to the serving of alcoholic and/or intoxicating beverages or any
combination thereof, for consumption at the licensed establishment. 
Leisurely dancing may occur or patrons may be entertained by live or recorded
performers who dance, sing, play instruments, or perform other acts of
entertainment (excluding adult entertainment).  The service of food may be
incidental to the service of the aforementioned beverages, activities, and
entertainment. These establishments are known as but are not limited to the
following:  bars, cigar bars, cabarets, cocktail lounges, comedy clubs,
dance clubs, discothèques, night clubs, piano bars, pubs, and saloons. 
Business activity is to be conducted indoors, but the establishment may have
an outdoor component if approved through the site plan or site plan
modification process.



   BASE FLOOD - See "Flood, Base Flood."



   BASE STATION (GROUND EQUIPMENT) - The electronic equipment utilized by
the wireless providers for the transmission and reception of radio signals.



   BED AND BREAKFAST - A private owner occupied residence having more than
three (3) and less than ten (10) guest units, which are subordinate and
incidental to the main residential use of the building, in conformance with
the prescribed regulations as outlined in the Land Development Regulations.



   BEER, WINE, & LIQUOR STORE - An establishment primarily engaged in
retailing packaged alcoholic beverages, such as ale, beer, wine, and
liquor.  They are limited to off-site consumption.



   BENCHMARK - A relatively permanent material object, natural or
artificial, bearing a marked point whose elevation above or below an adopted
datum plane is known.



   BETTERMENT PLAN OR ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE - A proper landscape plan
that demonstrates that an improvement or betterment of the environment can be
accomplished over the existing site conditions if such landscape plan is
carried out to its fullest.  Such a plan is submitted and reviewed to meet
or exceed the intent of the city's landscape regulations.



   BEVERAGE MFG - An establishment primarily engaged in the manufacturing,
purifying, bottling, and distribution of beverage products, including ice and
alcoholic beverages. This industrial use may include a subordinate commercial
component (i.e., tasting room, retail and facility tours) that is open to the
public.



   BICYCLE PATH - Any road, path or way that is open to bicycle travel,
which road, path or way is physically separated from motorized vehicular
traffic by an open space or by a barrier and is located either within the
highway right-of-way or within an independent right-of-way.



   BICYCLE RACK - A stationary stand which supports a minimum of five (5)
bicycles by its frame and to which a user can lock the bicycle and one (1)
wheel simultaneously with a security U-shaped lock.



   BILLBOARD - See "Sign, Billboard."



   BLOCK - Includes Tier or Group and means a group of lots existing
within well-defined and fixed boundaries, usually being an area surrounded by
streets, parks or other physical barriers and public space, having an
assigned number, letter, or other name through which it may be identified.



   BOARD - Board means any board appointed by the city, such as the
Planning and Development Board.  Also, see "Historic Preservation, Board."



   BOAT DEALER/RENTAL - An establishment primarily engaged in retailing
new and/or used boats, retailing new boats and selling replacement parts and
accessories, renting boats, or a yacht brokerage business, including the
display and temporary storage of boats on-site (customarily incidental to the
principal use).  A yacht broker that exclusively displays/stores boats
off-site would be considered an office use.  A boat dealer/rental excludes
the repair or service of vessels on the premises



   BOAT REPAIR - A facility where boats are repaired, serviced, or
customized.



   BOYNTON BEACH HOUSING TRUST - A trust created as a depository for
in-lieu of payments, donated land, or housing units for the purpose of
providing workforce housing units.



   BOYNTON BEACH REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES - See "Historic Preservation."



   BREAKPOINT TECHNOLOGY - The engineering design of a monopole wherein a
specified point on the monopole is designed to have stresses concentrated so
that the point is at least five percent (5%) more susceptible to failure than
any other point along the monopole so that in the event of a structural
failure of the monopole, the failure will occur at the breakpoint rather than
at the base plate, anchor bolts, or any other point on the monopole.



   BRIDGE - A structure, including supports, erected over a depression or
an obstruction, such as water or a highway or railway, and having a track or
passage-way for carrying traffic as defined in the Florida State Statues or
other moving loads.



   BUFFER WALL - A stuccoed and painted masonry wall or an engineered
pre-cast concrete wall used to physically separate or screen a residential
property from a non-residential property so as to visually shield or block
noise, lights, or other nuisances.  Finish on both sides of wall must be
approved by the Director of Planning and Zoning.









 



   BUILD-TO LINE - A line delineating the maximum allowable distance that
a building may be constructed from a property line.  In instances where a
build-to line is required, the space between the building and property line
is typically referred to as the "reduced building setback" area.  No
building may be constructed outside the reduced building setback area when
the zoning code stipulates multiple build-to lines.



   BUILDABLE AREA - That portion of a site exclusive of the required yard
areas on which a structure or building improvements may be erected.



   BUILDING - All construction built for support, enclosure, shelter or
protection.  Also see "Historic Preservation, Building(s)."



   BUILDING FAÇADE - That portion of the exterior elevations of a
building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the
entire width of the building elevations.









 



   BUILDING FRONTAGE - The main entrance side of a building or bay.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL - The official (or authorized representative)
responsible for the interpretation and administration of the city's Building
Code.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE - A line delineating the minimum required
distance between each property line and the building.









 



   BUILDING SITE - A portion or parcel of land considered as a unit,
devoted to a certain use or occupied by a building or group of buildings that
are united by a common interest or use, and the customary accessories and
open spaces belonging to the same. 



   BUILDING/STRUCTURE HEIGHT - The vertical distance in feet measured from
the lowest point at the property line of an adjacent property or from the
minimum base flood elevation, whichever is highest, to the highest point of
the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line for parapet roofs with parapets
less than five (5) feet in height. Gable, mansard, and hip roof heights shall
be measured to the midpoint between the eaves and the ridge. Rooftop
penthouses, stairwells, mechanical and electrical equipment shall be
concealed by or constructed of exterior architectural materials or features
of the same type or quality used on the exterior walls of the main building
and may only exceed the maximum building height pursuant to the provisions of
the Land Development Regulations.  Walls or retaining walls shall also be
measured from the lowest adjacent property line to the top of the structure
excluding column caps, column capitals and other similar architectural items.









 



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL - A building wherein the main or principal use of
the lot is conducted.



   BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL OFFICE - An establishment that conducts
administrative and/or professional functions that serve internal operations
and/or customers or clients, involving accounting, consulting, design, legal,
research, scientific, technical, or other similar professional or
administrative functions.



   BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT - A tax levied for the privilege to operate a
business, profession, occupation or other operation within the city limits,
which is issued in accordance with the city's Code of Ordinances.



   CALIPER - A point on a tree used as part of the accepted method of
measurement of the thickness of a tree trunk, as defined in the Florida
Grades and Standards Manual.  The measurement is taken at six (6) inches
from the ground, unless trunk diameter measured six (6) inches from the
ground is greater than four (4) inches, in which case the measurement is
taken at twelve (12) inches from the ground.



   CALL CENTER - An establishment primarily engaged in providing customer
service, support, or information in a centralized office environment, and
whose typical activities include receiving (inbound) or transmitting
(outbound) telephone calls, facsimiles, or internet communications (e.g.,
live chat, instant messaging, email).



   CANOPY - A structure, other than an awning, made of cloth or metal with
metal frames attached to a building, and carried by a frame supported by the
ground, or sidewalk.









 



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ELEMENT (CIE) - The capital improvements element
of the Comprehensive Plan of the city.



   CAR - See "Automobile."



   CAR RENTAL - See "Automobile Rental."



   CAR WASH - See "Auto/Car Wash."



   CARPET AND UPHOLSTERY CLEANING - An establishment primarily engaged in
cleaning and/or dyeing used rugs, carpets, and upholstery.



   CARPORT - A roofed area open on one (1), two (2) or three (3) sides and
attached to the main building, for the storage of one (1) or more vehicles.









 



   CATERER - An establishment primarily engaged in providing single
event-based food services.  These establishments generally have equipment
and vehicles used to prepare and transport meals and/or snacks to events
and/or prepare food at an off-premise site.  Banquet halls with catering
staff are included in this industry.  Unless specifically provided for
within these Regulations, on-site consumption and/or take-out service is not
a permitted accessory use.



   CEMETERY - An establishment that is primarily engaged in operating
site(s) or structure(s) reserved for the interment of human or animal remains.



   CENTERLINE - A line midway between the right-of-way lines or the
surveyed and prescribed centerline established by the City Engineer, which
may or may not be the line midway between the existing or proposed
right-of-way lines.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS - See "Historic Preservation."



   CERTIFICATE OF CONFORMANCE - Certification issued by the Development
Director or designee that a parcel, building, and/or site improvements made
nonconforming due to actions of a governmental entity, shall be deemed to
conform upon the issuance of a certificate of conformity as outlined in the
Land Development Regulations.



   CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP - See "Historic Preservation."



   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY - A statement signed by the City Development
Director setting forth that a building or structure legally complies with the
City of Boynton Beach Building and Zoning Codes and that the same may be used
for the purposes stated therein.



   CERTIFICATION OF CONCURRENCY - Proof that public facilities are or will
be available, consistent with the adopted levels of service and the
conditions set forth in the Land Development Regulations and shall specify
the public facilities which are to be constructed, timing of construction and
responsibility for construction.  Certification of concurrency shall reserve
capacity in the public facilities which are available, until the
certification of concurrency expires.



   CERTIFIED DOCUMENTS - Drawings, estimates, warranties, etc. signed and
sealed by a Florida registered architect, engineer and/or land surveyor
guaranteeing that the documents are true, accurate and in compliance with all
applicable laws, rules and regulations.



   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT (CLG) - See "Historic Preservation."



   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN - A sign of permanent character, but with
removable letters, words or numerals, indicating the names or persons
associated with, or events conducted upon, the premises upon which a sign is
erected.



   CHECK CASHING - A person or business that for compensation engages, in
whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money
orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose.  This use does
not include a state or federally chartered bank, savings association, credit
union, or industrial loan company.



   CHICKEE HUT or CHIKI HUT - (a.k.a. Tiki Hut) - A type of "open-air
structure" that is specifically described as an open-sided wooden hut with a
thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, constructed
by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or by the Seminole Tribe of
Florida, and does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood
features into its construction.  This type of structure is specifically
defined pursuant to the review and approval consistent with Florida Law.



   CHILD - An unmarried person under the age of eighteen (18) years.



   CHURCH - Also known as a place of worship, is a building or group of
buildings wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and
related activities.  Day care centers, primary and secondary schools,
seminaries, and colleges and universities shall not be construed to be an
accessory use to a church.



   CITY - The City of Boynton Beach, a municipality established in the
County of Palm Beach, State of Florida to be a political corporation under
the name of City of Boynton Beach pursuant to the laws of Florida.



   CITY COMMISSION - Whenever the words "City Commission" are used, they
shall be construed to mean the City Commission of the City of Boynton Beach.



   CITY ENGINEER - A Florida licensed professional engineer in charge of
the City of Boynton Beach, Department of Public Works/Engineering Division,
and who acts as the administrative officer for the purposes of implementing
the city's platting requirements.



   CITY INSPECTOR - The person(s) designated by a city administrator to
inspect improvements, a business, or property for compliance with the city's
regulations.



   CITY STANDARDS - Standards adopted by the City of Boynton Beach.



   CITY STREET SYSTEM - The city street system consisting of all local
roads and all collector roads inside the City of Boynton Beach which are not
in the State of Florida or Palm Beach County road system.



   CITY SURVEYOR AND MAPPER - A Florida licensed professional surveyor and
mapper, under contract or employment with the City of Boynton Beach, Florida
in accordance with F.S. § 177.081(1), as amended from time to time.



   CIVIC & FRATERNAL CLUB/ORGANIZATION - A registered association of
persons for the promotion of some non-profit common objective, involving
literature, science, politics, or community service, which meets periodically
and is limited to members and guests. This use and/or establishment is
primarily comprised of the office function of the organization supporting
administrative and business affairs, document storage and maintenance, and
meeting facilities for members and guests.



   CLEANING SUPPLY STORE (SWIMMING POOLS, JANITORIAL) - An establishment
primarily engaged in the retail sales of supplies, materials, chemicals, and
other specialized lines of merchandise for the cleaning of swimming pools and
other household items (interior and exterior) and janitorial businesses.



   CLOTHING & ACCESSORIES - An establishment primarily engaged in
retailing new clothing and clothing accessories merchandise from fixed
point-of-sale locations. 



   COASTAL CONSTRUCTION CONTROL LINE - See "Flood, Coastal Construction
Control Line."



COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA - The area below the elevation of the category 1
storm surge line as established by a Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from
Hurricanes (SLOSH) computerized storm surge model.



   COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT - Whenever the words "commercial district"
or "commercial zoning district" are used, they are construed to include any
or all of the following zoning districts: C-1 office and professional
commercial; C-2 neighborhood commercial; C-3 community commercial; C-4
general commercial; CBD central business district; and PCD planned commercial
development.



   CODE 1958 - Any reference herein to "Code 1958" shall be construed to
mean the "Code of Ordinances, City of Boynton Beach, Florida," adopted
October 20, 1958, by Ordinance Number 315, as from time to time amended and
supplemented.



   COIN-OPERATED LAUNDRY - An establishment primarily engaged in operating
facilities with coin-operated or similar self-service laundry/dry cleaning
equipment for customer use on the premises, contingent upon the floor area of
such use is entirely enclosed.



   COLLECTOR STREET - See "Street, Collector."



   COLLEGE, SEMINARY, UNIVERSITY - An establishment primarily engaged in
furnishing academic courses and granting degrees at associate, baccalaureate
or graduate levels. The requirement for admission is at least a high school
diploma or equivalent.



   COLOCATION - The practice of installing and operating multiple wireless
carriers, service providers, and/or radio common carrier licensees on the
same antenna support structure or attached wireless communication facility
using different and separate antenna, feed lines and radio frequency
generating equipment.



   COMMERCIAL TRUCK - A truck defined as such by the rules of the Florida
Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles.



   COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT - All C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, CBD, and PCD
zoning districts.



   COMMUNITY GARDEN - See "Garden."



   COMMUNITY SUPPORTED AGRICULTURE (CSA) - A form of food production and
distribution where a group of individuals pledge to support and provide
capital to a farm thereby sharing the risks and benefits of food
production.  Typically, members or "share-holders" (e.g., individuals,
businesses, restaurants) of the CSA pledge in advance to cover the
anticipated costs of the farm operation and in return, receive shares in the
farm's yield throughout the growing season.  See "Garden."



   COMPACT DEVELOPMENT - A development or development pattern consisting
of a varied mix of land uses, including but not limited to residential,
commercial, office, and public/civic spaces.  The central characteristic of
compact development is discouraging urban sprawl and reducing the number of
vehicular miles traveled by accommodating living, employment, shopping,
entertainment, recreation, and outdoor gathering areas, all of which are
located within walking distance of each other.  Typical design elements
include minimal building setbacks, wide pedestrian areas and public spaces, a
grid pattern street network with short and interconnected block and alley
lengths, and innovative/flexible approaches to off-street parking
requirements.  Emphasis is placed on the proximity and access of a subject
development to public transit and alternate modes of transportation, with
priority given to creating safe and pleasant pedestrian/bicycle circulation
patterns and linkages.



   COMPLETELY ENCLOSED - A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open area, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows
or entrances or exit doors normally provided, and open for the accommodation
of persons, goods, or vehicles.



   COMPOSTING - A controlled biological reduction of organic wastes to
humus.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The Comprehensive Plan of the City of Boynton
Beach as adopted and amended and required by the Florida Statutes.



   COMPUTATION OF TIME - In computing any period of time prescribed or
allowed by this Code or Regulations, the day of the act, event or default
from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included.
The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday in which event the period shall run until
the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday.  When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven
(7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be
excluded in the computation.



   CONCEALED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY - See "Wireless Communication
Facility."



   CONCEPTUAL FEEDBACK - General reaction to a thought or idea with the
clear understanding that further development of the thought or idea will be
considered only when it is in conformance with all codes, ordinances, rules
and regulations.  Conceptual feedback neither provides nor implies either
present or future waivers, variances, exceptions or exemptions from any
codes, ordinances, rules and/or regulations.



   CONCURRENCY - The requirement that the necessary public facilities and
services to maintain the adopted level of service standards are available
when the impacts of development occur.



   CONCURRENCY EXEMPTION DETERMINATION - A written certification by the
Planning Director that a development order or permit is exempt with respect
to meeting the concurrency requirements for a particular public facility.



   CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATION OF CONCURRENCY - The reasonable likelihood
that the necessary public facilities would be provided by the developer, a
governmental agency, or by other developers, but that the conditions set
forth herein cannot be met.  The conditional certification of concurrency
shall specify the public facilities which are to be constructed, timing of
construction and responsibility for construction.  A conditional
certification of concurrency shall reserve capacity in the public facilities
which specified as such, until the conditional certification of concurrency
expires.



   CONDITIONAL USE - See "Use, Conditional."



   CONDOMINIUM - See "Property Owners Association."



   CONSIGNMENT SHOP - See "Merchandise, Used."



   CONSTRUCTION PLANS - Certified documents from which a complete review
and analysis can be made of all required improvements without research and/or
additional data.



   CONTIGUOUS LANDS - Lands that abut each other or are separated only by
streets, ways, easements, pipelines, powerlines, conduits or rights-of-way
under ownership of the petitioner, a governmental agency, a subdivision or a
public or private utility.  Also see the Florida Statutes in connection with
annexation.



   CONTRACTOR - A contractor undertakes trades of a type that are
specialized to assist in building construction and remodeling.  This
definition includes, but is not limited to, heating, air conditioning,
plumbing, roofing, paving, underground, and landscaping.  This establishment
is limited to the office and administrative function of a contractor.  This
would exclude the storing and operating of equipment and special purpose
vehicles and/or trailers typically used in providing services by the
contractor, and not commonly used for general transportation purposes on a
day-to-day basis by employees.  Such storage and operation is allowed at a
contractor’s workshop (See “Contractor's Workshop”).



   CONTRACTOR'S WORKSHOP - The functions of a contractor establishment,
including the housing and/or operating of machinery, the provision of
services, the fabrication of building-related products, and interior storage.
This may also include the administrative function of a contractor.



   CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY - See "Historic Preservation."



   CONVALESCENT HOME - See "Group Home."



   CONVENIENCE STORE - An establishment known as a convenience store or a
food mart (except those with fuel pumps) is primarily engaged in retailing a
limited line of goods that generally includes milk, bread, soda, and
snacks.  The term "convenience store" does not include a store which is
solely or primarily a restaurant.



   CONVENTIONAL ZONING DISTRICT - All zoning districts which are not
planned zoning districts.  Whenever the words “conventional district” or
“conventional zoning district” are used, they are construed to exclude
any or all of the following zoning districts:  IPUD infill planned unit
development; PUD planned unit development; MHPD mobile home planned
development; PCD planned commercial development; SMU suburban mixed use;
MU-L1 mixed use-low intensity 1; MU-L2 mixed use-low intensity 2; MU-L3 mixed
use-low intensity 3; MU-4 mixed use; MU-H mixed use-high intensity; and PID
planned industrial development.



   CONVERTED PAPER PRODUCT PROCESSING - An establishment primarily engaged
in converting paper or paperboard without manufacturing paper or
paperboard.  This use is limited to cutting, stamping, folding, laminating,
lining, coating, and treating of purchased paper, paperboard, foil, sheet, or
film materials.



   COPYING, PRINTING, AND SIGN DESIGN - An establishment primarily engaged
in providing photocopying, duplicating, blueprinting, office support and
printing services (excluding commercial printing operations- see "publishing
and commercial printing").  This use also includes the preparation of
temporary signs such as banners, pennants, or other signs constructed of
non-rigid materials not intended for permanent display.



   CORNER - See "Lot."



   COSMETICS, BEAUTY SUPPLY, AND PERFUME - An establishment primarily
engaged in the retail sales of cosmetics, beauty supplies, perfumes,
colognes, and the like.



   COST ESTIMATE - A certified estimate of the cost of surveying, testing,
all required improvements, supervision, profit, and overhead.



   COUNSELING - An establishment that provides professional advice,
therapy, and guidance for matters concerning but not limited to marriage and
family, occupation and career, debt and finance, mental health, and substance
abuse.  This use excludes administering medications and in-patient or
resident care.



   COUNTY - The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the county
of Palm Beach.



   COUNTY ROAD SYSTEM - The county road system consisting of all collector
roads in the unincorporated areas and all extensions of such collector roads
into and through any incorporated areas, all local roads in the
unincorporated areas, and all urban minor arterial roads not in the State
Highway System.



   CREMATORIUM - An establishment containing properly installed, certified
apparatus used in the act of cremation.



   CROSSWALK - Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on
the surface.



   CROWN OF ROAD - The elevation of the highest surface of street pavement
within the right-of-way abutting the property or otherwise approved by the
City Engineer.



   CUL-DE-SAC - See "Street, Cul-de-sac."



   DAIRY PRODUCTS MFG - An establishment that manufactures dairy products
from raw milk, processed milk, and dairy substitutes. This industrial use may
include a subordinate commercial component (i.e., tasting room, retail and
facility tours) that is open to the public.



   DAY CARE - An establishment that provides care, protection and
supervision for children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary
residence for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day.  The term does not
include facilities operated in conjunction with an employment use or other
principal activity, where children are cared for while parents or custodians
are occupied on the premises or in the immediate vicinity.



   DAY SPA - Spa facilities that have no overnight accommodations, but
offer (an array of spa treatments administered by licensed and certified spa
technicians) beauty, wellness and relaxation programs that may last from a
few minutes up to a full day.



   DAY & TRADE LABOR POOL (TEMPORARY HELP) - An establishment engaged in
providing temporary day or manual labor service for the construction,
maintenance, agricultural, or industrial trades.



   dBA - The total sound level of all noise as measured with a sound level
measuring device using A-weighting network.  The unit is decibel-based on a
reference sound pressure of .0002 microbars.



   DEAD END STREET - See "Street, Cul-de-sac."



   DEED RESTRICTION - Each workforce housing unit created under the
program shall be deed restricted for fifteen (15) years.  The deed
restriction shall be recorded and serve to restrict the sales or rental price
and/or the income of the purchaser or renter.



   DEMOLITION - Any intentional dismantling, destruction, or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar
property.  Also see "Historic Preservation, Demolition."



   DENSITY - The number of residential dwelling units permitted on a
particular lot or within a project determined by dividing the applicable
zoning district minimum lot size for one (1) dwelling unit into the gross
acreage of said lot.  Density is always expressed in terms of dwelling units
per gross acre (d.u./g.ac.).









 



   DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STATE STANDARDS - The most recent edition
of all state standards and specifications.



   DESIGN GUIDELINES HANDBOOK - See "Historic Preservation."



   DEVELOPER - The owners of record executing the dedication required by
F.S. § 177.081, and applying for approval of a plat of a subdivision
pursuant to this chapter.



   DEVELOPER'S ENGINEER - A professional engineer, registered in Florida,
retained by the developer.



   DEVELOPMENT - A single use or combination of uses, proposed or
approved, that may include but not be limited to a single-family subdivision,
townhomes, rental apartments, condominiums, public facilities, commercial
buildings, shopping centers, or industrial projects, possibly of similar
design, constructed as a unified community.  Development shall also include
the meaning given it in F.S. § 380.04, pursuant to a development order or
permit.



   DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY - Application for a master plan, site plan,
rezoning, building permit, or variance, as it relates to the notice of intent
section of these regulations.



   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT - An agreement entered into between a local
government and a person in connection with the approval of a development
order or permit including, but not limited to, a development agreement
pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220, or an agreement on a development order issued
pursuant to F.S. §§ 380.01 et seq.



   DEVELOPMENT AREA - Under the provisions of the wireless communication
facilities (WCF) section of these Regulations, it is the area occupied by a
WCF including areas inside or under the following: an antenna-support
structure's framework, equipment cabinets, ancillary structures and access
ways.



   DEVELOPMENT ORDER - Any order granting, denying, or granting with
conditions an application for a development permit.  A development order
becomes effective upon approval by the City Commission.



   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT - Any permit authorizing required improvements,
building(s), zoning, rezoning, plat approval, certification, variance, or
other action having the effect of permitting commencement of development as
defined in F.S. § 380.04, or any other official action or types of action by
the city which, in the judgement of the City Manager, would permit the use or
development of land similar to any of the listed actions.



   DIET/NUTRITION CENTER - An establishment that conducts non-medical
types of services to assist clients in attaining or maintaining a desired
weight.  The sale of weight reduction products, such as food supplements,
may be an integral component of the program.  These services typically
include individual or group counseling, menu and exercise planning, and
weight and body measurement monitoring. 



   DISTRIBUTOR - Any individual or business entity engaged in the
dissemination of any publication utilizing a newsrack located in the city.



   DISTRICT, PLANNED ZONING - See "Planned Zoning District."



   DISTRICT, COMMERCIAL ZONING - See "Commercial Zoning District."



   DISTRICT, HISTORIC - See "Historic Preservation."



   DISTRICT, INDUSTRIAL ZONING - See "Industrial Zoning District."



   DISTRICT, MISCELLANEOUS ZONING - See "Miscellaneous Zoning District."



   DISTRICT, MIXED USE ZONING - See "Mixed Use Zoning District."



   DISTRICT, RESIDENTIAL ZONING - See "Residential Zoning District."



   DISTRICT, ZONING - See "Zoning District."



   DOCTOR'S OFFICE - See "Medical or Dental Office."



   DRIP LINE - A vertical line running through the outermost part of the
crown of a tree and extending to the ground.









 



   DRIVEWAY, MINOR - The paved area between a public street and private
property intended to provide ingress and egress for vehicular traffic from
the public streets or thoroughfare to a definite area of private property, or
which connects parking aisles or provides access to parking aisles.  A minor
driveway is one that serves an average daily traffic (ADT) volume of not more
than five hundred (500) vehicles (trips) per day.  Location and driveway
width is set forth in the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction
Standards.



   DRIVEWAY, INTERMEDIATE - The paved area between a public street and
private property intended to provide ingress and egress for vehicular traffic
from the public streets or thoroughfare to a definite area of private
property, or which connects parking aisles or provides access to parking
aisles.  An intermediate driveway is one that serves an average daily
traffic (ADT) volume greater than five hundred (500) vehicles (trips) per
day, but not more that two thousand (2,000) vehicles (trips) per day. 
Location and driveway width is set forth in the Engineering Design Handbook
and Construction Standards.



   DRIVEWAY, MAJOR - The paved area between a public street and private
property intended to provide ingress and egress for vehicular traffic from
the public streets or thoroughfare to a definite area of private property, or
which connects parking aisles or provides access to parking aisles.  A major
driveway is one that serves an average daily traffic (ADT) volume in excess
of two thousand (2,000) vehicles (trips) per day.  Location and driveway
width is set forth in the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction
Standards.



   DRUG STORE - See "Pharmacy & Drug Store."



   DRY CLEANER - An establishment that dry cleans or launders articles of
clothing and garments that are deposited on the premises directly by the
customer.  The cleaning and/or laundering of articles of clothing/ garments
may occur either on or off the premises.  The business is small-scale and
not intended to perform as a dry cleaning plant.



   DRY CLEANING PLANT - An establishment that cleans fabrics, textiles,
wearing apparel, or articles of any sort by immersion and agitation, or by
immersions only, in volatile solvents including, but not by way of
limitations, solvents of the petroleum distillate type, and/or the
chlorinated hydrocarbon type, and the processes incidental thereto.  These
establishments are typically not open to the general public and primarily
cater to a commercial and/or industrial clientele.



   DUPLEX - See "Dwelling, Two-family (Duplex)."



   DWELLING - A building or portion thereof used exclusively for
residential occupancy or habitation, but excluding hotels and motels, group
homes, boats, recreation vehicles, tents, and the like.



   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY - A building, typically referred to as an
apartment or condominium, containing three (3) or more dwelling units, all of
which share a common vestibule. Resident support services intended to meet
the basic physical, emotional, and social needs of the residents such as
custodial care or support with activities of daily living (ADL) are
prohibited. Licensing or certifications from the Florida Department of Health
are not required.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY (DETACHED) - A detached building or modular
structure containing one (1) dwelling unit entirely surrounded by open space
and not attached to another dwelling unit's foundation or roof or joined at
one (1) or more sides by a tenant separation (party) wall or walls.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX) - A detached building containing two (2)
dwelling units, both of which share a common tenant separation (party) wall,
and each unit has direct access to the outside.



   DWELLING UNIT (DU) - A residential unit comprised of one (1) or more
habitable rooms connected together, providing complete, independent, living
facilities for a single family, and which includes permanent provisions for
living, cooking, eating, sleeping, and sanitation.  For the purposes of
determining impact fees, the term "residential unit" shall be considered an
apartment, condominium, single-family detached house, mobile home,
single-family attached house, or multi-family housing established for human
habitation.



   EASEMENT - Any strip of land created by a subdivider for public or
private utilities, drainage, sanitation, or other specified uses having
limitations, the title to which shall remain in the name of the property
owner, subject to the right of use designated in the reservation of the
servitude.



   EASEMENT, LIMITED ACCESS - A strip of land which does not permit access
except at authorized and controlled points.



   ECONOMIC HARDSHIP - See "Historic District."



   ECOSYSTEM - An assemblage of living organisms (plants, animals,
microorganisms, etc.) that functions as a dynamic whole through organized
energy flows.



   EGRESS - An exit.



   EFFECT - See "Historic District."



   EFFICIENCY - See "Apartment, Efficiency."



   ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) - Any vehicle that operates, either partially or
exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid, or an off-board source, that
is stored on-board for motive purpose.



   ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) CHARGING LEVELS - Three levels of battery
charging are generally as follows:



      LEVEL 1 - Considered slow charging. It requires a 15 or 20 amp
breaker on a 120-volt Alternating Current (AC) circuit and standard outlet.
This level of charging can fully recharge a Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV)
between eight (8) and thirty-two (32) hours;



      LEVEL 2 - Considered medium charging. It requires a 40 amp to 100
amp breaker on a 240-volt circuit. This level of charging can fully recharge
a BEV between 4 and 6 hours; and



      LEVEL 3 - Considered fast or rapid charging (a.k.a. "DC fast
charge"). It requires a 60 amp or higher dedicated breaker on a 480-volt or
higher three-phase circuit with special grounding equipment. Charging time
ranges from 25 minutes to 40 minutes.



   ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) CHARGING STATION - A public or private parking
space located together with a battery charging station that permits the
transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery
or other storage device in an electric vehicle.



      PUBLIC - A publicly accessible EV charging station is either 1)
publicly owned or publicly available (e.g., public library or City Hall lot)
or 2) privately owned and publicly available (e.g., shopping center,
non-reserved parking in multi-family developments, etc.).



      PRIVATE - An EV charging station that is either 1) privately
owned and has restricted access (e.g., single- family home, multi-family
parking) or 2) publicly owned and has restricted access to the general public
(e.g., fleet vehicle parking for police).



   ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT, APPLIANCE & COMPONENT ASSEMBLY - An establishment
that assembles products, finished parts, and materials which generate,
distribute and use electrical power.



   ELECTRONICS AND APPLIANCE STORE - An establishment primarily engaged in
retailing televisions, stereos, and other home/car electronic appliances. 
This use would include the retailing of cameras and other audio-visual
equipment.  The repair of this merchandise is incidental to the principal
use (retail sales).



   ELIGIBLE OCCUPANT - Relative to the workforce housing program contained
in these Regulations, it is a person who qualifies for participation in the
program whose income does not exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of
median household income for the City of Boynton Beach.  Priority will be
given to persons who have lived or worked within the city limits of Boynton
Beach continually for one (1) year immediately prior to the date of
application for a workforce housing unit.



   ENDANGERED, THREATENED, AND RARE SPECIES OF SPECIAL CONCERN - Species
listed as endangered, threatened, rare or of special concern by one (1) or
more of the following agencies: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; Florida Game
and Fresh Water Fish Commission; Florida Committee on Rare and Endangered
Plants and Animals; Florida Department of Agriculture; and Treasure Coast
Regional Planning Council.



   ENGINEER - A person registered as a professional engineer in the State
of Florida, in accordance with F.S. Chapter 471, who is in good standing with
the Florida Board of Professional Engineers.



   ENLARGEMENT OR TO ENLARGE - An enlargement is an addition to the floor
area of an existing building, an increase in the size of any structure, or an
increase in that portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.



   ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR - An establishment primarily engaged in operating
amusement arcades/parlors, billiard halls, bowling alleys, paint ball,
shooting ranges, skating rinks, playground and play centers, and the like. 
Arcades include any electric or electronic machines (i.e. pinball, video
games) which provide amusement, enjoyment, or entertainment, and must comply
with F.S. Chapter 849.  See "Amusement Arcade."



   ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR - An establishment offering recreation,
entertainment, or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge
wherein any portion of the activity occurs in the open.  Typical uses
include but are not limited to amusement and water parks, skateboarding,
batting cages, miniature golf and driving ranges, tennis clubs, and other
types of recreation and entertainment not otherwise defined.



   ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LANDS - Ecological sites (ecosites)
representing high quality native Florida ecosystems.



   EQUIPMENT CABINET - Under the provisions of the wireless communication
facilities section of these Regulations, it is any structure such as a
cabinet, shelter, or pedestal used to exclusively contain radio or other
equipment necessary for the transmission or reception of wireless
communication signals.



   EQUIPMENT COMPOUND - The fenced area surrounding a wireless
communication facility including the areas inside or under the following: an
antenna support structure's framework and ancillary structures such as
equipment necessary to operate the antenna on the including cabinets,
shelters, pedestals, and other similar structures.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE - Services and infrastructure
provided by governmental entity or public/private utility, such as
underground, surface, or overhead electrical, gas, steam, water, sanitary
sewage, and stormwater drainage structures, which are necessary for the
health, safety, and general welfare of the public.  This includes, but is
not necessarily limited to, infrastructure and facilities intended to support
a limited service area of the city, such as lift stations, district energy
plants, and power substations.  This use excludes wireless communication
facilities (WCF), as defined in the Land Development Regulations, Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 13.



   EXCAVATION OR EXCAVATING - The removal of materials from either above
or below the water table and/or the grading, mixing or spreading of materials.



   EXEMPTION DETERMINATION - See "Concurrency Exemption Determination."



   EXPRESSWAY - A street shown or described as such according to the
current or most recent functional classification system contained in the City
of Boynton Beach Comprehensive Plan, as adopted and amended.



   EXTERIOR DISPLAY - The display of merchandise, as an accessory use to a
lawful principal use, outside of the walls of the building or within any area
which is not fully enclosed by building walls, in such a manner so as to
allow for viewing or inspection of merchandise by customers.



   EXTERIOR STORAGE - The keeping of merchandise, materials, equipment or
supplies, and the like, outside of the walls of a building or within any area
which is not fully enclosed by building walls, which is generally not for the
purpose of allowing inspection or viewing by customers.



   EXTERMINATING AND PEST CONTROL - An establishment offering the control
and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their
harborage places by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve
as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other
recognized and legal pest elimination method.



   FAA - The Federal Aviation Administration.



   FAMILY - One (1) or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit and
using common cooking facilities.  Families who provide care in their own
home as duly state licensed foster family homes, in which dependent children
have been duly placed by the State of Florida, and which include not more
than five (5) children (both natural and foster) in the household, are
expressly included within this term.



   FAMILY DAY CARE - A residence providing day care services for a number
of children which is limited in accordance with Florida law, and which shall
be construed to be an accessory use to any dwelling unit located in a
residential or PU district, or in any commercial zoning district, excluding
C-4 district.



   FARM - See "Garden."



   FARM STAND - A temporary sales table or kiosk that is used for the
retail sales of fruits, vegetables, nuts, or herbs in connection with a
community garden.



   FCC - The Federal Communications Commission. 



   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) - The federal agency that,
in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood
Insurance Program.



   FEED LINES (ICEBRIDGE OR BRIDGE) - Cables used as the interconnecting
media between the transmission/receiving base station and the antenna.



   FESTOONS - Strings of ribbons, lights, tinsel, small flags, discs,
spinners, pinwheels or any device propelled by natural forces used for the
purpose of attracting attention.



   FIRST TIME HOME BUYER - A person who has not held ownership in a
residence within the past three (3) years.



   FLAG - A piece of cloth used as the national, state, municipal, civic
or church symbol, registered corporate logo, or internationally recognized
symbol, properly displayed in accordance with published federal, state,
municipal, civic or church adopted guidelines and displayed on a designated
pole located in a proper holder or in other ways approved by an appropriate
national, state, municipal, civic or church agency.



   FLOOD (FLOODING) - A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or
tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source. For purposes of Chapter 4, Article X, Flood
Prevention Requirements:



      1.   ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE - A dam, impoundment, channel
relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in
cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other
form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction
and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base
flood.



      2.   ASCE 24 - A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and
Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code.  ASCE 24 is
developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston,
VA.



      3.   BASE FLOOD - A flood having a one percent (1%) chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.  The base flood is commonly
referred to as the "one hundred (100) year flood" or the "one percent (1%)
annual chance flood."



      4.   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION - The elevation of the base flood,
including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).



      5.   BASEMENT - The portion of a building having its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.



      6.   BREAKAWAY WALL - A wall that is not part of the
structural support of the building and is intended to collapse without
causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the foundation
system.



      7.   COASTAL CONSTRUCTION CONTROL LINE - The line established
by the State of Florida pursuant to F.S. § 161.053, and recorded in the
official records of the community, which defines that portion of the
beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a one hundred
(100)-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions.



      8.   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA - A special flood hazard area
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as
"high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V Zones" and are
designated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30. VE, or V.



      9.   DESIGN FLOOD - The flood associated with the greater of
the following two (2) areas: 1) area with a floodplain subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 2) area designated
as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise
legally designated.



      10.   DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION - The elevation of the "design
flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the
community's legally designated flood hazard map.  In areas designated as
Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest
existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet)
specified on the flood hazard map.  In areas designated as Zone AO where the
depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as
being equal to two (2) feet.



      11.   DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of
equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities.



      12.   ENCROACHMENT - The placement of fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas.



      13.   EXISTING BUILDING and EXISTING STRUCTURE - Any buildings
and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before January
3, 1979.



      14.   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before January 3, 1979.



      15.   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OF
SUBPIV1SON - The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



      16.   FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS - Any construction
material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with
floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic
repair.



      17.   FLOOD HAZARD AREA - The greater of the following two (2)
areas: 1) the area within a floodplain subject to a one percent (1%) or
greater chance of flooding in any year; and/or 2) the area designated as a
flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally
designated.



      18.   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.



      19.   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY - The official report provided by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency which contains flood profiles, flood
boundary-floodway map and water surface elevation of the base flood.



      20.   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR - The office or position
designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this
chapter (may be referred to as the Floodplain Manager).



      21.   FLOODWAY - The channel of a watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.



      22.   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS - An engineering analysis
of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to
have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation
shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard
engineering methods and models.



      23.   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE - A use which cannot perform
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long term
storage or related manufacturing facilities.



      24.   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE - The highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or
foundation of a structure.



      25.   HISTORIC STRUCTURE - Any structure that is determined
eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the
Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings.



      26.   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC) - An official determination
issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map
or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include:



         a.   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA) - An amendment based
on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a
designated special flood hazard area.  A LOMA amends the current effective
Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property, portion of
a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area.



         b.   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR) - A revision based on
technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations,
special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other
planimetric features.



         c.   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F) - A
determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill
above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within
the special flood hazard area.  In order to qualify for this determination,
the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the
community's floodplain management regulations.



         d.   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR) - A
formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project
or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such
projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas.  A CLOMR
does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance
Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a
Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM.



      27.   LOWEST FLOOR - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed
area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any
unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely
for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24.



      28.   MARKET VALUE - The price at which a property will change
hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under
compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant
facts. As used in Chapter 4, Article X, the term refers to the market value
of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the
parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser.
Actual Cash Value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of
construction), or the ad valorem tax assessment value adjusted to approximate
market value by a factor provided by the Property Appraiser.



      29.   NEW CONSTRUCTION - For the purposes of administration of
Chapter 4, Article X, and the flood resistant construction requirements of
the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after January 3, 1979 and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.



      30.   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after January 3. 1979.



      31.   SAND DUNES - Naturally occurring accumulations of sand
in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.



      32.   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA - Land in the floodplain
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.  Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1, A30,
AE, A99, AH, V1, V30, VE or V.



      33.   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage of any origin sustained by a
building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure
to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred.



      34.   SUBSTANTIAL, IMPROVEMENT - Any repair, reconstruction,
alteration, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been
damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes
of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include (1) Any
project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health,
sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and
that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) Any
alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.



      35.   WATERCOURSE - For the purposes of Chapter 4. Article X,
a river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through,
or over which water flows at least periodically.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) - A mathematical expression determined by
dividing the gross floor area (GFA) of a building by the area of the lot on
which it is located.  Gross floor area/lot area = FAR.









 



   FLORIDA BUILDING CODE (FBC) - The family of codes adopted by the
Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building;
Florida Building Code. Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building;
Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida
Building Code, Fuel Gas.



   FLORIDA MASTER SITE FILE - See "Historic Preservation."



   FLORIDA-FRIENDLY LANDSCAPING - The principles of Florida-Friendly
Landscaping include planting the right plant in the right place, efficient
watering, appropriate fertilization, mulching, attraction of wildlife,
responsible management of yard pests, recycling yard waste, reduction of
stormwater runoff, and waterfront protection. Additional components of
Florida-Friendly Landscape include planning and design, soil analysis, the
use of solid waste compost, practical use of turf, and proper maintenance.
The following definitions shall also apply:



      1.   AQUASCAPE - The planting of aquatic and wetland plants in
the enhancement, restoration, or creation of freshwater, estuarine, or marine
systems.



      2.   AUTOMATIC CONTROLLER - An electronic device, capable of
automated operation of valve stations to set the time, duration and frequency
of a water application based upon soil moisture probes.



      3.   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES - Turf and landscape practices
or combination of practices based on research, field-testing, and expert
review, determined to be the most effective and practicable on-location
means, including economic and technological considerations, for improving
water quality, conserving water supplies and protecting natural resources.
See “Biointensive Integrated Pest Management.”



      4.   COMMERCIAL FERTILIZER APPLICATOR - Any person who applies
fertilizer on turf and/or landscape plants in the city in exchange for money,
goods, services or other valuable consideration.



      5.   CONSTANT PRESSURE/FLOW CONTROL - A device that maintains
a constant flow, pressure, or both.



      6.   EMITTER - This term primarily refers to devices used in
microirrigation systems.



      7.   FERTILIZE, FERTILIZING, OR FERTILIZATION - The act of
applying fertilizer or fertilizer product to turf, specialized turf, or
landscape plant.



      8.   FERTILIZER - Any substance or mixture of substances,
except pesticide/fertilizer mixtures such as “weed and feed” products,
that contains one (1) or more recognized plant nutrients and promotes plant
growth, or controls soil acidity or alkalinity, or provides other soil
enrichment or provides other corrective measures to the soil.



      9.   FILTER - A device in irrigation distribution systems that
separates sediment or other foreign matter.



      10.   GROUND COVER - Low growing plants, other than turf
grass, used to cover the soil and form a continuous, low mass of foliage.



      11.   GUARANTEED ANALYSIS - The percentage of plant nutrients
or measures of neutralizing capability claimed to be present in a fertilizer.



      12.   HARDSCAPE - Impervious areas such as patios, decks,
driveways, paths and sidewalks that do not require irrigation.



      13.   HIGH WATER USE PLANTS - Plants that require irrigation
to provide supplemental water on a regular basis throughout the year, or are
so identified by a regulatory agency having jurisdiction. When placed in a
naturally high water table area appropriate to the plant such that irrigation
is not required, such plants shall not be considered high water use for the
purposes of the Florida-Friendly standards.



      14.   HYDROZONE - A distinct grouping of plants with similar
water needs and climatic requirements.



      15.   INFILTRATION RATE - The rate of water entry into the
soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (inches per hour).



      16.   INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM) - An effective and
environmentally sensitive approach to pest management that relies on a
combination of common-sense practices. IPM programs use current comprehensive
information on the life cycles of pests and their interaction with the
environment. This information, in combination with available pest control
methods, is used to manage pest damage by the most economical means, and with
the least possible hazard to people, property, and the environment.



      17.   IRRIGATED LANDSCAPE AREA - All outdoor areas that
require a permanent irrigation system.



      18.   IRRIGATION SYSTEM - A constructed watering system
designed to transport and distribute water to plants.



      19.   IRRIGATION ZONE - A grouping of sprinkler heads or
microirrigation emitters operated simultaneously by the control of one (1)
valve.



      20.   LANDSCAPED AREA - The entire parcel: less the building
footprint, driveways, hardscape and other impervious areas, such as decks,
patios, and non-porous areas. Water features are included in the calculation
of the landscaped area.



      21.   LOW-FLOW POINT APPLICATORS - Irrigation applicators with
output less than sixty (60) gallons per hour (gph).



      22.   LOW MAINTENANCE ZONE - An area with a minimum of six (6)
feet in width, adjacent to water courses, which is planted and managed in
order to minimize the need for fertilization, watering, mowing, etc.



      23.   LOW WATER USE PLANTS - Permanent plants that do not need
supplemental water beyond natural rainfall, or are so identified by a
regulatory agency having jurisdiction not needing irrigation to survive.



      24.   MICROCLIMATE - The climate of a specific area in the
landscape that has substantially differing sun exposure, temperature, or wind
than surrounding areas or the area as a whole, resulting in different needs
and requirements.



      25.   MICROIRRIGATION (LOW VOLUME) - The application of small
quantities of water directly on or below the soil surface, usually as
discrete drops, tiny streams, or miniature sprays through emitters placed
along the water delivery pipes (laterals). Microirrigation encompasses a
number of methods or concepts including drip, subsurface, bubbler, and spray
irrigation, previously referred to as trickle irrigation, low volume, or low
flow irrigation.



      26.   MODERATE WATER USE PLANTS - Plants that need
supplemental water during seasonal dry periods.



      27.   MOISTURE SENSING DEVICE OR SOIL MOISTURE SENSOR - A
device to indicate soil moisture in the root zone for the purpose of
controlling an irrigation system based on the actual needs of the plant.



      28.   MULCH - Non-living, organic, or synthetic materials
customarily used in landscape design to retard erosion and retain moisture.



      29.   NATIVE VEGETATION - Any plant species with a geographic
distribution indigenous to all, or part, of the State of Florida as
identified in: Wunderlin, R. P. 1998. Guide to the Vascular Plants of
Florida. University Press of Florida, Gainesville.



      30.   NON-COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR - Any person that applies
fertilizer for the purpose of maintaining turf and/or landscape plants.
Non-commercial applicators shall include but not be limited to owners and
managers of public lands, schools, parks, religious institutions, utilities,
and any residential properties maintained in condominium and/or common
ownership.



      31.   PASTURE - Land used for livestock grazing that is
managed to provide feed value.



      32.   PLANT BED - A grouping of trees, shrubs, ground covers,
perennials or annuals growing together in a defined area devoid of turfgrass,
normally using mulch around the plants.



      33.   PLANT COMMUNITIES - An association of plants that are
dominated by one (1) or more prominent species, or a characteristic physical
attribute.



      34.   POINT OF CONNECTION (POC) - The location where an
irrigation system is connected to a water supply.



      35.   POP-UP SPRAYS - Spray heads that pop up with water
pressure and provide a continuous spray pattern throughout a given arc of
operation.



      36.   PRESSURE TANK - A pressurized holding tank for
irrigation water.



      37.   PROHIBITED APPLICATION PERIOD - The time period during
which a Flood Watch or Warning, or a Tropical Storm Watch or Warning, or a
Hurricane Watch or Warning is in effect for any portion of the City of
Boynton Beach issued by the National Weather Service, or if heavy rain is
likely.



      38.   PUMP CYCLING - Irrigation pump coming on and shutting
off frequently during operation of irrigation systems.



      39.   RAIN SENSOR DEVICE - A low voltage electrical or
mechanical component placed in the circuitry of an automatic irrigation
system that is designed to turn oft a sprinkler controller when precipitation
has reached a pre-set quantity. Required by law (F.S. § 373.62) on all
automatic irrigation systems since 1991.



      40.   SITE APPROPRIATE PLANT - A plant that after
establishment, will thrive within the environmental conditions that are
normal for a specific location without artificial supplements such as
irrigation.



      41.   “SLOW RELEASE,” “CONTROLLED RELEASE,” “TIMED
RELEASE,” “SLOWLY AVAILABLE” or “WATER INSOLUBLE NITROGEN” -
Nitrogen in a form which delays its availability for plant uptake and use
after application, or which extends its availability to the plant longer than
a reference rapid or quick release product.



      42.   SOD OR LAWN - A piece of turf-covered soil held together
by the roots of the turf.



      43.   SOIL MOISTURE SENSOR - See “Moisture Sensing Device.”



      44.   SOIL TEXTURE - The classification of soil based on the
percentage of sand, silt, and clay in the soil.



      45.   TURF (TURFGRASS) - A mat layer of monocotyledonous
plants such as, but not limited to, Bahia, Bermuda, Centipede, Paspalum, St.
Augustine, and Zoysia.



      46.   VALVE - A device used to control the flow of water in
the irrigation system.



      47.   WATER USE ZONE - See “Hydrozone.”



   FLORIST - An establishment primarily engaged in retailing cut flowers,
floral arrangements, and potted plants purchased from others.  These
establishments usually prepare the arrangements they sell.



   FOOD PROCESSING - An establishment primarily engaged in processing
canned, pickled, and dried fruits, vegetables, specialty foods, snacks,
confections, and spices. This industrial use may include a subordinate
commercial component (i.e., tasting room, retail and facility tours) that is
open to the public.



   FOOTWEAR & OTHER LEATHER PRODUCTS - An establishment primarily engaged
in manufacturing and fabricating footwear and other leather products from
purchased leather or leather substitutes (i.e., fabric, plastics).



   FORTUNE TELLER, PALM READER, OR PSYCHIC - An establishment that
primarily offers opinions or interpretations of a person's personal
character; foretelling of the future; or advice based upon astrology,
numerology, card, or tea reading, clairvoyance, crystal gazing, palmistry,
phrenology, and the like.



   FOSTER CHILD - A child in foster care who has been placed in a foster
home by the State of Florida.



   FOSTER HOME OR FOSTER CARE, FOR CHILDREN - A family foster home as
defined by the Florida Statutes, and which conforms to the definition of
"family."



   FRONTAGE STREET - See "Street, Marginal Access."



   FROZEN FOOD - An establishment primarily engaged in processing and
freezing fruit, juices, vegetables, and specialty foods, such as dinners,
entrees, and side dishes; pizza; whipped toppings; and waffles, pancakes, and
french toast. This industrial use may include a subordinate commercial
component (i.e., tasting room, retail and facility tours) that is open to the
public.



   FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION - The assignment of roads and streets into
systems according to the character of service they provide in relation to the
total road network.  Basic functional categories include arterial roads,
collector roads and local roads which may be subdivided into principal, major
or minor levels.  Those levels may be additionally divided into rural and
urban categories.



   FUNERAL HOME - An establishment engaged in preparing the dead
(including pets) for burial or interment and conducting funerals (i.e.,
providing facilities for wakes, arranging transportation for the dead,
selling caskets and related merchandise).  This would include a crematorium
as an allowable accessory use.



   FURNITURE & HOME FURNISHING - An establishment that engages in the
retail sales of furniture and related home accessories.



   FURNITURE PRODUCTS - An establishment that makes or repairs furniture
and related articles, such as mattresses, window blinds, cabinets, and
fixtures.  The processes used in the manufacturing of furniture include the
cutting, bending, molding, laminating, and assembly of such materials as
wood, metal, glass, plastics, and rattan.  This use also includes furniture
repair, refinishing, and reupholstering.



   GARBAGE - Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.



   GARDEN - A planned outdoor space on a lot that is set aside for the
cultivation and harvest of fruits, vegetables, nuts, or herbs for human
consumption, limited to those foods requiring only a superficial washing
prior to consumption.  A garden is categorized as follows:



      1.   ACCESSORY GARDEN - A garden used in connection with,
subordinate to, and on the same lot as a lawful principal use, such as a
"dwelling" (e.g., single-family, duplex) or "restaurant" establishment.



      2.   COMMUNITY GARDEN - A principal use, which may include
community supported agriculture (CSA), consisting of an area managed and
maintained by an individual, group, or business establishment, with the
intent to grow and harvest food.  Accessory retail sales may be allowed
on-site where located in commercial and mixed use districts, and if in
conjunction with a temporary activity approved through the city's special
events approval process.



   GASOLINE STATION WITH CONVENIENCE STORE  - An establishment engaged in
retailing automotive fuels (i.e., diesel fuel, gasohol, gasoline), which may
be in combination with convenience store or food mart items.  These
establishments can either be in a convenience store (i.e., food mart) setting
or a gasoline station setting.  It may include "automotive, minor repair" as
an accessory use.



   GAZEBO - See "Open-air Structure."



   GENDER - A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.



   GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - Also known as the Comprehensive Plan, it is
the official public document adopted by the City of Boynton Beach in
accordance with Florida law, as a policy guide to present and future land use
decisions.



   GEOGRAPHIC SEARCH AREA - An area designated by a wireless provider or
operator for a new base station, produced in accordance with generally
accepted principles of wireless RF engineering.



   GLASS AND MIRROR - An establishment primarily engaged in the cutting
and beveling of flat glass and mirror.  The establishment may also sell,
install, or repair windows, screens, acrylics, and other types of glass
products.



   GLASS PRODUCTS - An establishment primarily engaged in processing (i.e.
coating, laminating, tempering, shaping) purchased glass and/or glass
products.



   GOVERNING BODY - Means the City Commission of the City of Boynton Beach.



   GOVERNMENT - A principal or accessory use that provides both essential
and non-essential services/infrastructure to promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the public.  For clarification, this use does not include
wireless communication facilities, "Schools," or "Social Service Agencies." 
The five (5) categories of governmental uses are as follows:



      1.   MUNICIPAL OFFICE/EMERGENCY/CIVIC FACILITIES - A municipal
use such as an administrative office, public safety station or substation,
civic center, library, recreational centers, and other similar uses that are
typically accessed by the public, including public parking facilities.



      2.   MUNICIPAL UTILITY/SUPPORT FACILITIES - A municipal use
such as an electric power facility, wastewater treatment plant, recycling
center, solid waste transfer station, and maintenance/storage facility that
provides an essential utility or support service without direct access to the
facility by the public.



      3.   NON-MUNICIPAL OFFICE FACILITIES - A non-municipal
governmental or quasi-public use, excluding a "Post Office," which typically
functions in a regulatory capacity and directly serves the public, such as
administrative offices (e.g.. employment, health, public assistance, etc.),
motor vehicle registration and licensing services, and judicial buildings.



      4.   NON-MUNICIPAL UTILITY/SUPPORT FACILITIES - A
non-municipal governmental or quasi-public use that provides essential
utility and support services and infrastructure to the public such as an
electric power facility, wastewater treatment plant, recycling center, solid
waste transfer station, maintenance/storage facility, or bus/train station.



      5.   POST OFFICE - A government operated facility that
provides mail delivery services, post office boxes, offices, vehicle storage
areas, and sorting and distribution facilities for mail.



   GRADE, FINISHED - The average level of the finished surface of the
ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the structure.









 



   GRADE SEPARATED INTERSECTIONS - Use of the term grade separated
intersections shall mean any intersection wherein one (1) road passes over
another road by means of a bridge or an overpass.



   GRADES & STANDARDS FOR NURSERY PLANTS - The Standards for Florida No. 1
or better as given in "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants" Part I, 1963
and Part II, State of Florida, Department of Agriculture, Tallahassee, or
equal thereto.  These standards are amended from time to time.



   GREENWAY - A protected corridor of open space that is managed for
conservation, recreation, transportation, or a combination thereof; and which
may serve to protect natural habitats while providing a connection or linkage
to important nodes, such as neighborhoods, parks, and other places of
interest.



   GROCERY STORE - An establishment (generally known as a supermarket) is
primarily engaged in retailing a general line of food, such as canned and
frozen foods; fresh fruits and vegetables; and fresh and prepared meats,
fish, and poultry, and those services customarily incidental to the principal
use.



   GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) - The total floor area of a building or a use
occupying part of a building, measured from centerlines of partitions and
exterior of outside walls.  Gross floor area shall include all floor area
occupied by the main or principal use, plus any floor area occupied by
accessory uses such as storage rooms, maintenance and mechanical rooms,
offices, lounges, restrooms, lobbies, basements, mezzanines and hallways.



   GROUNDWATER - Water occurring beneath the surface of the ground,
whether or not flowing through known or definite channels.



   GROUP HOME - A facility that provides lodging for individuals in
dwelling units or sleeping rooms which, with the possible exceptions of a
Type 3 Group Homes, operate primarily on a referral basis from state, county,
or local social service agencies and/or self-help programs. All group homes,
unless specifically exempt by Florida Statutes, are licensed by the State of
Florida, except that drug and alcohol treatment homes (a/k/a recovery
residence) shall be certified by the Florida Association of Recovery
Residences (FARR) or, if not certified by FARR, may apply for consideration
through the City’s Reasonable Accommodation process, as set forth in Part
III, Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4 of the City’s Code of Ordinances. The
different types of group homes are distinguished by size and/or the extent of
support services provided. Group Homes offer lodging and meals along with
either limited or comprehensive resident support services that meet the basic
physical, emotional, and social needs of the residents. Such limited services
may include counseling, basic medical care, support with activities of daily
living (ADL), and transportation to off-site service providers. Services at a
Type 1 or Type 2 Group Home are typically provided by a single individual
including, but not limited to, a caretaker/overseer, counselor, house
manager, nurse, or therapist. Such homes operate as the equivalent of a
family unit sharing kitchen and living amenities of the home, through daily
interactions or coordinating responsibilities, and exist compatibly within
the surrounding neighborhood. The term “group home” includes but is not
limited to adult congregate living facilities (ACLF), assisted living
facilities (ALF), group care homes, community residential homes, and recovery
homes. The following additional descriptions further define the three
different types of group homes:



      1.   TYPE 1 - A group home of not more than two (2) residents
per bedroom, up to a maximum of ten (10), including a caretaker or overseer,
which provides limited support services on-site. The services are typically
delivered by a single individual including but not limited to a
caretaker/overseer, counselor, house manager, nurse or therapist. Such
services may include, for example, counseling, basic medical care, assistance
with activities of daily living (ADL), and transportation to off-site service
providers. Such homes operate as the equivalent of a family unit, with shared
kitchen and living amenities of the home, and existed comparability within
the surrounding neighborhood.



      2.   TYPE 2 - A group home or facility with no more than
fourteen (14) residents. A Type 2 Group Home provides limited support
services on-site, generally provided by a single individual including but not
limited to a caretaker/overseer, counselor, house manager, nurse or
therapist. Such limited services may include for example, counseling,
basic-medical care, assistance with activities of daily living (ADL), and
transportation to off-site service providers. Such homes operate as the
equivalent of a family unit, sharing kitchen and living amenities of the
home, daily interaction and coordination, and existing compatibility within
the surrounding neighborhood. This category of group home includes a
Community Residential Home as defined and licensed by the State of Florida.



      3.   TYPE 3 - A group home without a limit on the number of
residents, and that principally provides long-term lodging for unrelated
persons in individual sleeping rooms or dwelling units with private or shared
kitchen and bathing facilities  along with other common amenities to meet
the medical, social, and recreational needs of the residents. These
facilities are licensed by the Florida Department of Health. This category of
group homes provides lodging accommodations and comprehensive, on-site
personal services represents a larger, more self-sufficient facility than a
Type 1, or Type 2 Group Home. However, such facilities would not include
24-hour, on-site, skilled nursing services, except as allowed in a
combination facility as described below. To support the principle of
continuum of care, this type accommodates a range of facilities from
independent to assisted living facilities, or the combination of such
facilities with a nursing home and/or memory care facility as long as the
nursing home or memory care represents 40% or less of the total bed count of
the facility. The term “group home” includes but is not limited to
assisted living facilities (ALF), and excludes facilities that provide
short-term accommodations in conjunction with a specific medical or mental
service (see the use category Medical Care or Testing (In-patient)). See the
Zoning Matrix and Notes for additional provisions and standards.



   GUYED TOWER - See "Wireless Communication Facility (WCF), Antenna
Support Structure."



   GYM, FITNESS & HEALTH CLUB - An establishment primarily engaged in
operating fitness and recreational sports facilities featuring exercise
(weight training, aerobics, yoga) and other active physical fitness
conditioning or recreational sports activities, such as swimming, skating,
handball, racquet sports, and the like.



   HALFWAY HOUSE - See "Group Home, Type 4."



   HANDOFF CANDIDATE - A wireless communication facility that receives
call transference from another wireless facility, usually located in an
adjacent first "tier" surrounding the initial wireless facility.



   HARDWARE STORE - An establishment primarily engaged in retailing a
general line of new hardware items, such as tools and builders' hardware.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL - Any substance or material which has been
determined by the Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation
to be capable of imposing an unreasonable risk to health, safety and
property.  This term includes hazardous waste as defined in the Florida
Statutes.



   HEALTH CLUB - See "Gym, Fitness & Health Club."



   HEALTH & PERSONAL CARE (EYEGLASS, MEDICAL SUPPLIES, HEARING-AIDS) - An
establishment primarily engaged in the retail sales of convalescent supplies,
eyeglasses, hearing aids, nutritional products, and the like.



   HISTORIC PRESERVATION - Any definition set forth in 36 C.F.R. Part 60
(the then-current Code of Federal Regulation, as may be amended from time to
time) shall be included in the definition for such term (and shall control to
the extent there is a conflict of meaning), or as an additional definition,
if such term is not otherwise defined:



      1.   ALTERATION - Any construction or change of a resource.



      2.   BOARD - The Boynton Beach Historic Resources Preservation
Board (HRPB).



      3.   BOYNTON BEACH REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES - An official
listing maintained by the city of all historic properties and historic
districts so designated by these Regulations.



      4.   BUILDING(S) - A construction, such as a house, garage,
church, or hotel, created principally to shelter any form of human activity.



      5.   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS - A document evidencing
approval by the Board or the city staff for work proposed by an applicant.



      6.   CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP - A document evidencing
approval by the Board of an application for economic hardship as that term is
defined in these Regulations.



      7.   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT (CLG) - A local government
approved by the Florida Department of State, Division of Historical
Resources, to perform certain historic preservation functions.



      8.   CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY - A property that contributes to
the historic significance of a historic district by location, design,
setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association and thus adds to
the district's sense of time, place, and historical development.



      9.   DEMOLITION - Any act or process that partially or totally
destroys a resource.



      10.   DESIGN GUIDELINES HANDBOOK - Document utilized by the
city which illustrates examples of design features, historic styles and
treatment options which preserve the historical, cultural and architectural
character of a historic district or property.



      11.   DISTRICT - (see "Historic District" below).



      12.   ECONOMIC HARDSHIP - An onerous, extreme and exceptional
economic burden that would be placed upon a property owner by the denial of
an application for a certificate of appropriateness or by the imposition of
conditions placed on the granting of such certificate.



      13.   EFFECT - A change in the quality of the historical,
architectural, archeological or cultural significance of a property or
district, or in the characteristics that qualify the property or district as
historically important.



      14.   FLORIDA MASTER SITE FILE - An archive and database of
all known archaeological and historical sites and districts recorded within
the State of Florida that is maintained by the Florida Department of State
Division of Historical Resources and is organized alphabetically by county
and numerically, as recorded.



      15.   HISTORIC DISTRICT - A geographically definable area
designated by the City Commission as possessing a significant concentration,
linkage, or continuity of properties united historically or aesthetically by
plan or physical development.



      16.   HISTORIC PROPERTIES - Those properties designated by the
City Commission as being of historical, cultural, architectural or
archaeological importance.



      17.   NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES - The official
federal list of historic districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects
significant in American history, architecture, landscape architecture,
engineering, archaeology, and culture. Authorized under the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966, and by 36 C.F.R. 60 as each may be amended from
time to time, and maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior.



      18.   NON-CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY - A classification applied to
a property within a historic district signifying that it does not contribute
to the qualities that give the historic district cultural, historical,
architectural, or archaeological significance as embodied in the criteria for
designation of a district, but which because of its location within a
district should follow the review procedures required by these Regulations.



      19.   OBJECT - A primarily artistic item closely linked to the
history of the property. Said item is typically relatively small in scale and
simply constructed, such as a statue, milepost, statuary, or fountain.



      20.   PROPERTY - Area of land containing a single historic
resource or a group of resources, which may include any of a building, site,
structure, object, or district.



      21.   RECONSTRUCTION - The process of reproducing by new
construction the exact form and detail of a demolished property as it
appeared at a certain point in time.



      22.   REHABILITATION - The process of repairing or altering a
property so that an efficient, sustainable and appropriate contemporary use
is achieved, while preserving those significant historical, architectural, or
cultural features which establish the character of the property.



      23.   RELOCATION - Any change of the location of a building,
structure or object from its present setting to another setting.



      24.   RESOURCE - A building, site, structure, object, or
district that reflects historical, archaeological, or cultural significance.



      25.   RESTORATION - The process of accurately recovering the
form and details of a property as it appeared at a particular period of time,
which may involve the removal of later additions or alterations, or the
replacement of missing features.



      26.   SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION
- A federal document set forth in 36 C.F.R. 67, as amended from time to time,
which provides guidance on the sensitive rehabilitation of a historic
property.



      27.   SETTING - The physical environment of a property,
including all landscape elements.



      28.   SITE - The location of an event, a prehistoric or
historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether
standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possesses historic,
cultural, or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing
structure.



      29.   STRUCTURE(S) - A combination of materials to form a
construction, generally used to distinguish from buildings those functional
constructions made for purposes other than creating human shelter. (For
example, a bridge, wall, fence, pond).



   HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER - An establishment primarily engaged in
retailing a variety of new home repair and improvement materials and
supplies, such as lumber, plumbing goods, electrical goods, tools,
housewares, appliances, hardware, and lawn and garden supplies, with no one
(1) merchandise line predominating. The merchandise lines are normally
arranged in separate departments.



   HOME OCCUPATION - The home business operation of an individual and/or
members of the immediate family conducted inside a dwelling unit within a
zoning district that allows for residential uses, when such dwelling unit is
the principal use of the property and all the applicable conditions of this
Code can be affirmatively evidenced and complied with.



   HOSPITAL - An establishment typically referred to as an institution
(excluding Group Homes) that provides comprehensive, inpatient and outpatient
healthcare, including typical emergency medical, surgical, diagnostic,
rehabilitation and treatment services, as well as other specialized services
ranging from bariatrics to wound care.  This use would also include
accessory meeting/conference facilities, limited retail sales, and
administrative offices.



   HOTEL - A building or portion thereof containing fifty (50) or more
guest rooms, efficiency units or suites designed for the temporary lodging of
transient guests rented on a daily basis and occupied for less than thirty
(30) days. Ancillary facilities may include conference facilities,
restaurants, bars, recreation facilities, ballrooms, banquet rooms and
meeting rooms.  Access to the guest quarters shall be through an inside
lobby and corridors or from an exterior court which is within a secured area.



   HOTEL, APARTMENT - Any hotel building containing a mixture of sleeping
rooms and apartment suites for transient guests only, and which shall not
serve as the primary or permanent residence of the occupants.  Buildings
designed as hotel apartments shall have not more than one-third (1/3) of the
total units devoted to apartment suites.  Dining rooms and lounges shall be
permitted as accessory uses.  Hotel apartment suites shall have a minimum
gross floor area of five hundred (500) square feet.



   HOTEL, CONDOMINIUM - See "Hotel, Extended Stay."



   HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY - Any all-suite hotel that provides visitors with
a full kitchen and more than five percent (5%) of its rooms are occupied for
at least thirty (30) days and no more than one hundred and eighty (180) days.



   HOTEL, TIMESHARE - The term shall include, but shall not be limited to,
any building or part thereof in which the right of use or occupancy of any
unit circulates among various occupants for specific periods of time less
than a full year during any given year but not necessarily for consecutive
years in accordance with a fixed time schedule on a periodically recurring
basis extending for more than one (1) year.  The determination that a
building, or part thereof, is a time sharing hotel shall be made without
regard to the form of ownership of the property or of the units therein and
shall be immaterial whether the right of use or occupancy is derived from a
leasehold or fee interest.



   HOTELS, BOUTIQUE - A small luxury hotel containing ten (10) to fifty
(50) guest rooms. Meal service is usually breakfast only, but in some
instances high-quality dinner and/or lunch service and room service may also
be provided.



   HOUSE EAVES - A non-structural portion of any building or structure
extending beyond the vertical plane of the foundation.









 



   HOUSE TRAILER - (1) A trailer or semitrailer which is designed,
constructed and equipped as a dwelling place, living abode or sleeping place
(either permanently or temporarily) and is equipped for use as a conveyance
on streets and highways, (2) or a trailer or semitrailer, the chassis and
exterior shell of which is designed and constructed for use as a house
trailer, as defined in paragraph (1).



   HOUSEHOLD - All persons who occupy a dwelling unit.  A person living
alone or any group of persons sharing a dwelling unit is a household.



   ICE CREAM & FROZEN DESSERT - An establishment primarily engaged in the
manufacturing frozen desert products such as ice cream, yogurts, ices,
sherbets, and other desserts (except bakery products). This industrial use
may include a subordinate commercial component (i.e., tasting room, retail
and facility tours) that is open to the public.



   IMPACT FEE - A charge applied to new development to generate revenue
for the construction or expansion of capital facilities located off-site that
benefit the contributing development.



   IMPROVEMENT - Includes, but not limited to, street pavements, curbs and
gutters, sidewalks, alley pavements, walkway pavements, water mains, sanitary
sewer, storm sewers or drains, street names, signs, landscaping, permanent
reference monuments (PRMs), permanent control points (PCPs), monuments, or
any other improvement required by the city.



   INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL - Any material which will not ignite at or below
a temperature of one thousand, two hundred (1,200) degrees Fahrenheit and
will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature.



   INCOME QUALIFIED HOUSEHOLD - Under the workforce housing program
provisions of these Regulations, it is a household whose income is verified
to be either low income or moderate income.



   INDOOR ATHLETIC INSTRUCTION/TRAINING - An establishment primarily
engaged in offering athletic instruction or training, including martial arts,
gymnastics, cheerleading, batting/golfing, and dance studios, and other
similar types of uses having the same characteristics and special needs as
confirmed by staff.



   INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT - Whenever the words "industrial district"
or "industrial zoning district" are used, they are construed to include any
or all of the following zoning districts: M-1 industrial; and PID planned
industrial development.



   INFESTATION - The presence of insects, rodents or other pests (see
"Extermination").



   IN-FILL HOUSING - New residential units on parcels less than five (5)
acres that are not part of an approved planned unit development as defined by
the City of Boynton Beach Land Development Regulations.



   INFORMATION AND DATA PROCESSING - An establishment primarily involved
in the compilation, storage, and maintenance of documents, records, and other
types of information.  On-site activities include but are not limited to the
following:  data entry, storage, conversion or analysis, subscription, and
credit card transaction processing, telephone sales and order collection,
mail order and catalog, and mailing list preparation.  This use excludes the
sale of computers, peripherals, hardware, or software. 



   INGRESS - An entry.



   INSPECTOR - A city employee working as an inspector under the authority
and direction of either the Director of Development, the Director of Public
Works, the Director of Utilities, the City Engineer, or their designees.



   INTERIM SERVICES FEE - User charge applicable to structures certified
for occupancy by the Development Department but not appearing on the Palm
Beach County tax rolls as an improvement to real property.



   INTERIOR DECORATOR STUDIO - A commercial establishment from where
professional home interior decorating services are provided.  This business
may provide cloth, wallpaper, paint samples and the like, as part of the
design services, but not on-site sales of furniture or other home furnishings.



   INTERSECTION - See "Street, Intersection."



   INUNDATION - Moving, standing or ponded water which is a nuisance,
hazard or health problem.



   INVESTIGATIVE SERVICE - An establishment primarily engaged in providing
investigation and detective services.



   IRRIGATION  SYSTEM - A system of pipes or other conduits designed to
transport and distribute water to all landscape plantings.



   JANITORIAL AND GENERAL CLEANING - An establishment primarily engaged in
cleaning building interiors and exteriors (e.g. driveways, roof tiles,
patios, etc.); interiors of transportation equipment (e.g., aircraft, rail
cars, ships); and/or windows.  This use also includes pressure cleaning
services.  See "Cleaning Supply Store" for the retail sales of materials,
supplies, chemicals, and specialized lines of merchandise associated with a
"janitorial and general cleaning" establishment.



   JEWELRY, LUGGAGE & LEATHER GOODS - An establishment primarily engaged
in retailing new jewelry (except costume jewelry); new silver and plated
silverware; new watches and clocks; and new luggage with or without a general
line of new leather goods and accessories, such as hats, gloves, handbags,
ties, and belts.



   JEWELRY MFG - An establishment primarily engaged in one (1) or more of
the following: (1)  manufacturing, fabricating, engraving, or etching
jewelry or metal personal goods; (2) stamping coins; or (3) cutting,
slabbing, tumbling, carving, engraving, polishing, or faceting precious or
semiprecious stones and gems.



   JUNKYARD - An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed or disassembled, including,
but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals and waste materials.  A
junkyard includes an automobile wrecking yard and secondhand automotive parts
yard.



   LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT - A permit issued by the City Engineer prior to
commencement of construction of required improvements after final record plat
approval by the city.



   LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS (LDR) - Ordinances of the city that govern
any aspect of the development, redevelopment and improvement of lands lying
in the jurisdiction of the city, and include but are not limited to zoning,
subdivision, health, environmental, landscaping, parking or sign
regulations.  These regulations are amended from time to time as deemed
necessary by the city.



   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT - Professionally educated and licensed person who
is authorized to prepare landscape plans, specifications and provide expert
testimony in regards to site development and compliance with municipal
landscape regulations.



   LANDSCAPE BARRIER - A landscape barrier is a near solid element
combining a wall and/or natural vegetation intended to block all direct and
reasonable views to a given use such as overhead bay or service doors,
automotive repair or the like, outdoor storage areas, parked vehicles, etc.



   LANDSCAPE BUFFER - A continuous row of plant material and/or wall (or
other durable barrier) placed, for example, where a vehicle use area abuts
the adjoining rights-of-way and adjacent property.



   LANDSCAPE DEBRIS STOCKPILING - The temporary storage of vegetative
debris such as grass, tree or shrub branches or stumps, or other common
landscaping materials generated and/or collected by commercial landscaping
maintenance services for use in recycling processes involving energy
production, soil enhancements or mulch for example.



   LANDSCAPE SCREEN - A landscape screen is a continuous row of plant
material and/or wall (or other durable barrier) placed where the vehicle use
area abuts the adjoining rights-of-way and adjacent property.  The materials
used to establish the landscape screen are defined under the respective
sections below, and are planted to form a continuous screen of plant material
within a maximum of one (1) year after time of planting.  The hedge element
shall be maintained at four (4) feet, and the wall used in place of the hedge
shall be no less than three (3) feet high and combined with a minimum of two
(2) hedge plants placed on the outside of the wall and spaced every ten (10)
lineal feet.









 









 



   LANDSCAPED AREA - An area not occupied by any structures or impervious
surfaces, and landscaped with vegetative material pursuant to the Landscape
Code regulations.



   LANDSCAPING - Any of the following or combination thereof:  Materials
such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges,
trees or palms, and other material such as rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or
fences, and decorative paving materials approved by the Development
Department and the Planning and Development Board.



   LATTICE TOWER - See "Wireless Communication Facility (WCF), Antenna
Support Structure."



   LAWN MAINTENANCE & LANDSCAPING SERVICE - A business principally engaged
in the decorative and functional alteration, planting, and maintenance of
property.  This use excludes contractors who primarily use heavy equipment
for tree trimming, grading, excavation, or the installation of irrigation
systems.



   LEGAL ACCESS - See "Access, Legal."



   LEGAL ENTITY - An entity that holds a certificate of authorization
issued under Florida Statutes whether the entity is a corporation,
partnership, association, or person practicing under a fictitious name.



   LEVEL OF SERVICE - The extent or degree of service provided by or
proposed to be provided by a public facility, based on and related to the
operational characteristics of the public facility.



   LIMITED ACCESS - See "Street, Limited Access."



   LIMITED ACCESS EASEMENT - See "Easement, Limited Access."



   LISTED HISTORIC STRUCTURES (MIXED USE REGULATIONS) - Includes all
structures listed as eligible for designation in "The City of Boynton Beach
Historic Sites Survey" as prepared by Research Atlantica, Inc, September
1996, including any subsequent updates.



   LITTORAL  ZONE - That region of the shoreline beginning at the
Ordinary High Water (OHW) mark and extending waterward to a maximum depth of
minus three (-3) feet OHW.









 



   LIVE/WORK UNIT - A commercial unit with incidental residential
accommodations occupying one (1) or more sleeping rooms or floors in a
building primarily designed and used for commercial occupancy and providing
the following:  (1) adequate working space reserved for commercial use and
regularly used for such purpose by one (1) or more persons residing in the
unit; and (2) living space containing, but not limited to, a sleeping area,
food preparation area with reasonable work space and a full bathroom.



   LOADING SPACE - Off-street accommodations for loading and unloading
trucks, in the form of one (1) or more truck berths located either within a
building or in an open area on the same lot.



   LOCAL STREET -  See "Street, Local."



   LOCKSMITH - An establishment primarily engaged in the installation,
accessory sales, repair, or adjusting service of mechanical or electronic
locking devices, safes, and security vaults.



   LOGO - See "Sign, Logo."



   LOT - Includes tract or parcel and means the least fractional part of
subdivided lands having limited fixed boundaries, and an assigned number,
letter or other name through which it may be identified.



   LOT AREA - The total area of a lot measured from lot lines.



   LOT COVERAGE - The area of the lot expressed as a percentage of the
total lot area covered by the ground floor of all principal and accessory
structures including all areas covered by the roof of such uses and
structures measured along the exterior faces of the walls or along the
foundation wall line or between the exterior faces of supporting columns or
from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings or as a combination
of the foregoing whichever produces the greatest total ground coverage for
such uses and structures.



   LOT DEPTH - The length of a straight line drawn from the midpoint of
the front property line of the lot to the midpoint of the rear property line
of the lot.









 



   LOT FRONTAGE - The property line adjacent to a public or private
street; it is also the front property line.









 



   LOT WIDTH - The distance between the side lot lines measured at right
angles to the lot depth at a point between the front and rear property lines.



   LOT, CORNER - Either a lot bounded entirely by streets or a lot which
adjoins the point of intersection of two (2) or more streets.



   LOT, INTERIOR - Any lot that is neither a corner lot nor a through lot.



   LOT, THROUGH (DOUBLE FRONTAGE) - Any lot, not a corner lot, having both
the front and rear property lines adjacent to a public street.









 



   LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD - Under the workforce housing program provisions
of these regulations, it is a household with a gross, combined income below
eighty percent (80%) of the City of Boynton Beach median household income.



   MALL - A single building, enclosing a number of tenants and occupancies
wherein two (2) or more tenants have an entrance into an enclosed, roofed
over area designed as a pedestrian public way.



   MANGROVE TREES - A "mangrove tree" is any plant belonging to any of the
following species of mangroves:  Rhizophora mangle, the red mangrove;
Laguncularia racemosa, the white mangrove; and Avicennia nitida, the black
mangrove; or Conocarpus erectus, the green buttonwood.



   MANGROVE STAND - An assemblage of trees which contain one (1) or more
of the following species: black mangrove, red mangrove, white mangrove and
buttonwood.



   MANUFACTURED HOME - A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is eight (8) feet or more in width and greater than four hundred (400)
square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The structure is designed for long term occupancy as a
complete dwelling unit and containing all conveniences and facilities, with
plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to approved
utility systems.  All wheels shall be removed prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK - Premises typically referred to as a mobile
home or trailer park, where manufactured homes are installed for
non-transient living or sleeping purposes.



   MANUFACTURER'S REPRESENTATIVE - An establishment primarily engaged in
providing customer service to the public on behalf of a manufacturer in an
office-type of setting, primarily through pre-arranged appointments.  The
business owner typically markets the product line to the customer through the
use of catalogues, brochures, or samples, and takes product orders, and
relays product orders to the manufacturer.  Inventory for point-of-purchase
sales shall not be allowed.  Individual items may be shipped directly to the
representative for pickup by the customer; however, large items or bulk goods
are shipped directly to the customer, because the business use is deemed to
be an office rather than a retail, warehouse, or distribution operation.



   MARINA, INCLUDING YACHT CLUB - A facility designed to provide a variety
of accommodations and services for local or transient boaters, such as
fueling, dockage, wet storage, and retail sales of marine supplies and
equipment.  Facilities must be provided at every marina to accommodate
proper sanitary sewer and water connections as well as to maximize flushing
of the impacted marine basin.



   MARINE ACCESSORIES - Retailing new and/or used outboard motors, boat
trailers, marine supplies, parts, and accessories.  Machine shops and/or the
on-site installation of marine accessories are prohibited.



   MASTER PLAN - A drawing which shows the intended division of and
improvements on one (1) or more parcels filed in conjunction with a formal
application for a rezoning to a planned zoning district.



   MASTER SITE PLAN (WITHIN A PID) - A master site plan is the conceptual
plan for the entire mixed use pod within a planned industrial development
district (PID) which individual technical site plans and buildings as
processed by staff are to be consistent.



   MASTER STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN - Documents outlining proposed
primary and secondary drainage and storm water treatment facilities.



   MATERIAL (FILL) - Sand, clay, rock, muck, gravel, loam or like
materials existing or hauled to the site.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL - The average elevation of the sea for all stages of the
tide.  The term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD).



   MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME (MHI) - Under the workforce housing program
provisions of these regulations, it is the City of Boynton Beach Median
Household Income, as determined by the most recent 5-year estimate of the
U.S. Census Bureau American Community Survey.



   MEDICAL CARE OR TESTING (IN-PATIENT) - A facility, excluding hospitals,
which operates 24 hours per day or provides 24-hour healthcare, treatment,
and/or examinations from professional medical staff (e.g. skilled nursing
services), requiring overnight stays for a short or long term period of time,
and are based on emergency, planned, or scheduled admittance to facilities
with controlled and secured access to ensure appropriate care of patients.
Such facilities include but are not limited to:



      1.   Alcohol or chemical dependency treatment centers licensed
pursuant to F.S. Chapter 397;



      2.   Mental health treatment facilities licensed pursuant to
F.S. Chapter 394;



      3.   Urgent care centers (24-hour);



      4.   Inpatient testing services such as sleep disorder centers;



      5.   Birth centers licensed pursuant to F.S. § 383.305;



      6.   Hospice facilities licensed pursuant to F.S. Chapter 400,
Part IV;



      7.   Eating disorder treatment centers; and



      8.   Nursing homes, physical rehabilitation centers, and
memory care facilities (i.e. dementia/Alzheimer’s care facilities),
licensed pursuant to F.S. Chapter 400.



   MEDICAL OR DENTAL IMAGING/TESTING/SUPPORT SERVICES (OUT-PATIENT) - An
establishment that is primarily engaged in providing analytic, diagnostic, or
other support services through, in part, on-site interaction with patients
and customers, including the collection of body fluids and other clinical
specimen, as well as the necessary diagnostic images.    Analysis of
images, fluids, or other clinical specimen may occur on-site or off-site or
diagnostic services.



   MEDICAL OR DENTAL LABORATORY - An establishment that offers diagnostic
or pathological testing and analysis of blood, blood fluids, pathological
specimens, DNA, and any other diagnostic test commonly used in the healthcare
industry.  This use also includes dental laboratories, which are
establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing dentures, crowns, bridges,
and orthodontic appliances customized for individual application. The fluids
and other clinical specimens tested are customarily collected by others (see
“Medical or Dental Imaging/Testing/Support Services” use), and the use
does not involve on-site patient visits.



   MEDICAL OR DENTAL OFFICE (OUT-PATIENT) - A facility or clinic operated
by one (1) or more physicians, dentists, chiropractors, or other licensed
practitioners of the healing arts for the examination and treatment of
persons solely on an outpatient basis including intensive out-patient
treatment. Images, body fluids or other clinical specimens and information
may be collected and analyzed on-site or off-site (see “Medical or Dental
Imaging/Testing/Support Services” use and “Medical or Dental
Laboratory”).



   MEDICAL EQUIPMENT & SUPPLIES - An establishment primarily engaged in
manufacturing medical equipment and supplies.  Examples of products made by
these establishments are laboratory apparatus and furniture, surgical and
medical instruments, and surgical appliances.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A facility, operated by a Medical
Marijuana Treatment Center (MMTC) in accordance with the Florida Department
of Health as a medical marijuana dispensing facility that dispenses medical
marijuana to qualified patients or caregivers. A medical marijuana dispensing
facility does not prepare, transfer, cultivate or process any form of
marijuana or marijuana product.



   MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE - See “Medical Care or Testing
(In-patient).”



   MERCHANDISE, NEW (SUPERCENTER, DISCOUNT, DEPARTMENT, CLUB) - An
establishment primarily engaged in retailing a wide range of the following
new products with no one (1) merchandise line predominating: apparel,
furniture, appliances and home furnishings; and selected additional items,
such as paint, hardware, toiletries, cosmetics, photographic equipment,
jewelry, toys, and sporting goods.  Clubs and supercenters include
perishable items.



   MERCHANDISE, USED (ANTIQUE & CONSIGNMENT SHOPS AND BOOKSTORES) - An
establishment primarily engaged in the retail sales of objects of value, of
which, are at least fifty (50) years old and/or collectibles that are
desirable due to rarity, condition, utility, or some other unique feature, or
an establishment that principally sells furniture and household furnishings
under a consignment arrangement.



   MERCHANDISE, USED (OTHER) - An establishment primarily engaged in the
sale of used merchandise, such as a clothing.  "Merchandise used (other)"
may also include either of the following types of establishments:  (1)
loaning money on the security of pledges of personal property (pawnshop); or
(2) merchandise principally donated (thrift store).  This classification
does not include the sale of secondhand motor vehicles or parts.



   METAL, FABRICATED PRODUCTS - An establishment primarily engaged in
manufacturing one (1) or more of the following:  (1) prefabricated metal
buildings, panels and sections; (2) structural metal products; and (3) metal
plate work products.  These establishments transform metal into intermediate
or end products, other than machinery, computers, and electronics. 
Processes may include, stamping, bending, forming, and machining, used to
shape individual pieces of metal; and other processes, such as welding and
assembling, used to join separate parts together.  This use excludes drop
forging.



   MICROWAVE DISH ANTENNA - A dish-like antenna used to link personal
wireless service sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data.



   MINIMUM FLOOR AREA - The area of the floor or floors measured from the
centerline of the exterior walls to the centerline of dividing walls.  The
area for garages, roofed-over screened porches and utility rooms shall be
credited for fifty percent (50%) of floor area.  Open porches and carports
shall be credited with twenty-five (25%) of floor area.  Accessory buildings
shall not count as floor area if not accessible from the interior of the
building.  Not more than ten percent (10%) of any minimum floor area shall
be credited to screened-in porches or breezeways.



   MISCELLANEOUS ZONING DISTRICT - Whenever the words "miscellaneous
district" or "miscellaneous zoning district" are used, they are construed to
include any or all of the following zoning districts: REC recreation; and PU
public usage.



   MITIGATION, WCF - See "Wireless Communication Facilities."



   MIXED USE BUILDING - A building that contains a mix of residential and
non-residential uses.  See also "Mixed Use Development."



   MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT - The development of a single building or single
parcel to contain two (2) or more of the following types of uses:
residential, retail/commercial, office or institutional.  Mixed uses may be
combined vertically within the same building or placed side by side on the
same parcel, provided that they are in close proximity, planned as a unified
and complementary whole and functionally integrated to make the use of shared
vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas. 



   MIXED USE POD - A development project located entirely within a
previously approved planned industrial development (PID) which, when
complete, will have all of the following uses:  multi-family residential;
commercial/retail; and office and professional.  The residential component
of the mixed use pod may include fee simple and rental dwelling units.  A
mixed use pod is the aggregate of all land within the PID designated for
mixed use.



   MIXED USE ZONING DISTRICT - Whenever the words "mixed use district" or
"mixed use zoning district" are used, they are construed to include any or
all of the following zoning districts: SMU suburban mixed use; MU-1 Mixed Use
- 1; MU-2 Mixed Use - 2; MU-3 Mixed Use - 3; MU-4 Mixed Use - 4; and MU-C
Mixed Use Core.



   MOBILE HOME - See "Manufactured Home."



   MOBILE HOME PARK - A subdivision of land for the sale of lots for
manufactured homes.



   MOBILE VENDING UNIT (MVU) - Any movable cart, trailer, or other vehicle
that is operated from an established location, from which food, flowers, and
other merchandise and services, as well as non-alcoholic beverages are
provided to the public with or without charge; except, however, that the
provisions of these Regulations shall not apply to mobile caterers or service
providers, generally defined as a person engaged in the business of
transporting, in motor vehicles, food, beverages, or service equipment to
residential, business, and industrial establishments pursuant to prearranged
schedules, and dispensing from the vehicles the items or services at retail,
for the convenience of the personnel of such establishments.  For the
purposes of implementing and interpreting the mobile vendor ordinance, the
following definitions shall apply:



      1.   ADULTERATED - The condition of a food that bears or
contains any poisonous or deleterious substance or has been processed,
prepared, packed or held under unsanitary conditions, whereby it may have
become contaminated with filth, in a quantity which may render it injurious
to health.



      2.   APPROVED MANNER - Method of dealing with waste, solid or
liquid, which comports with adequate sanitation methods as established by the
Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Florida Department of Business and
Professional Regulation.



      3.   APPROVED SOURCE - A licensed food processing
establishment considered satisfactory by the Health Director and serving food
products which are clean, wholesome, free from adulteration or misbranding
and safe for human consumption.



      4.   ASSEMBLY - A concentration of three (3) or more MVU’s
coordinated by a single applicant intended to contribute to the vitality of
publicly-accessible spaces and community activities.  Events of this type
are required to obtain a Special Event Permit.



      5.   COMMISSARY - A food processing establishment or food
service establishment approved by the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of
the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation in which food,
containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored for
transportation by mobile vendors.



      6.   CORROSION RESISTANT MATERIAL - A material which maintains
its original surface characteristics under prolonged influence of food,
cleaning compounds, bactericidal solutions and other conditions-of-use
environment.



      7.   EASILY CLEANABLE - Surfaces are readily accessible and
made of such material and finish and so fabricated that residue may be
effectively removed by normal cleaning methods.



      8.   FOOD - Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance,
ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or
in part for human consumption.



      9.   FOOD HANDLER - A person, certified by the Division of
Hotels and Restaurants of the Florida Department of Business and Professional
Regulation, engaged in the preparation, handling or vending of food.



      10.   FOOD VENDOR - Any person, group of persons, firm or
corporation who individually or by or through an agent or employer, offers
for sale, sells, attempts to sell, exposes for sale or gives away any food
intended for human consumption from any vehicle or by a person afoot.



      11.   LABEL - A display of any written, printed, or graphic
matter upon the immediate container, not including package liner, of any
prepackaged article in accordance with state law.



      12.   LIQUID WASTE - Fluid, resulting from wastes produced
from food vending operations, composed of solids, whether dissolved or in
suspension; liquids, whether in solution, in emulsion or in separate phases;
and gases. The term shall also include melted ice.



      13.   MERCHANDISE - Items of clothing, jewelry (including
timepieces), photos, artwork, housewares, flowers, plants, landscape
materials, carpets, phones and accessories, small appliances, medicines,
personal care items, books and/or magazines as well as audio or video
recordings, tapes, discs or other media.



      14.   MISLABELED AND MISBRANDED - The presence of any written,
printed or graphic matter upon or accompanying any food or container of food
which is false or misleading and which is not presented in the English
language as stipulated by the Food and Drug Act, Title 21, Chapter 1-101.15
or which violates any applicable federal, state or local labeling
requirements.



      15.   PERISHABLE FOOD - Food, including shelled eggs, of a
type or in such condition that it will become adulterated unless kept at a
temperature which will maintain product quality and wholesomeness.



      16.   PERMIT - A site specific license to operate a mobile
vending unit which shall be issued by the Planning and Zoning Division of the
Department of Development for a stated fee and shall be carried by a vendor
or food handler at all times while vending.



      17.   POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD - Any food that consists in
whole or in part of milk or milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish,
shellfish, edible crustacea or other ingredients including synthetic
ingredients, in a form capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of
infectious or toxigenic microorganisms. The term does not include clean,
whole, uncracked, odor-free shell eggs or foods which have a pH level of 4.5
or below or a water activity (AW) value of 0.85 or less.



      18.   PUBLIC WAYS - Include all portions of public streets,
alleys, sidewalks, trails and parking lots of the City of Boynton Beach and,
in addition, shall include privately owned streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks,
trails, and parking lots that are provided for public use or access.



      19.   SAFE TEMPERATURES - As applied to potentially hazardous
food, shall mean temperatures of forty-five (45) degrees Fahrenheit (seven
(7) degrees Celsius) or below, or one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit
(sixty (60) degrees Celsius) or above and zero (0) degrees Fahrenheit (minus
seventeen (-17) degrees Celsius) or below for frozen food storage. 



      20.   SANITIZE - Effective bactericidal treatment of cleaned
surfaces of equipment and utensils by a process which has been approved by
the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Florida Department of Business
and Professional Regulation as being effective in destroying microorganisms
including pathogens.



      21.   SERVICES - Personal services to include portraits, body
art, and hair braiding; the cleaning and detailing of vehicles including
automobiles, trucks, vans, and motorcycles; and repairing household goods,
tools, and equipment.



      22.   SINGLE SERVICE ARTICLES - Cups, containers, lids,
closures, plates, knives, forks, spoons, stirrers, paddles, straws, napkins,
wrapping materials, toothpicks and similar articles intended for one
(1)-time, one (1)-person use and then discarded.



      23.   UTENSIL - Any implement used in the storage,
preparation, transportation or serving of food.



      24.   VEHICLE - Every device in, upon, or by which any
persons, food or other commodity is or may be transported, pushed or drawn.



      25.   WHOLESOME - In sound condition, clean, free from
adulteration and otherwise suitable for use as human food. 



   MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLD - Under the workforce housing program
provisions of these regulations, it is a household with a gross, combined
income between eighty percent (80%) and one hundred twenty percent (120%) of
the City of Boynton Beach median household income.



   MONOPOLE TOWER - See "Wireless Communication Facility (WCF), Antenna
Support Structure."



   MOTEL - A building or group of buildings designed to provide sleeping
accommodations for transient or overnight guests.  Each building shall
contain a minimum of ten (10) residential units or rooms, which generally
have direct access to a parking lot, street, drive, court, patio, etc.



   MOTEL APARTMENT - Any motel building containing a mixture of sleeping
rooms and apartment suites for transient guests only, and which shall not
serve as the primary or permanent residence of the occupants.  Buildings
designed as motel apartments shall have not more than one-third (1/3) of the
total units devoted to apartment suites.  Dining rooms and lounges shall be
permitted as accessory uses.  Motel apartment suites shall have a minimum
gross floor area of five hundred (500) square feet.



   MOTOR VEHICLE - See "Automobile."



   MOTOR VEHICLE SEATING & INTERIOR TRIM - An establishment primarily
engaged in manufacturing motor vehicle seating, seats, seat frames, seat
belts, and interior trimmings.



   MOTOR VEHICLE, WRECKED - See "Wrecked Motor Vehicle."



   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING - See "Dwelling, Multi-family."



   MULTIPLE-VENDOR MARKET - An indoor use that is primarily engaged in the
sale of new or used merchandise or a combination thereof, and such use
accommodates more than one (1) individual, vendor, tenant, or business within
a building.  Each individual, vendor, tenant, or business occupies sales
areas, typically by using stalls, tables, booths, platforms, racks, or other
temporary tenant separation methods, the sum of which constitutes a single
establishment.  This classification does not include the sale of secondhand
motor vehicles or parts, and excludes garage sales, rummage sales, and
special events.



   MUNICIPALITY - The City of Boynton Beach, Florida.



   MURAL - A work of art designed for a specific wall, ceiling, area or
large permanent surface that enhances a large architectural unit.  It must
be designed for a specific space and serve the purpose of the space.  Such
mural shall not contain any brand name, product name, abbreviation thereof,
company or business name or logo, trademark or other commercial message.



   MUSEUM - An institution that engages in the preservation and exhibition
of objects, sites, and natural wonders of historical, cultural, and/or
educational value.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) - A vertical control used for
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.



   NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES - See "Historic Preservation."



   NATIVE FLORIDA ECOSYSTEMS - A self-organized ecosystem of a type
existing in Florida prior to European colonization and containing
predominantly native species.



   NEWSRACK - Any type of unmanned device located on public property
utilized for the vending of newspapers or new periodicals.



   NEWSSTAND - A stall, booth, or store where newspapers and magazines are
sold.



   NIGHTCLUBS - See "Bar & Nightclub."



   NON-CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY - See "Historic Preservation."



   NOVELTY, GIFT, SOUVENIR & MISCELLANEOUS - An establishment primarily
engaged in retailing new gifts, novelty merchandise, souvenirs, greeting
cards, seasonal and holiday decorations, and curios.  This use would also
include Christmas & holiday shops, tobacco & news stores, and the like.  No
used merchandise is sold at these establishments.



   NUDITY - The exposing to public view of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, cleavage of the human buttocks, or that portion of the
human female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal
line one would have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of
the areola (the colored ring around the nipple).



   NURSERY SCHOOL - See "Day Care."



   NURSERY, GARDEN CENTER, & FARM SUPPLY - An establishment primarily
engaged in retailing nursery and garden products, such as trees, shrubs,
plants, seeds, bulbs, and sod, that are predominantly grown elsewhere. 
These establishments may sell a limited amount of a product they grow
themselves.



   NURSING HOME - See "Group Home."



   OATH - The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in
all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath,
and in such cases the words "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the
words "affirm" and "affirmed."



   OBJECT - See "Historic Preservation."



   OBLIGOR - Any person or entity who is obligated to pay a park and
recreation facilities impact fee pursuant to the city's Park and Recreation
Facilities Impact Fee Ordinance.



   OCCUPANT - The individual, individuals, or entity in actual possession
of a premises.



   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE - See "Business Tax."



   OFFICE SUPPLIES & STATIONERY - An establishment primarily engaged in
one (1) or more of the following:  (1) retailing new stationery, school
supplies, and office supplies; (2) selling a combination of new office
equipment, furniture, and supplies; and (3) selling new office equipment,
furniture, and supplies in combination with selling new computers.  They
exclude the sale of used merchandise.



   OFFICERS/AGENCIES - Wherever reference is made in this Code or
Regulations to any officer or agency, such as "City Manager," "the Mayor,"
"the City Clerk," "Planning and Development Board," and so forth, such
reference shall be construed to mean such officer or agency of the city and
shall include the duly authorized subordinates or personnel of such officer
or agency.



   OFF-PREMISES STORAGE - Storage which is not located on the same parcel
as the principal use to which such storage is an accessory use.



   ON-PREMISES - At the place of business of a particular use, including
the entire lot or parcel and any structure thereon, as opposed to on the
customer's premises.



   OPEN SPACE - A required exterior open area clear from the ground to the
sky devoid of residential and commercial buildings, and accessory structures.



   OPEN-AIR STRUCTURE (GAZEBO, TIKI HUT, CHICKEE HUT) - A detached
ancillary structure, open on all sides, with a roof of some type, used for
recreation/entertaining purposes.  Such structures shall include but not be
limited to gazebos; tiki, chickee or chiki huts; tea houses; or other like
pavilions.









 



   OR, AND - "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the
sense requires it.



   ORNAMENTAL, CHINA, FINE EARTHENWARE, & POTTERY - An establishment
primarily engaged in the manufacturing of earthenware, stoneware, and pottery
products, such as dinnerware, art, and ornamental items.



   OUTFALL - A pipe which discharges treated stormwater into waterways.



   OWNER - Any individual, agent, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, corporation, or any other legal entity that owns or holds
title to real property as reflected on the public records of Palm Beach
County, including a contract purchaser who has consent from such owner(s).



   PACKING & SHIPPING, TRUCKING, AND MOVING - An establishment primarily
engaged in packing, crating, and otherwise preparing goods for
transportation.  These establishments provide over-the-road transportation
of cargo using motor vehicles, such as trucks and tractor trailers. 
Accessory to this use includes the rental of moving trucks, trailers and
related equipment and accessories.



   PAINT, COATING & ADHESIVE - An establishment primarily engaged in the
mixing and blending of pigments, solvents, and binders into paints and other
coatings, such as stains, varnishes, lacquers, enamels, shellacs, and water
repellant coatings for concrete and masonry.



   PARAPET - The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof
level, for the purpose of safety, screening rooftop equipment, and/or
containing roof run-off.  A parapet, as defined herein, is intended to fully
encircle/encompass the roof, not be one (1), or a series of smaller
extensions above the roof line.









 



   PARK - An open space, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center
or any other area in the city, owned, or used by the city, and devoted to
active or passive recreation.  For the purposes of determining impact fees,
the term "park" is considered a public park within the city that is not owned
or operated by Palm Beach County.



   PARKING LOT - Any outdoor or partially enclosed or enclosed space,
plot, yard or any portion thereof, which is utilized for the parking or
storage of vehicles, upon which two (2) or more parking stalls are
constructed.  (Parking facilities designed for detached single-family homes
or duplex units with a maximum of four (4) parking stalls are exempted from
this definition.)



   PARKING SPACE (STALL) - A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed,
designed to store one (1) automobile, together with a driveway or drive aisle
connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress
and egress of an automobile.



   PARKING SPACE, TANDEM - Provisions within certain zoning districts
allowing the placement of parking spaces one (1) behind the other, so that
the space nearest the driveway, aisle, or street access serves as the only
means of access to the other space.



   PARKING STRUCTURE - A structure or portion thereof composed of one (1)
or more levels of floor used for the parking of motor vehicles.  A parking
structure may be fully below grade or either partially or fully above grade
with floors or levels being either open or enclosed.



   PARKING STRUCTURE, WRAPPED - A parking structure that is fully or
partially wrapped with habitable or leaseable space to disguise the actual
function of the structure.  A fully wrapped parking structure is one in
which the garage component, other than the access drive, cannot be seen from
any elevation.  A partially wrapped parking structure is one in which the
garage component extends above the habitable or leaseable space and can be
seen from one (1) or more elevations.



   PARTIAL NUDITY - The exposing to public view of the human male or
female cleavage of the human buttocks or that portion of the human female
breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would
have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of the areola
(the colored ring around the nipple) with less than a full opaque covering;
or the depiction of covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



   PARTIES IN INTEREST - All individuals, associations, partnerships,
corporations and others who have interest in a dwelling or who are in
possession or control thereof, as agent of the owner, as executor, executrix,
administrator, administrative, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.



   PAWN SHOP - See "Merchandise, Used."



   PERMANENT CONTROL POINT (PCP) - "Permanent control point" shall be
considered a reference monument as outlined within these Regulations.



   PERMANENT REFERENCE MONUMENT (PRM) - A permanent reference monument
which must consist of a metal rod having a minimum length of eighteen (18)
inches and a minimum cross-section area of material of two-tenths (0.2)
square inches.  In certain materials, encasement in concrete is optional for
stability of the rod.  When used, the concrete shall have a minimum
cross-section of twelve and one-quarter (12.25) square inches and a minimum
of twenty-four (24) inches long.  The PRM shall be identified with a durable
marker or cap with the point of reference marked thereon bearing either the
Florida registration number of the professional survey and mapper in
responsible charge or the certificate of authorization number of the legal
entity, which number shall be preceded by LS or LB as applicable and the
letters "P.R.M.".  The PRM shall also be detectable with conventional
instruments for locating ferrous or magnetic objects.  If the location of
the "P.R.M." falls in a hard surface such as asphalt or concrete, alternate
monumentation may be used that is durable and identifiable.



   PERMITTED USE - See "Use, Permitted."



   PERMITTEE - Under the sidewalk café provisions of these regulations,
it shall be the lawful holder of a sidewalk café permit obtained pursuant to
the terms and provisions of these Regulations.



   PERSON - Any natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.



   PERSONAL CARE (BEAUTY, HAIR, NAILS) - An establishment primarily
providing one (1) or more of the following services and/or facilities: 1)
hair care; 2) nail care; 3) facials or application of makeup; 4) tanning
salons; 5) day spas, including accessory massage/aromatherapy; and 6) body
piercing and tattooing.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE - Commercial mobile services, unlicensed
wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services, as
defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended from time to time.



   PERVIOUS PAVEMENT - A pavement system that consists of a sustainable
design which allows for percolation of rainfall.



   PET CARE (BOARDING AND DAYCARE) - An establishment primarily engaged in
the keeping of animals for short-term purposes (daycare) or for extended
periods of time (boarding).  This use excludes indoor/outdoor commercial
kennels, animal shelters (dog pound), and breeders.



   PET CARE (GROOMING) - An establishment engaged in grooming and/or
training pets.  It excludes overnight boarding, pet sitting, and veterinary
services.



   PET CARE (VETERINARY SERVICES) - An establishment of licensed
veterinary practitioners that is primarily engaged in the practice of
veterinary medicine, dentistry, or surgery for animals; and an establishment



primarily engaged in providing testing services for licensed veterinary
practitioners.  This use excludes indoor/outdoor commercial kennels.



   PET STORE & SUPPLIES - An establishment primarily engaged in retailing
pets, pet foods, and pet supplies.  Pet grooming and veterinary services
(excluding boarding) are permitted accessory uses.



   PHARMACEUTICAL & MEDICINE - An establishment primarily engaged in one
(1) or more of the following: (1) manufacturing biological and medicinal
products; (2) processing (i.e., grading, grinding, and milling) botanical
drugs and herbs; (3) isolating active medicinal principals from botanical
drugs and herbs; and (4) the collection, destruction, disposal, or other
related processes.



   PHARMACY & DRUG STORE - An establishment primarily engaged in retailing
a variety of prescription and non-prescription drugs and medicines, and
medical and surgical supplies.  A "drug store" would be an establishment
that combines a "pharmacy" with the sale of products typically associated
with a convenience store, and provides services such as photo processing or
basic health assessment (e.g., vaccinations, minor examinations, etc.).



   PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO - An establishment, also known as a portrait studio,
that is primarily engaged in providing still, video, or digital photography
services.



   PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT (PCD) - Land under unified control,
uniformly zoned, planned, approved and developed as a single development
operation or as a  programmed series of phased development operations for
commercial buildings and related uses and facilities in accordance with an
approved master plan.



   PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT (PID) - Land under unified control,
uniformly zoned, planned, approved and developed as a single development
operation or a programmed series of phased development operations for
industrial buildings and related uses and facilities, in accordance with an
approved master plan.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) - Land under unified control, uniformly
zoned, planned, approved and developed as a single development operation or a
programmed series of phased development operations for dwelling units and
accessory uses and facilities, in accordance with an approved master plan.



   PLANNED ZONING DISTRICT - A zoning district in which the zoning is
accompanied by and conditioned upon an approved master plan for the use
and/or development of the property.  Whenever the words "planned district"
or "planned zoning district" are used, they are construed to include any or
all of the following zoning districts:  IPUD infill planned unit
development; PUD planned unit development; MHPD mobile home planned
development; PCD planned commercial development; SMU suburban mixed use; MU-1
Mixed Use - 1; MU-2 Mixed Use - 2; MU-3 Mixed Use - 3; MU-4 Mixed Use - 4;
MU-C Mixed Use Core; and PID planned industrial development.



   PLASTIC PRODUCTS - An establishment primarily engaged in processing and
fabricating new or recycled plastic resins into a variety of intermediate or
final products, using such processes as molding and casting.



   PLAT - A map or delineated representation of the combining, or
subdivision of lands, being a complete, exact representation of the
subdivision and other information in compliance with all requirements of all
applicable provisions of F.S. Chapter 177, and may include the terms "record
plat", "replat", "amended plat", or "revised plat."



      1.   BOUNDARY - A map or delineated representation for
recordation of the combination of multiple pieces, tracts or lots into a
single parcel for development purposes prepared, approved, and recorded in
accordance with the requirements and procedures for a plat pursuant to F.S.
Chapter 177.



      2.   FINAL - A finished plat including all signatures required
for recordation except those signifying approval by the city.



      3.   PRELIMINARY - A copy of the plat in sufficient form to
readily compare the plat with the development plan, subdivision plan and the
construction plans.



      4.   RECORD - A plat which conforms to the requirements of the
applicable state laws and city codes, and is subsequently recorded in the
Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida.



   PLUMBING - Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment:  Gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal
units, waste pipes, toilets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins,
drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer or gas lines.



   POINT OF COMPOUND CURVATUR -  See "Survey Data."



   POINT OF CURVATURE - See "Survey Data."



   POINT OF REVERSE CURVATURE - See "Survey Data."



   POINT OF TANGENCY -  See "Survey Data."



   POSTAL/MAIL CENTER - An establishment primarily engaged in providing
packing/shipping services, mailbox rental and other postal and mailing
services (except direct mail advertising) in conjunction with sales of
related merchandise/supplies.



   PREMISES - A platted or unplatted lot or parcel of land either occupied
or unoccupied by any structure.



   PRESERVATION - The perpetual maintenance of areas in their original
state.



   PRINCIPAL USE - See "Use, Principal."



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE - See "Business or Professional Office."



   PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR AND MAPPER - See "Surveyor and Mapper,
Professional."



   PROFILE, LEAST VISUALLY OBTRUSIVE - The design of a wireless
communication facility intended to present a visual profile that is the
minimum profile necessary for the facility to properly function.



   PROHIBITED USE - See "Use, Prohibited."



   PROPERTY - See "Historic Preservation."



   PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION (POA) - An organization under the laws of
the state, operated under recorded maintenance and ownership agreements
through which each owner of a portion of a development or subdivision, be it
a lot, home, property or any other interest, is automatically a voting
member, and each such member is automatically subject to a charge for a
prorated share of expenses, either direct or indirect, for maintaining common
properties within the development or subdivision, such as roads, parks,
recreational areas, common areas, and other similar properties.  A property
owners' association is considered to be a single entity for property
ownership as it relates to platting.  The term "property owners association"
shall also be deemed to include a homeowners association, condominium
association or cooperative (apartment) association, as defined in F.S.
Chapter 711, as amended, having a life tenure of not less than twenty (20)
years; as well as a third party having an agreement with a condominium or
cooperative association as permitted by F.S. Chapter 711, as amended.



   PRM - See "Permanent Reference Monument."



   PUBLIC AGENCY - Any government or governmental agency, board,
commission, authority or public body of Palm Beach County, the State of
Florida, or of the United States government, or any legally constituted
governmental subdivision or special district.



   PUBLIC ART FUND - A separate, interest bearing account set up to
receive monies for the Art in Public Places Program.



   PUBLIC FACILITIES - Capital facilities for water, sewer, drainage,
solid waste, parks, recreation and roads, for which levels of service have
been established in the Comprehensive Plan.



   PUBLIC HALL - Any hall, corridor or passageway not within the exclusive
control of one (1) family.



   PUBLIC UTILITY - Includes any public or private utility, such as, but
not limited to, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, electric power, water
service, gas service, or telephone line, whether underground or overhead.



   PUBLISHING AND COMMERCIAL PRINTING - An establishment known as a
publisher or commercial printer is engaged in the publishing and/or printing
of newspapers, magazines, books, other periodicals, as well as directory,
mailing list, and software publishing and print products.  Print products
may include stationery, business forms and other materials.  The processes
used in printing or reproduction may include a variety of methods used to
transfer an image from a plate, screen, film, computer file, or other medium
to paper, plastics, metal, textile articles, or wood.  Support activities
include data imaging, platemaking services, and bookbinding.



   RADIO & TV BROADCASTING - An establishment primarily engaged in
operating broadcast studios and facilities for over-the-air or satellite
delivery of radio and television programs.



   RADIO FREQUENCY EMISSIONS - Any electromagnetic radiation or other
communications signal emitted from an antenna or antenna-related equipment on
the ground, antenna support structure, building, or other vertical projection.



   READER BOARD SIGN - See "Sign, Changeable Copy."



   REAL ESTATE BUSINESS - An establishment primarily engaged in the
renting or leasing of real estate to others; managing real estate for others;
selling, buying, or renting real estate for others; and providing other real
estate related services, such as appraisal services.



   REAL PROPERTY - The portion of the land or buildings contained in a
legal description setting forth the boundaries of such property and legally
acknowledged under the laws of the State of Florida and Palm Beach County.



   RECLAMATION - The filling, backfilling, restructuring, reshaping and/or
revegetation within and around a land excavation or filling area to a safe
and aesthetic condition.



   RECONSTRUCTION - See "Historic Preservation."



   RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR - An outdoor area which is
principally used for active or passive recreation, and which is operated on a
for-profit basis.  Such uses include tennis centers and swimming pools.



   RECREATION AND PARKS DEPARTMENT SPECIAL EVENT - Any meeting, activity,
gathering, or group of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination
thereof, having a common purpose, design or goal upon any public or private
facility, street, sidewalk, alley, park or other place or building where the
Special Event substantially inhibits the usual flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic or which occupies any public area or building and preempts
use by the general public.  A special event shall include, but not be
limited to, City events, festivals, carnivals, concerts, parades, walks,
races, fund raising sales and similar gatherings, block parties, grand
openings, promotions, and other similar events not specifically permitted by
City Ordinance.  Merchandise sales under a tent on private property which
have no other related activity, i.e. food sales or entertainment, are exempt
from obtaining a Special Event permit; however, applicant must still obtain
the proper Special Sales Event Approval (ref. Part III, Ch. 2, V. 4) and
applicable building permit.



   RECREATIONAL FACILITY - Any building or structure designated for
recreational purposes such as games, sports, etc. and including adjacent
property included for such use.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A travel trailer, camp trailer, chassis mount
camper or motor home, as defined by the rules of the Florida Department of
Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles.



   REFERENCE POINT - Any defined position that is or can be established in
relation to another defined position.



   REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES - See "Historic Preservation."



   RELOCATION - See "Historic Preservation."



   REMODELING OR CONVERSION - Under the Arts in Public Places Program
provisions of these Regulations, they are the alterations made to a building
within any twelve (12) month period, including, but not limited to, changes
to the façade of a building, changes to the interior of a building,
increases or decreases in the floor area of a building and changes to
exterior improvements.



   RENTAL/LEASING, INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL EQUIP - An establishment
primarily engaged in renting or leasing commercial-type and industrial-type
machinery and equipment.  These establishments typically cater to a business
clientele and do not generally operate a retail-like or store-front facility.



   RENTALS, RECREATIONAL (BICYCLES, CANOES, PERSONAL WATERCRAFT) - An
establishment primarily engaged in renting recreational goods, such as
bicycles, canoes, mopeds, skis, beach chairs, beach umbrellas, and the
like.  This use excludes the rental of boats and large marine
vessels/accessories.



   REPAIR/MAINTENANCE, INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT - An
establishment primarily engaged in the repair and maintenance of commercial
and industrial machinery and equipment.  This use excludes junk, salvage,
and tow yards.



   REPAIR/ MAINTENANCE, PERSONAL AND HOUSEHOLD GOODS - An establishment
primarily engaged in repairing and servicing personal or household-type
goods, such as garments (tailors & dressmakers); watches; jewelry; musical
instruments; bicycles and other fitness equipment; and including but not
limited to: (1) reupholstering furniture; (2) refinishing furniture; and (3)
repairing and restoring furniture.



   REPAIR, RENTAL, & MAINTENANCE OF HOME/GARDEN TOOLS - An establishment
primarily engaged in the repair, rental/leasing, or maintenance/servicing of
home and garden equipment, without retailing new home and garden equipment,
such as lawnmowers, handheld power tools, edgers, leaf-blowers, and trimmers.



   REPAIR, RENTAL, & MAINTENANCE OF OFFICE, HOME EQUIP - An establishment
primarily engaged in the repair, rental/leasing, or maintenance/servicing of
office machinery and related equipment, such as computers, office furniture,
duplicating machines (i.e., copiers), or facsimile machines.



   REPLACEMENT - See "Mitigation."



   RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT, SCIENTIFIC/TECHNOLOGICAL - An establishment
engaged in conducting original investigation undertaken on a systematic basis
to gain new knowledge (research) and/or the application of research findings
or other scientific knowledge for the creation of new or significantly
improved products or processes (experimental development).



   RESIDENTIAL UNIT - See "Dwelling Unit (D.U.)."



   RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT - Whenever the words "residential district"
or "residential zoning district" are used, they are construed to include any
or all of the following zoning districts:  R-1-AAB single-family
residential; R-1-AA single-family residential; R-1-A single-family
residential; R-1 single-family residential; R-2 single and two-family
residential; R-3 multi-family residential; R-4 multi-family residential; IPUD
infill planned unit development; PUD planned unit development; or MHPD mobile
home planned development.



   RESOURCE - See "Historic Preservation."



   RESTAURANT - An establishment engaged in preparing, selling, and/or
serving  food and beverage items.  Food and drink may be consumed on
premises, delivered, and taken out (via pick-up or carry-out).  Alcoholic
beverages may be sold in combination with selling food but ultimately, the
sale of food constitutes more than fifty-one percent (51%) of its monthly
gross revenue.  Business activity is to be conducted indoors, but the
establishment may have an outdoor component if approved through the site plan
or site plan modification process.



   RESTAURANT, TAKE-OUT - An establishment engaged in preparing and
selling food and beverage items for consumption off the premises, via
pick-up, carry-out, or delivery.  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in
combination with selling food but ultimately, the sale of food constitutes
more than fifty-one percent (51%) of its monthly gross revenue.



   RESTORATION - "Historic Preservation."



   RESTRICTIVE COVENANT AND AGREEMENT - The covenants that govern the
initial sale and rental and subsequent resale and releasing of workforce
housing units created under the workforce housing program.  The term of the
restrictive covenant and agreement is fifteen (15) years.



   REZONING - The legal process by which changes are made to the boundary
or boundaries of a zoning district(s) or where a new boundary or boundaries
are established for a zoning district(s).



   RIGHT-OF-WAY - Land dedicated, deeded, used or to be used for a street,
alley, walkway, boulevard, drainage facility, access for ingress and egress,
or other purpose by the public, certain designated individuals, or governing
bodies.



   ROOFLINE - The overall ridge line of the structure which does not
include cupolas, elevator towers, clock towers or other features that are
permitted to exceed the maximum height of the building.



   RUBBER PRODUCTS - An establishment primarily engaged in the processing
and fabricating of natural, synthetic, or reclaimed rubber materials into a
variety of intermediate or final products, excluding  tire and inner tube
manufacturing, retreading, and rubber reclaiming.



   RUBBISH - All combustible and non-combustible waste except garbage.



   RUNOFF - Precipitation discharge into waterways.  The water that flows
off the surface of the land without sinking into the soil is called surface
runoff.  Water that enters the soil before reaching waterways is called
groundwater runoff or seepage flow from groundwater.



   SAFETY SIGN/WARNING SIGN - See "Sign, Safety."



   SAND DUNES - Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.



   SATELLITE EARTH STATION - A single or group of parabolic (or dish)
antennas mounted to a support device that may be a pole or truss assembly
attached to a foundation in the ground, or in some other configuration,
including the associated ground equipment and cabinets.



   SCALE - The relationship of a building or structure to its surroundings
with regard to its size, height, bulk, and/or intensity.



   SCHOOL, INDUSTRIAL & TRADE - An establishment providing instruction and
practical training in mechanical, construction and industrial occupations
such as auto repair, masonry, machinery operation/repair, metal fabrication,
welding and others.



   SCHOOL, PRIMARY AND SECONDARY - A public, private, or parochial school
offering instruction at the elementary, junior, or high school level in the
branches of learning and study required to be taught in schools within the
state.



   SCHOOL, PROFESSIONAL & TECHNICAL - An establishment, other than a
college, providing specific job training to be pursued as a career including
art, cosmetology, business, computers, fashion design, or other such
programs, and which is conducted entirely within an enclosed building.



   SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION - See
"Historic Preservation."



   SECURITY SERVICES - An establishment primarily engaged in: (1) the
installation and monitoring home/business alarm systems; (2) guard and patrol
services; and/or (3) picking up and delivering money, receipts, or other
valuable items with personnel and equipment to protect such properties while
in transit.



   SETTING - See "Historic Preservation."



   SEWER/SEPTIC & WASTE MGMT CLEANING - An establishment primarily engaged
in: (1) pumping (i.e., cleaning) septic tanks and cesspools; and/or (2)
renting and/or servicing portable toilets.  This use also includes
establishments primarily engaged in providing waste management services such
as sewer, catch basin, and grease trap cleaning.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM, CENTRAL - A system of pipes, pumps, tanks, etc. for
the collection and disposal of sewage, in accordance with the requirements of
requisite government agencies.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL - Pipes, tanks and subsurface absorption
field, or other approved treatment device, for handling and disposing of
sewage wastes for a single user.



   SHELTER - A facility, which is not a hotel or motel, used primarily for
providing free or very low-cost short-term lodging for individuals who would
otherwise be homeless.



   SHOOTING RANGE, INDOOR - The commercial use of a building or structure
for archery and/or the discharging of firearms for the purposes of
marksmanship, recreation, or temporary competitions.



   SHOPPING CENTER - A group of retail commercial and/or service
establishments planned, developed, managed and operated as a unit.



   SHOWROOM WAREHOUSE, (SINGLE PRODUCT LINE) - Showroom-type establishment
in which the principal use consists of a showroom for large, space intensive
items such as furniture, major appliances, flooring, mattresses, recreational
vehicles or the like.  Those establishments generally have a single product
line, which differentiates them from department stores, electronics stores,
home improvement stores and warehouse clubs in that they do not sell a wide
range and mix of merchandise.



   SIDEWALK - That portion of the right-of-way which is located between
the curbline or the lateral line of a street and adjacent property line and
which is intended for use by pedestrians. 



   SIDEWALK CAFÉ - Chairs and tables temporarily placed within the
sidewalk area that directly abut a business operating as a "Restaurant".



   SIGHT DISTANCE - The minimum extent of unobstructed vision in a
horizontal and vertical plane.



   SIGHTSEEING & SCENIC TOURS - A business office for an operation that
utilizes transportation equipment to provide recreation and entertainment. 
The activity is local in nature, usually involving a same-day return to the
point of departure.



   SIGN - Includes any letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point,
marquee sign, design, poster, pictorial, picture, banner, stroke, stripe,
line, trademark or reading material which shall be constructed, placed,
attached, painted, erected, fastened, manufactured or displayed in any manner
whatsoever for the purpose of informing of or advertising about the nature,
type or quality of goods, services or activities available; or to advertise
the name of any firm, corporation business or any other enterprise, or its
nature, type or quality of goods, services or activities; or to attract to or
identify any of the aforementioned or by its nature, act to draw attention to
a business.



      1.   "A" FRAME - A moveable sign not secured or attached to
the ground.









 



      2.   ABANDONED - Sign which no longer identifies or advertises
a bona fide activity, where the activity has been abandoned or does not
possess a current occupational license.



      3.   ADVERTISING STRUCTURE - A sign structure erected or
intended for advertising purposes, with or without advertisement display
thereon, situated upon or attached to real property.



      4.   ANIMATED OR FLUTTERING - A sign which uses devices to
generate movement by either mechanical, electrical or natural methods.



      5.   AWNING VALANCE - A sign of permanent nature, which is
incorporated into, affixed, or painted onto the valance of a permanent awning.



      6.   BILLBOARD - Signs or framework installed for the purpose
of advertising or communicating either commercial or non-commercial messages
that refer to something other than the name, primary character, and/or
purpose of the establishment or business on the premises where the sign is
located.



      7.   BLADE - A small, pedestrian oriented sign that projects
perpendicular from the building or is hung beneath a canopy/covered walkway.









 



      8.   BUS BENCH - A bench or seat with graphics, symbols and/or
copy affixed against any surface.



      9.   BUS SHELTER - See "Sign, Transit Shelter."



      10.   CHANGEABLE COPY - A sign of permanent character, but
with removable letters, words or numerals, indicating the names or persons
associated with, or events conducted upon, the premises upon which a sign is
erected.









 



      11.   COMBUSTIBLE - Any sign or sign structure which will
ignite or support flames and which has a low flame point.  Prime examples of
combustible signs would be wood, non-U.L. approved plastics, cloths, etc.



      12.   CONSTRUCTION - A sign identifying the owners,
contractors, receivers, lenders and suppliers on the property where the sign
is located during the construction period.



      13.   COVERED WALKWAY AND ARCADE - A sign which is
perpendicular to the building face and is suspended from, attached to,
supported from or forms part of, a covered walkway and is rigid.









 



      14.   DIRECTIONAL - (1) On-premises, incidental signs designed
to guide or direct pedestrians or vehicular traffic.  (2) Signs erected or
permitted by the city, Palm Beach County, State of Florida or the United
States Government or agency thereof, for the direction or safety of the
public.  (3) A sign, notice, or symbol as to the time and place of regular
civic meetings and religious services.



      15.   DIRECTORY - A freestanding or flat sign listing only the
name and/or use or location of more than one (1) business, activity or
profession conducted within a building, group of buildings or commercial
center.



      16.   DOOR - See "Sign, Window."



      17.   DOUBLE FACED - A sign with two (2) faces which are back
to back with no more than a forty-five (45)-degree angle between the faces.



      18.   ELECTRICAL - A sign or sign structure in which integral
electric wiring, connections and/or fixtures are used and connected to an
electric source and meeting the requirements of the National Electrical Code.



      19.   ERECT - To build, construct, attach, hang, place,
suspend or affix a sign.



      20.   FIXED PROJECTION - A sign, other than a flat sign, which
extends outward for more than eighteen (18) inches from the façade of any
building and is rigidly affixed thereto.









 



      21.   FLASHING - A sign, which uses or contains intermittent
or a sequential flashing light source with the exception of a time or
temperature sign or Dow Jones average sign which is part of a permitted
commercial sign.



      22.   FLAT - A sign erected parallel to, and extending not
more than eighteen (18) inches from, the façade of any building to which it
is attached and supported throughout its entire length by the façade of the
building and not extending above or beyond the building.









 



      23.   FREESTANDING - A monument or ground-mounted sign
identifying the use of the property upon which it is located. Ground-mounted
signs may be supported by one (1) or more poles, provided that the bottom of
the sign or cabinet is no more than two (2) feet above grade and that the
poles and complete length of the sign or cabinet are clad in the same or like
material, completely to the ground. Alternatives to the cladding requirement
may be considered if the design of the sign conforms to the architectural
design of the building(s).









 



      24.   GOVERNMENT - Any temporary or permanent sign erected and
maintained by the city, county, state or federal government or any of their
legal entities.



      25.   GROUND - Any sign, other than a pole sign, in which the
entire bottom is in contact with or is close to the ground and is independent
of any other structure.









 



      26.   ILLUMINATED - Any sign which has characters, letters,
figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes
as a part of the sign proper.



      27.   IMPRESSION - Any symbol and/or lettering that is struck
into a masonry or stuccoed wall.



      28.   LOGO - A symbol of a company or business.



      29.   MENU BOARD - A sign of permanent nature, which is used
in association with a drive-through facility.



      30.   MONUMENT - A freestanding sign situated directly on the
ground or mounted completely along the bottom of the sign cabinet to a
low-profile base or pedestal.









 



      31.   MURAL - See "Mural."



      32.   OFF-PREMISES - A sign advertising an establishment,
organization, residential development, merchandise, service, or
entertainment, which is sold, produced, manufactured, located, and/or
furnished, at a place other than the property on which such sign is
located.  A sign located within a public or private right-of-way is
considered an off-premises sign.



      33.   ON-PREMISES - A sign located on-site that advertises an
establishment, organization, residential development, merchandise, service,
or entertainment, which is sold, produced, manufactured, located, and/or
furnished.  Such sign shall be located where the use, for which the sign is
identifying or advertising, is located.



      34.   PARAPET - A sign placed completely on the face of a
parapet.









 



      35.   PERIMETER - The entire outer boundary of the sign, not
including the supporting structural members.



      36.   PERMANENT - A sign constructed of durable materials and
intended to exist or display for the duration of time that the establishment,
organization, or occupant is located on the premises.



      37.   PLAQUE, (CUSTOMARY) - A sign identifying the address,
operator's name or activity taking place within the facility, not to exceed
two (2) square feet in area.



      38.   POLITICAL - A sign erected by a political candidate,
group or agent thereof, for political purposes.



      39.   PROJECTING - A sign attached to, and projecting at a
right angle from, a building face or wall and maintained wholly on private
property.



      40.   PYLON - A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole(s)
or other freestanding support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six
(6) feet or more above grade.



      41.   REAL ESTATE - Any sign erected by an owner, or his
agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located as for
rent or sale.



      42.   REAR DOOR BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION PLAQUE - A
non-illuminated sign affixed to the rear of a building bearing the business
name and/or address of the occupant, with an area not exceeding three (3)
square feet.



      43.   ROOF - A sign erected upon or above a roof of a
building, or above or partially above a parapet of a building.









 



      44.   SAFETY - A D.O.T. approved sign erected to identify a
special safety or warning message relating to that particular location or
area.



      45.   SEASONAL SALES EVENT - A temporary sign used in
association with a seasonal sales event.



      46.   SNIPE - A sign of a temporary nature which is mounted to
stakes or other objects, which is utilized to advertise or display matter.



      47.   SPECIAL EVENT - A sign which carries a message regarding
a special event or function which is of general interest to the community and
sponsored by a not-for-profit civic, religious, school or governmental
organization.



      48.   SPECIAL TEMPORARY SALES EVENT - A temporary sign used in
association with a special temporary sales event.



      49.   TEMPORARY - A sign not intended or designed for
permanent display.



      50.   TEMPORARY BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION - A non-permanent,
on-premise sign identifying a business location.



      51.   TRANSIT SHELTER - Graphics, symbols and/or copy affixed
to any surface of a public transit shelter.



      52.   VEHICLE DISPLAY - A sign or sign structure attached or
affixed in any manner in or to any wheeled vehicle for the purpose of
advertising that business to which the sign refers, excluding such signs
attached or affixed to public transportation vehicles for business
advertising purposes when such vehicles belong to a fully licensed public
transportation company.  A vehicle shall not be used to circumvent this sign
code.



      53.   WALL - A sign containing copy, graphics, symbols and/or
letters placed on the wall surface itself.









 



      54.   WARNING - See "Sign, Safety."



      55.   WINDOW - Any sign which is painted on, applied to,
attached to, hanging in or projected upon or within, the exterior or interior
of a building glass area, including doors.  For clarification purposes,
signs in this definition include, but are not limited to, any identification,
message, symbol, insignia, visual representation, logo type or any other form
of communication.









 



      56.   YARD - A temporary sign, not to exceed four (4) square
feet, which identifies a safety feature related to the particular lot, such
as "Home Security", "Beware of Dog", or "Keep off the Grass".



   SIGN CONTRACTOR, ELECTRICAL - A person licensed to install, repair,
alter, add to or change, any electrical wires, apparatus, raceways, conduit
or any part thereof on electrical signs and is qualified to erect signs and
connect to an existing sign circuit.



   SIGN CONTRACTOR, NON-ELECTRICAL - A person licensed by the city to
install, repair, add to, paint or change non-electrical signs.



   SIGN COPY - Any combination of letters, numbers, graphics, or the like
which are intended to inform, direct, or otherwise transmit information.



   SIGN FACE - Shall mean the surface of the sign upon, against or through
which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.



   SIGN HEIGHT - The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from
the base of the sign at ground level (at typical grade) to the top of the
highest component of the sign.  "Typical" grade shall generally mean the
average grade that would exclude variations in grade, such as for berms or
landscaping.  In instances where typical grade cannot reasonably be
determined, the base elevation shall be the elevation of the vehicle use
area, at the nearest point from the proposed location for the sign.



   SITE - See "Historic Preservation."



   SKY EXPOSURE PLANE - A "sky exposure plane" is an imaginary inclined
plane beginning at maximum frontage height and rising at a ratio of vertical
distance to horizontal distance as set forth in the mixed use zoning
regulations, used for determining maximum building heights and setbacks.









 



   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (SWES) - A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion
electronics, and which is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of
utility power and/or to serve an educational purpose.  The total height is
measured at the tip of the blade or the highest piece of equipment attached
thereto.  In case of building-mounted towers, the height of the tower
includes the height of the building on which it is mounted.  For
clarification, any SWES that is affixed to a building shall comply with the
maximum height and minimum setbacks required for an at-grade tower.



   SOAP & TOILETRY - An establishment primarily engaged in the mixing,
blending, and packaging of cosmetics, soaps, and other cleaning compounds.



   SOCIAL SERVICE AGENCY - A non-regulatory public or private
not-for-profit establishment providing a combination of support services,
resources, and activities, including counseling (except for drug and alcohol
addiction), education, training and referral; and soliciting funds to be used
for these and related services. Also includes establishments with community
improvement and neighborhood development functions.  Excludes establishments
providing overnight accommodations, medical clinics dispensing prescription
medications, and on-site food preparation and consumption; on-site food
distribution is permitted only if part of the establishment's service mix and
not its main objective.



   SPECIAL EVENT HANDBOOK - A publication issued by the City of Boynton
Beach entitled “Special Event Handbook” which sets forth procedures for
the application process and City requirements for Special Event activities.



   SPECIALTY FOOD STORE - An establishment primarily engaged in retailing
specialized lines of food.  These types of stores include various markets
(meat, fish, seafood, fruit, and vegetable), baked goods, confectionary and
nut stores, and health/gourmet food stores.



   SPECIMEN TREE - A tree which has been determined by the judgment of the
Director of Planning and Zoning or designee to be of high value because of
its type, size, age or other arboricultural criteria, and has been so
designated and promulgated as part of the official records of the city.



   SPORTING GOODS AND TOYS - An establishment primarily engaged in
manufacturing sporting goods, fitness equipment, toys, and the like.



   STANDARDS, CURRENT - Documents, drawings, specifications, details,
laws, rules, regulations, ordinances and the like in effect on the date
complete application or amended application, whichever is later, is submitted
for consideration.



   STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION - See "Historic Preservation."



   START OF CONSTRUCTION - The date a building permit is issued for new
construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement is within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date.  The actual start means the first
placement of permanent construction (including a manufactured home) on a
site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles,
construction of columns or any work beyond excavation or placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation.  Permanent construction excludes land
preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets
and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; installation on the property of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of
construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.



   STATE - The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to
mean the State of Florida.



   STATE HOUSING INITIATIVES PARTNERSHIP ACT - For the purposes of this
section, the definitions contained in the State Housing Initiatives
Partnership Act hereinafter "the Act," F.S. §§ 420.907 et seq., and Chapter
9I-37 of the Florida Administrative Code, as amended from time to time, are
adopted herein by reference.



   STATE PLANE COORDINATE - The system of plan coordinates which has been
established by the National Ocean Service for defining and stating the
positions or locations of points on the surface of the earth within the state
and shall hereinafter be known and designed as the "Florida State Plane
Coordinate System".  For the purpose of the use of this system, the zones
established by the National Ocean Service in NOAA Manual NOS NGS 5, State
Plane Coordinate System of 1983, shall be used and the appropriate projection
and zone designation shall be indicated and included in any description using
the Florid State Plane Coordinate System.



   STATE ROAD - Any highway designated as a state-maintained road by the
Department of Transportation.



   STATION AREA - A geographic area established for planning and
regulatory purposes, and which is characterized by "Compact Development"
within a one-half (½) mile radius around a transit station.  Within the
framework of TOD and transit station planning, this area includes the
"Transit Core."  See "Transit Core."  The Station Area of a one-half (½)
mile radius around the intersection of Ocean Avenue and the Florida East
Coast rail corridor, the anticipated location of the Downtown Boynton Beach
Station for the planned commuter Tri- Rail Coastal Link service on the FEC
Corridor, coincides with the Downtown Transit-Oriented Development District
(TODD).



   STEALTH FACILITY - See "Wireless Communications Facility, Concealed."



   STONE CUTTING & FINISHING - An establishment primarily engaged in
cutting, shaping, and finishing marble, granite, slate, and other stone for
building and miscellaneous uses.  This use also includes establishments
primarily engaged in buying or selling partly finished monuments and
tombstones.



   STORAGE CONTAINER, TEMPORARY - An object that is designed and
constructed by the manufacturer thereof for the primary purpose of storing
and/or transporting items or goods which may be used for storage purposes in
lieu of storage within a principal or accessory building. Also included are
operable or inoperable vehicles used for the purposes as described herein.



   STORAGE, BOATS/MOTOR/RECREATIONAL VEHICLES - An outdoor storage
facility for the temporary storage of boats, motor, or recreational vehicles,
as a principal use.  This use excludes junk yards, salvage, or tow yards.



   STORAGE, OPEN - The safekeeping of any goods or products in an
unoccupied space open to the sky for eventual removal not expected within
seventy-two (72) hours or for continuous replacement by same or similar goods
or products.



   STORAGE, SELF-SERVICE - An establishment engaged in the storage of
personal property in facilities where individual owners control individual
storage bays.  This use includes both limited-access and multi-access
facilities.  Accessory to this use includes the retail sale of merchandise
related to the packing, shipping/storing, and moving of personal items, as
well as the rental of moving vehicles, trailers and related accessories.



   STORM DRAINAGE - A system sufficient to prevent inundation resulting
from a three (3)-year storm which conveys storm waters to publicly dedicated
and maintained drainage canals or natural waterways acceptable to the agency
having jurisdiction or an alternate proposal approved by the City Engineer.



   STORMWATER - The flow of water which results from a rainfall event.



   STREET - Includes any access way such as a street, road, lane, highway,
avenue, boulevard, alley, parkway, viaduct, circle, court, terrace, place, or
cul-de-sac, and also includes all of the land lying between the right-of-way
lines as delineated on a plat showing such streets, whether improved or
unimproved, but shall not include those access ways such as easements and
rights-of-way intended solely for limited utility purposes, such as for
electric power lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, drainage and
sanitary sewers, and easements for ingress and egress.



      1.   ARTERIAL - A route providing service which is relatively
continuous and of relatively high traffic volume, long average trip length,
high operating speed, and high mobility importance.  In addition, every
United States numbered highway is an arterial road, as well as every street
shown or described as "arterial" according to the current or most recent
functional classification system contained in the City of Boynton Beach
Comprehensive Plan, as adopted and amended.



      2.   COLLECTOR - A route providing service which is of
relatively moderate average traffic volume, moderately average trip length
and moderately average operating speed.  Such a route also collects and
distributes traffic between local roads or arterial roads and serves as a
linkage between land access and mobility needs.  A street shown or described
as a "collector" street according to the current or most recent functional
classification system contained in the City of Boynton Beach Comprehensive
Plan, as adopted and amended.



      3.   CUL-DE-SAC - A street terminated at the end by a
vehicular turn-a-round.









 



      4.   LIMITED ACCESS - A highway or freeway which does not
permit access except at authorized and controlled points.  The acquisition
of right-of-way for such highways or freeways usually includes the
acquisition of access rights thereto.  Access may also be limited through
methods other than acquisition of access rights.



      5.   LOCAL - A street shown or described as a "local" street
according to the current or most recent functional classification system
contained in the City of Boynton Beach Comprehensive Plan, as adopted and
amended.



      6.   MAJOR THOROUGHFARES - A main traffic artery connecting
two (2) or more municipalities.



      7.   MARGINAL ACCESS - A street, parallel and adjacent to an
expressway, arterial street or limited access street or in the immediate
vicinity of such streets utilized primarily for relieving such streets from
local service of abutting property by providing protection from conflicts
with through traffic.  Also called a frontage street.



      8.   PRIVATE - Any street not dedicated to the public.



      9.   PUBLIC - Any street dedicated to the public and accepted
for ownership and maintenance by the City Commission.



   STREETSCAPE - The sum of the man-made and planted features that create
the character of a public space.  Streetscape features may be located within
and abutting the right-of-way.  Streetscape features include street trees
and plantings; street furniture such as benches, street lights, signs,
kiosks, gazebos, trash receptacles, bicycle racks, railings and fences,
fountains, planters, memorials, public telephones, and bollards; sidewalks;
median strips and islands; public art; banners and flags; signs and awnings;
and similar publicly visible features.



   STREET FRONTAGE - The property line adjacent to a public or private
street.



   STREET, INTERSECTION - The point of crossing or meeting of two (2) or
more streets.



   STRUCTURE - Any building or improvement constructed upon real property
located within the municipal limits of the city.  Also see "Historic
Preservation, Structure(s)."



   SUBDIVISION - Land divided into three (3) or more lots, parcels,
tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land; and
includes establishment of new streets and alleys, additions, and
re-subdivisions; and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process
of subdividing or to the lands or area subdivided.



   SUPPLIED FACILITIES - Facilities paid for, furnished or provided by, or
under the control of, the owner or operator.



   SURETY - An irrevocable surety guaranteeing that all required surveying
and construction improvements will be completed in full accord with approved
documents and all conditions attached thereto.



   SURFACE WATERS - All waterways and associated wetlands that hold or
transport water on or over the ground.



   SURROUNDING BUILDINGS - See "Historic Preservation."



   SURVEY - The orderly process of determining facts of size, shape,
identity, geodetic location, or legal location by viewing and applying direct
measurement of features on or near the earth's surface using field or image
methods; further defined as follows according to the type of data obtained,
the methods and instruments used, and the purpose(s) to be served:



      1.   AS-BUILT - A survey performed to obtain horizontal or
vertical dimensional data so that constructed improvements may be located and
delineated; also known as a record survey.



      2.   BOUNDARY - A survey, the primary purpose of which is to
document the perimeters, or any one (1) of them, of a parcel or tract of land
by establishing or re-establishing corners, monuments, and boundary lines for
the purpose of describing the parcel, locating fixed improvements on the
parcel, dividing the parcel, or platting.



      3.   CONDOMINIUM - A survey performed pursuant to F.S. Chapter
718; includes a boundary survey.



      4.   CONSTRUCTION LAYOUT - The measurements made, prior to or
while construction is in progress, to control elevation, configuration, and
horizontal position and dimensions.



      5.   CONTROL - A survey which provides horizontal or vertical
position data for the support or control of subordinate surveys or for
mapping.



      6.   DESCRIPTIONS - Written by a surveyor and mapper to
describe land boundaries by metes and bounds shall provide definitive
identification of boundary lines.  A sketch shall accompany the property
description showing all information referenced in the description and shall
state that such sketch is not survey.  The initial point in the description
shall be tied to either a government corner, a recorded corner, or some other
well-established survey point.



      7.   HYDROGRAPHIC - A survey having as its principal purpose
the determination of data relating to bodies of water, and which may consist
of the determination of one (1) or several of the following classes of data:
depth of water and configuration of bottom; directions and force of current;
heights and time of water stages; and location of fixed objects for survey
and navigation purposes.



      8.   MEAN HIGH WATER LINE - A survey to document the mean high
water line as defined in F.S. Part II, Chapter 177.



      9.   QUANTITY - A survey to obtain measurements of quantity.



      10.   RECORD - A survey performed to obtain horizontal and
vertical dimensional data so that constructed improvements may be located or
delineated; also known as an as-built survey.



      11.   SPECIFIC OR SPECIAL PURPOSE - A survey performed for a
purpose other than the purposes detailed in the other types of surveys
defined within these regulations.



      12.   TOPOGRAPHIC - A survey of selected natural and
artificial features of a part of the earth's surface to determine horizontal
and vertical spatial relations.



   SURVEY DATA - All information shown on the face of a plat that would
delineate the physical boundaries of the unified property or the subdivision
and any parts thereof.



      1.   POINT OF COMPOUND CURVATURE (PC) - "P.C.C.," means the
point where two (2) circular curves have a common point of tangency, the
curves lying on the same side of the common tangent.



      2.   POINT OF CURVATURE (PC) - "P.C.," means the point where a
tangent circular curve begins.



      3.   POINT OF REVERSE CURVATURE (PRC) - "P.R.C.," means the 
point where two (2) circular curves have a common point of tangency, the
curves lying on opposite side of the common tangent.



      4.   POINT OF TANGENCY (PT) - "P.T.," means the point where a
tangent curve ends and becomes tangent.



   SURVEY MONUMENT - An artificial or natural object that is permanent or
semi-permanent, and used or presumed to occupy any real property corner,
point on a boundary line, or reference point.  A survey marker must:  (1)
be composed of a durable material; (2) have a minimum length of eighteen (18)
inches; (3) have a minimum cross-section area of material of two-tenths (0.2)
square inches; (4) be identified with a durable marker or cap bearing either
the Florida registration number of the professional surveyor and mapper in
responsible charge or the certificate of authorization number of the legal
entity, which number shall be preceded by LS or LB as applicable; (5) be
detectable with conventional instruments for locating ferrous or magnetic
objects.  If the location of the monument falls in a hard surface such as
asphalt or concrete, alternate monumentation may be used that is durable and
identifiable.



   SURVEYOR AND MAPPER, PROFESSIONAL - A surveyor and mapper registered
under F.S. Chapter 472, who is in good standing with the Board of
Professional Surveyors and Mappers.  A surveyor registered in Florida.



   SWIMMING POOL - Any confined body of water, located either above or
below the existing finished level of the site, exceeding two (2) feet in
depth, designed, used or intended to be used for swimming or recreational
purposes.



   TANDEM PARKING - See "Parking, Tandem."



   TASTING ROOM - Commercial floor area of a food or beverage
manufacturing establishment where the public is allowed and encouraged to
purchase, taste, and/or consume the products produced on or off-site. The
zoning regulations may contain conditions applicable to tasting rooms with
respect to location, size, hours of operation, and the like, in order to
maintain the ancillary relationship with the principal use and compatibility
with surrounding properties and zoning district.



   TAXI, LIMO, CHARTER BUS - An establishment primarily engaged in the use
of motor vehicles offered to the public for the purpose of carrying or
transporting passengers for a fixed charge, fee, or hourly rate.  This use
excludes automobile rental.



   TECHNICAL SITE PLAN - Technical site plans are development plans for
one (1) or more lots submitted in compliance with an approved Master Site
Plan for a mixed use pod within a planned industrial development district
(PID).



   TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER - See "Antenna Support Structure."



   TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT AGENCY - An establishment primarily engaged in
supplying workers (administrative, professional, sales) for limited periods
of time to supplement the work force of the client.  The individuals
provided are employees of the temporary employment agency.  However, these
establishments do not provide on-site training or direct supervision of their
employees at the clients' workplace.



   TEMPORARY HOUSING - Any trailer or other structure used for human
shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to
the ground, to another structure or to any utility system for more than
thirty (30) days.  Any trailer or other structure occupied for more than
thirty (30) days shall meet all requirements of this article.



   TESTING LABORATORY - An establishment primarily engaged in performing
laboratory analysis of natural resources and manufactured materials.  The
scientific analysis is generally performed for an outside customer to support
the work of that customer.



   TEXTILE PRODUCTS - An establishment primarily engaged in fabricating
apparel, clothing accessories, and canvas goods from purchased fabric and
materials.



   THEATER - A building or outdoor structure expressly designed to seat
persons viewing the presentation of plays, operas, music concerts, motion
pictures, etc.



   THOROUGHFARE PLAN - The plan of present and future streets adopted by
the City of Boynton Beach.



   THRIFT STORE - See "Merchandise, Used."



   TILE AND CARPET - An establishment primarily engaged in the retail
sales and installation of finished flooring products, such as ceramic tile,
natural stone and marble, carpet, hardwood, cork, laminate, and vinyl.



   TOWER - See "Antenna Support Structure."



   TOWING, MOTOR VEHICLE - An establishment primarily engaged in towing
light or heavy motor vehicles, both local and long distance.  These
establishments may provide incidental services, such as the temporary storage
of towed vehicles and emergency road repair services.  This use excludes
junk and salvage yards.



   TOWNHOME - A type of dwelling unit that is designed for or occupied by
no more than one (1) family or household.  Each dwelling unit has the
following:  1) direct means of access to the outside; 2) tenant separation
(party) walls designed and constructed in accordance with the Florida
Building Code; and 3) fee simple ownership of the lot occupied by that unit.



   TOWNHOUSE - A dwelling comprised of at least three (3) attached
townhomes.



   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES - Any mechanism used to regulate traffic, such
as pavement striping, signs, etc. as specified in the D.O.T. Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (M.U.T.C.D.), excluding any mechanical or
electrical device such as traffic lights.



   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL - Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
permitted to proceed.



   TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS - A traffic statement prepared by a registered
professional engineer competent in traffic engineering, submitted as part of
the application for site plan, rezoning, or other application in compliance
with local, county, or state review requirements for appropriate review of
traffic impacts.



   TRAILER - Any vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle.



   TRANSIT CORE - The first one-quarter (1/4) mile radius, or
approximately one hundred twenty-five (125) acres around a transit station
characterized by the most intense/dense development and urban design that
promotes efficient and pleasurable pedestrian routes to the transit station
and to surrounding resources and nearby destinations.



   TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (TOD) - A component of "Compact
Development" characterized by moderate to high intensity and density, mixed
use development within one-half mile of a transit stop or station designed to
maximize walking trips and access to transit and the various uses within the
area devoted to "Compact Development."



   TRAVEL AGENCY - An establishment primarily engaged in acting as agents
in selling travel, tour, and accommodation services to the general public and
commercial clients.



   TUTORING AND TESTING CENTER - An establishment primarily engaged in
providing remedial teaching or instructional services to pupils on a
contractual and limited basis.  This classification also includes centers
where scholastic or professional tests are administered and assessed.



   TUXEDO, FORMAL WEAR, COSTUME RENTAL - An establishment primarily
engaged in renting clothing, such as formal wear, costumes (e.g.,
theatrical), or other clothing (except laundered uniforms and work apparel).



   UNITY OF TITLE - A document recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the
Circuit Court of Palm Beach County, stipulating that lots or parcel(s) of
land shall be held under single ownership, shall not be eligible for further
subdivision and shall not be transferred, conveyed, sold or divided in any
unit other than in its entirety.



   URBAN AGRICULTURE - See "Garden."



   USE - Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of
land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; or any
activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be
carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.



   USE, ACCESSORY - A use that is customarily incidental to the principal
use.  Accessory uses, unless otherwise provided, shall be located on the
same premises as the principal use.



   USE, CONDITIONAL - A use that, because of special requirements or
characteristics, may be allowed in a particular zoning district but only with
conditions as necessary to make the use compatible with other uses permitted
in the same zone or vicinity.



   USE, NONCONFORMING - A nonconforming use is a use which lawfully
occupied a building or land prior to the adoption of the ordinance or any
amendment thereto, which has been lawfully continued, and that no longer
conforms to the uses permitted in the site's current zoning district, due to
changes in the code or its application to the site.



   USE, PRINCIPAL - The primary or predominant use of any building,
structure, or lot.



   USE, PERMITTED - A use permitted in a zoning district, without the need
for special administrative review and approval, upon satisfaction of the
standards and requirements of these Regulations.



   USE, PROHIBITED - A use not permitted in a zoning district.



   UTILITY - A governmental or franchised provider of water, sewer,
electric, gas, telephone, telegraph, cable television or similar service.



   UTILITY TRAILER - A trailer or commercial truck which is rented, leased
or sold primarily for use by household users for moving household goods, and
specifically excluding truck-tractors or semi-trailers.



   VARIANCE - Relief from certain requirements of the regulations herein
as described where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest
and warranted due to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result
of the actions of the applicant, and when literal enforcement of this Code
would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.



   VIDEOS, GAMES & DVD RENTAL - An establishment primarily engaged in
renting pre-recorded video tapes and discs for home electronic equipment for
entertainment purposes.  This use excludes adult entertainment.



   WAREHOUSE, INTERNET SALES - A warehouse-type of establishment that
stores, packs, or ships merchandise that is sold primarily over the internet,
and wherein customer visits occur infrequently.  The business may have an
accessory showroom area and/or auction activity; however, any such space
dedicated to a showroom shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the gross
floor area, and any auction activity is restricted to weekends only.



   WAREHOUSING - An establishment engaged in operating facilities to store
general merchandise, refrigerated goods, and other warehouse products for
distribution.  They do not sell on-site, the goods they handle.



   WARNING SIGN - See "Sign, Safety."



   WATER SYSTEM, CENTRAL - A supply of water to serve more than one (1)
user including the water source, pipes, pumps, tanks, treatment plants and
all other appurtenances.



   WATER SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL - A water source and other appurtenances
supplying water to only one (1) user.



   WATERWAY - Any body containing water such as a canal, channel, ditch,
drainage way, lake, stream, watercourse, etc.



   WCF - See "Wireless Communication Facility."



   WETLANDS - Open bodies of water and those portions of a water body
inundated at regular and periodic intervals, or those areas where vegetation
is dominated by submerged and transitional species of plants.



   WHOLESALE TRADE - An establishment engaged in selling or distributing
merchandise to retailers or other businesses, excluding sales to household
customers.



   WINDMILL, AERATION - A wind driven aeration system that pumps oxygen
into air lines located in water bodies, such as wet detention areas, ponds,
and the like.  Air diffusers turn the compressed air into oxygen bubbles,
whose purpose it is to rise through the water and remove pollutants and
improve water quality.  It is not the function of an aeration windmill to
create or generate electric power, either for use or sale, on or off-site.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (WCF) - Any manned or unmanned
equipment used for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency
signals, or other wireless communications, and usually consisting of an
antenna or group of antennas, transmission cables, and equipment cabinets,
and may include an antenna support structure.  The following developments
shall be deemed a WCF: developments containing new, mitigated, or existing
antenna support structures, public antenna support structures, replacement
antenna support structures, co-location on existing antenna support
structures, attached wireless communications facilities, concealed wireless
communication facilities, and non-concealed wireless communication
facilities.  Excluded from the definition are: non-commercial amateur radio,
amateur ham radio and citizen band antennas, satellite earth stations and
antenna support structures, and antennas and/or antenna arrays for
AM/FM/TV/HDTV broadcasting transmission facilities.



      1.   ANTENNA - Any apparatus designed for the transmitting
and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to
telephonic, radio or television communications.  Types of elements include,
but are not limited to omni-directional (whip) antennas, sectorized (panel)
antennas, multi or single bay (FM & TV), yagi, or parabolic (dish) antennas.



      2.   ANTENNA ARRAY - A single or group of antenna elements and
associated mounting hardware, transmission lines, or other appurtenances
which share a common attachment device, such as a mounting frame or mounting
support structure, for the sole purpose of transmitting or receiving
electromagnetic waves.



      3.   ANTENNA ELEMENT - Any antenna or antenna array.



      4.   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE - A vertical projection
composed of metal or other material with or without a foundation that is
designed for the express purpose of accommodating antennas at a desired
height.  Antenna support structures do not include any device used to attach
antennas to an existing building, unless the device extends above the highest
point of the building by more than twenty (20) feet.  Types of support
structures include the following:



         a.   GUYED - A style of antenna support structure
consisting of a single truss assembly composed of sections with incorporated
bracing.  The sections are attached to each other, and the assembly is
attached to a foundation and supported by a series of wires that are
connected to anchors placed in the ground or on a building.



         b.   LATTICE - A tapered style of antenna support
structure that consists of vertical and horizontal supports with multiple
legs and cross-bracing, and metal crossed strips or bars.



         c.   MONOPOLE - A style of freestanding antenna support
structure consisting of a single shaft usually composed of two (2) or more
hollow sections without guy wires and the like or in the ground or on a
building's roof.



      5.   ANTENNA, COMBINED - An antenna or an antenna array
designed and utilized to provide services for more than one (1) wireless
provider for the same or similar type of services.



      6.   ATTACHED - An antenna or antenna array that is secured to
an existing building or structure with any accompanying pole or device which
attaches it to the building or structure, together with transmission cables,
and an equipment cabinet, which may be located either on the roof or
inside/outside of the building or structure.  An attached wireless
communications facility is considered to be an accessory use to the existing
principal use on a site.  (See also "Freestanding").



      7.   CONCEALED - Also known as "stealth" or "camouflaged",
means a type of WCF, ancillary structure, or WCF equipment compound, that is
not readily identifiable as such, and is designed to be aesthetically
compatible with existing and proposed building(s) and uses on a site.  There
are two (2) types of concealed WCFs, namely, attached and freestanding. 
They are further described as follows:



         a.   ATTACHED - Examples of concealed attached facility
include, but are not limited to the following: painted antenna and feed lines
to match the color of a building or structure, faux windows, dormers or other
architectural features that blend with an existing or proposed building or
structure.



         b.   FREESTANDING - Concealed WCFs usually have a
secondary, obvious function which may be, but is not limited to the
following: church steeple, windmill, bell tower, clock tower, cupola, light
standard, flagpole with or without a flag, or tree.  (See also
"Non-concealed").



      8.   CO-LOCATION - The practice of installing and operating
multiple wireless carriers, service providers, and/or radio common carrier
licensees on the same antenna support structure or attached wireless
communication facility using different and separate antenna, feed lines and
radio frequency generating equipment.



      9.   FREESTANDING - Any manned or unmanned location for the
transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals, or other wireless
communications, and usually consisting of an antenna or group of antennas,
feed lines, and equipment cabinets, and may include an antenna support
structure.  A freestanding wireless communication facility includes, but is
not limited to the following: guyed, lattice, or monopole antenna support
structures. (See also "Attached").



      10.   MITIGATION - A modification of an existing antenna
support structure to increase the height, or to improve its integrity, or to
replace or remove one (1) or several antenna support structure(s) located in
proximity to a proposed new antenna support structure in order to encourage
compliance with these Regulations or improve aesthetics or functionality of
the overall wireless network.



      11.   NON-CONCEALED - A wireless communication facility that
is readily identifiable as such and can be either freestanding or attached
(See also "Concealed").



      12.   RADIO FREQUENCY EMISSIONS - Any electromagnetic
radiation or other communications signal emitted from an antenna or
antenna-related equipment on the ground, antenna support structure, building,
or other vertical projection.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS - Any personal wireless service, which includes
but is not limited to, cellular, personal communication services (PCS),
specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR),
unlicensed spectrum services utilizing devices described in Part 15 of the
FCC rules and regulations (e.g., wireless internet services and paging).



   WOOD PRODUCTS - An establishment primarily engaged in processing and
fabricating purchased wood and/or wood parts into a variety of intermediate
or final products.  This use excludes pulp mills, wood preserving, pressure
treating, and/or drying.



   WORKFORCE HOUSING UNIT - A dwelling to be sold or leased to an
individual or family that is income qualified in which the rent or mortgage
payments (including principal, interest, taxes, insurance and homeowner
association fees) does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross income of
households that are classified as low or moderate income households.



   WORKMANLIKE STATE OF MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR - In compliance with all
codes and ordinances pertaining to construction of buildings and installation
of utilities.



   WORKSHOP - See "Contractor's Workshop."



   WRECKED MOTOR VEHICLE - A motor vehicle defined as such in the City of
Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances.



   XERISCAPE - A set of landscape design and maintenance principles that
promote good horticultural practice and the efficient use of water. The term
"Xeriscape" is a registered trademark of the National Xeriscape Council and
means water conservation through the use of drought tolerant landscaping or
appropriate plant materials that do not require special attention and require
little supplemental water to survive. Xeriscape designs do not resemble
desert landscape but reflect the lush traditional appearance of Florida
gardens.



   YARD - An open space on the same lot with a building unoccupied and
unobstructed from ground upward, except by trees or shrubbery or as otherwise
provided herein.



   YARD  AREA - The front, side and rear yard areas as established and
required under the zoning code and the zoning district requirements as
applicable thereto.



   ZONING CODE - That portion or section of the Land Development
Regulations that establishes or regulates, including but not limited to
permitted or conditional uses, minimum lot standards and site regulations,
building heights, accessory uses and structures, and nonconforming lots and
uses. 



   ZONING DISTRICT - Any certain designated area of the city to which
these regulations apply and within which the zoning regulations are generally
uniform.



   ZONING DISTRICT, COMMERCIAL - See "Commercial Zoning District."



   ZONING DISTRICT, CONVENTIONAL - See "Conventional Zoning District."



   ZONING DISTRICT, INDUSTRIAL - See "Industrial Zoning District."



   ZONING DISTRICT, MISCELLANEOUS - See "Miscellaneous Zoning District."



   ZONING DISTRICT, MIXED USE - See "Mixed Use Zoning District."



   ZONING DISTRICT, PLANNED - See "Planned Zoning District."



   ZONING DISTRICT, RESIDENTIAL - See "Residential Zoning District."



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-002, passed 3-1-11; Am. Ord.
11-017, passed 6-7-11; Am. Ord. 11-019, passed 8-2-11; Am. Ord. 11-020,
passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 11-023, passed 10-4-11; Am. Ord. 11-028, passed
10-18-11; Am. Ord. 12-002, passed 3-6-12; Am. Ord. 12-008, passed 5-15-12;
Am. Ord. 12-010, passed 6-19-12; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord.
13-013, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord. 13-020, passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 13-027,
passed 10-1-13; Am. Ord. 13-029, passed 11-19-13; Am. Ord. 15-002, passed
3-17-15; Am. Ord. 15-003, passed 3-17-15; Am. Ord. 15-006, passed 3-2-15; Am.
Ord. 15-015, passed 6-16-15; Am. Ord. 15-019, passed 8-18-15; Am. Ord.
16-010, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 16-011, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 16-023,
passed 1-3-17; Am. Ord. 17-014, passed 7-18-17; Am. Ord. 17-020, passed
9-19-17; Am. Ord. 17-023, passed 9-19-17; Am. Ord. 17-029, passed 9-19-17;
Am. Ord. 17-031, passed 11-7-17; Am. Ord. 18-013, § 2, 7-17-18)



ARTICLE III.  RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



Sec. 1.   Authority.



   The City of Boynton Beach Comprehensive Plan, hereinafter referred to
as the "Plan" as amended, has been adopted in compliance with, and pursuant
to, the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development
Regulation Act, F.S. §§ 163.3161, et seq., and Chapter 9J-5, Florida
Administrative Code.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Contents.



   The Plan consists of the following elements: Future Land Use, Housing,
Utilities (which includes the sub-elements of Sanitary Sewer, Potable Water,
Solid Waste, Drainage and Natural Groundwater Aquifer Recharge),
Conservation, Recreation and Open Space, Traffic Circulation, Coastal
Management, Intergovernmental Coordination and Capital Improvement.



   All background data, studies, surveys, economic assumptions, analysis
and inventory maps that are utilized in the formulation of the Plan but not
adopted as part of the Plan shall be compiled into support document(s). 
These document(s) shall be maintained as official public record and available
to the public for inspection.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Purpose and Intent.



   These Land Development Regulations are adopted to implement the
objectives and policies of the Plan.  It is the purpose and intent of the
Plan and the Land Development Regulations to encourage the most appropriate
use of land, water, and other resources consistent with the public interest,
and to adequately plan for and guide growth and development within the city.



   Nothing in this Plan, or in the Land Development Regulations adopted
consistent with its requirements shall be construed or applied to as to
result in an unconstitutional temporary or permanent taking of private
property or the abrogation of validly existing vested rights.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Preemption.



   In the event that the Plan is more restrictive than existing
development regulations, the provisions of the Plan shall prevail.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 5.   Future Land Use Map (FLUM).



   A.   Adoption.  The designation boundaries hereinafter set forth
and delineated on the future land use map, including all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby adopted.  The future land use map shall be maintained as
a digital format GIS document.  The most recent version of the land use map
shall be kept on file, in printed form, in the office of the City Clerk.



   B.   FLUM Classifications and Corresponding Zoning Districts (Table
1-1).  The following table shows the future land use map classifications and
their corresponding zoning districts:



 


Zoning Districts

 


LDR (7.5
 
MeDR (11)
 
HDR (15)
 
SHDR (20)
 
OC
 
LRC
 
GC
 
MXL (20)
 
MXM (50)
 
MXH (80)
 
I
 
R
 
PPGI
 
DRI




R-1-AAB
 

∙



5

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




R-1-AA
 

∙



5.5

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




R-1-A
 

∙



6

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




R-1
 

∙



7.5

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




R-2
 


 

∙



≤ 10

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




R-3
 


 

∙

 

∙

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




R-4
 


 


 

∙

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




IPUD
 


 

∙

 

∙

 

∙

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PUD
 

∙

 

∙

 

∙

 

∙

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




MHPD
 

∙

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




C-1
 


 


 


 


 

∙

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




C-2
 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




C-3
 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙



C-4
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 


 


 


 


 


 


 




CBD
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 

∙

 


 


 


 




PCD
 


 


 


 


 

∙

 

∙

 

∙

 


 


 


 


 


 


 




SMU
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 


 


 


 


 


 




MU-1
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 

∙

 


 


 


 


 




MU-2
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 


 


 


 


 




MU-3
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 


 


 


 


 




MU-4
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 


 


 


 




MU-C
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 


 


 


 




M-1
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 


 


 




PID
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 


 


 

∙



REC
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 


 




PU
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

∙

 






 



 



 



Future Land Use Map Classifications:
 
 


LDR:   Low Density Residential
 
MXL:    Mixed Use Low


MeDR:   Medium Density Residential
 
MXM:   Mixed Use Medium


HDR:   High Density Residential
 
MX-H:   Mixed Use High


SHDR:   Special High Density Residential
 
I:   Industrial


OC:   Office Commercial
 
R:   Recreation


LRC:   Local Retail Commercial
 
PPGI:   Public & Private Government/Institutional


GC:   General Commercial
 
DRI:   Development of Regional Impact




 



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 16-023, passed 1-3-17; Am. Ord.
17-023, passed 9-19-17)



ARTICLE IV.  REDEVELOPMENT PLANS



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The city's Land Development Regulations
are intended to further the goals, objectives, guidelines, and
recommendations of the adopted redevelopment plans.



   B.   Identification of City's Redevelopment Plans.  Each
redevelopment plan approved by the City Commission is hereby adopted by
reference in these Land Development Regulations and identified as the
following:



      1.   Federal Highway Corridor Community Redevelopment Plan;



      2.   Heart of Boynton Community Redevelopment Plan;



      3.   Ocean District Community Redevelopment Plan; and



      4.   Downtown Vision and Master Plan.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Compliance with Redevelopment Plans.



   All new development and redevelopment shall comply with the performance
and development standards contained in the LDR, as well as with any technical
codes or requirements adopted by the city.  Furthermore, each project shall
be reviewed for consistency with the applicable redevelopment plan, and
certain restrictions or recommendations may be imposed to further the purpose
and intent or vision of the redevelopment plan.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Amendments to Land Development Regulations.



   Subsequent amendments to the Land Development Regulations shall
consider impact to, and consistency with, the respective redevelopment plan.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE V.  HOUSING INITIATIVES



Sec. 1.  State Housing Initiatives Partnership Act.



   A.   General.



      1.   Short Title.  This section shall hereafter be known and
may be cited as the "Act."



      2.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this section is to
implement the Act, whose intent includes but is not limited to the following:



         a.   Increase Availability.  To increase the
availability of affordable housing by combining local resources and cost
saving measures, as applicable, and by using private and public resources to
reduce the cost of housing;



         b.   Efficient Use of Land.  To promote more compact
urban development, and to assist in achieving the growth management goals
contained in the adopted local comprehensive plan by allowing more efficient
use of land so as to provide housing units that are more affordable;



         c.   Integration.  To establish a strong sense of
community through increased social and economic integration;



         d.   Community-based Organizations.  To build the
organizational and technical capacity of community-based organizations so as
to optimize the role of community-based organizations in the production of
affordable housing;



         e.   Innovative Design.  To promote innovative design
of eligible housing, and its supporting infrastructure, to provide for cost
savings in the provision of such housing; and



         f.   Expedited Review.  To promote expedited permit
processing systems for affordable housing.



      3.   Definitions.  For the purposes of this section,
definitions contained in the Act are adopted herein by reference.



   B.   Local Housing Assistance Program.



      1.   General.  There is hereby created and established a
local housing assistance program, hereinafter referred to as the "Program" by
the City of Boynton Beach, to be implemented and administered by the city. 
The city shall implement the Program, within the city, consistently with the
requirements of the Act.  The city's Community Redevelopment Department
shall be responsible for administration of the local assistance program.



      2.   Provisions.  The city hereby indicates that five percent
(5%) of the funding to be used for administration of the program is
insufficient, and therefore elects to utilize ten percent (10%) of the
funding for administration purposes.



   C.   Affordable Housing Assistance Trust Fund.  Pursuant to the
requirements of the Act, the city agrees to establish an Affordable Housing
Trust Fund ("Fund") within the official and fiscal accounting records of the
city.  All monies deposited in the Fund shall be subject to the requirements
of the Act and this section.  The city shall cause the Fund to be audited,
and shall report the results of such audit as required by the Act.



   D.   Citizens Advisory Committee.  This section shall cause the
creation of a Citizens Advisory Committee to act in the role of the
Affordable Housing Advisory Committee, as required by the Act.  The
composition and function of the Committee shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Act.



   E.   Affordable Housing Incentive Plan (HIP).  The city will,
within one (1) year of adoption of Ordinance No. 97-11, adopt a HIP as
required by Florida Statutes.  The HIP may be amended from time to time and
shall include but not be limited to the following:



      1.   Art in Public Places Fee Exemptions.  Pursuant to City
Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 2, Article XII, the following types of
projects are exempt from the payment of the public art fee:



         a.   The percent of the project dedicated to affordable
housing as defined by the City of Boynton Beach.



         b.   Single-family and two-family in-fill housing.



      2.   Expedited Review.  Pursuant to Chapter 2, Article I,
Section 4.A.3., residential developments that provide affordable housing and
workforce housing units, as defined in the city's Workforce Housing
Ordinance, shall be afforded expedited reviews for site plans, building
permit applications, and required inspections.



   F.   Affordable Housing Cost Impact Review.  To prevent or mitigate
unintended negative impacts of amendments to these Land Development
Regulations on the cost of affordable housing, prior to the adoption of any
amendment, the planning staff will review a potential for such an impact and
provide recommendations to the City Commission. As part of the subject
review, staff will coordinate with the Community Improvement Division and, if
appropriate, consult with the outside agencies promoting affordable housing,
or any other entities in order to obtain relevant information.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Workforce Housing Program.



   A.   Findings.



      1.   Housing Shortage.  The City Commission having conducted
a Housing Assessment Study (Attachment A) has determined that new home prices
and rents are not affordable to the everyday working families and citizens of
the city;



      2.   Florida Statutes.  F.S. § 166.04151 provides that a
municipality may adopt and maintain any ordinance that is adopted for the
purpose of increasing the supply of workforce housing using land use
mechanisms not withstanding any other provision of law;



      3.   Housing Cost/Wage Gap.  The City Commission recognizes
that there is a growing gap between housing costs and wages in the city;



      4.   Public Interest.  The City of Boynton Beach has a
legitimate public interest in preserving the character and quality of
neighborhoods which requires assuring the availability of workforce housing
for low and moderate income persons in the city;



      5.   Sense of Community.  The city recognizes that the need
to provide workforce housing is critical to maintaining a diversified and
sustainable city having the character and sense of community where people can
live and work in the same area; and



      6.   Housing Availability.  The city is encouraging the
production and availability of workforce housing and at the same time is
cognizant that escalating land costs and rapidly diminishing amounts of land
hinder the provision of sufficient workforce dwelling units by the private
sector.



   B.   Applicability. The program is voluntary. Developers who choose
to participate may be awarded incentives outlined further in this article.
The following regulations shall apply only to development applications for
projects eligible for the Downtown Transit-Oriented Development District's
(DTOD's) density increase of twenty-five percent (25%), with an underlying
land use and zoning category permitting the density in excess of fifteen (15)
dwelling units per acre.



      3.   Developments whose previous approval was consistent with
Section 2.B.1. above.



   C.   Provisions. The developer may elect to obtain higher density as
part of the DTODD's twenty- five percent (25%) density bonus and/or a height
bonus through the construction of the workforce units on-site or off-site,
monetary contribution, donation of land or purchase of units to be designated
as workforce, subject to the limits and requirements of this article.



      I.   Construction of workforce units on-site:



         1.   To be eligible for the requested higher density as
part of the DTODD's twenty- five percent (25%) density bonus through the
construction of workforce units on-site, the developer must incorporate such
units into the development as follows:



            a.   Projects using DTODD density bonus alone or
in conjunction with the height bonus of one (1) additional story (up to a
maximum of 12 feet) shall designate ten percent (10%) of the total proposed
units as workforce housing units.



            b.   Projects with the Mixed Use Medium or Mixed
Use High future land use classifications may use the height bonus alone; such
bonus can include two (2) additional stories (up to a maximum of 24 feet) and
shall only be granted to projects located in the Cultural or Boynton Beach
Boulevard district, designating twenty percent (20%) of the total proposed
units as workforce housing units.



            c.   Eligible land use classifications and zoning
districts (Table 1-2).



 


Land Use Classification

 

Zoning Districts

 

M



H
 
Infill Planned Unit Development (IPUD)
 
11 du/acre


S
 
Infill Planned Unit Development
 
20 du/acre


Mixed Use Low
 
MU-1
 
 


Mixed Use-Medium
 
MU-2 and MU-3
 
 


Mixed Use High
 
Mixed Use MU-4 and MU-Core
Mixed Use-Low Intensity 3 (MU-L3)
 
40 du/acre



 



         2.   Household (Income) Type.  Twenty-five percent
(25%) of the total required workforce housing units shall be set aside for
low income households.  Seventy-five percent (75%) of the total required
workforce housing units shall be set aside for moderate income households.



         3.   Fractions.  If the number of workforce housing
units results in a fractional remainder greater than one-half (0.50), the
number shall be rounded up.  If the required number of workforce housing
units results in a fractional number less than one-half (0.50), the number
shall be rounded down.



         4.   Number of Units.  The workforce housing units
provided shall have the same percentage of unit types as market rate units
within the development. The unit types include the category of structure
(single-family detached and attached, multifamily), for rent versus for sale
units, and the number of bedrooms.  Relief from this provision may be
granted if the intended purpose is to address particular needs of the
community, substantiated by the provided data/analysis.



         5.   Staff Approval.  At the time of application for
land use amendment and rezoning, the project must be reviewed and signed off
by the Community Improvement Division of the city as part of the site plan
approval process for compliance with affordability guidelines and number of
units qualifying as workforce.



         6.   Site Plan.  The site plan shall clearly identify
the location of workforce housing units.  Additionally, tabular data must be
included on the site plan showing the address or unit number, total number of
units, number of bedrooms of workforce housing units and the targeted income
levels.  This shall be included with the market rate data.



         7.   Sale Restrictions.  Workforce housing units shall
be regulated in terms of:



            a.   Initial sales price or rent levels; and



            b.   Subsequent resale prices or leasing rates.



            c.   If compliance with a land development
standard would preclude construction of a residential or mixed use
development in which workforce housing units are included, pursuant to this
chapter, the applicant may submit a proposal for waiver or reduction of the
development standard.  The applicant shall show that the waiver or reduction
of the development standard is necessary to make the workforce housing units
economically feasible and that such a waiver will not compromise any of the
city's life or safety standards.



         8.   Recording the Restrictive Covenant.  Prior to the
issuance of any building permit, the restrictive covenant and agreement shall
be recorded in the public records of Palm Beach County.  The term of the
restrictive covenant shall be fifteen (15) years.  A copy of the recorded
covenant and agreement shall be provided to the city prior to the issuance of
the building permit.



      II.   In-Lieu and off-site options. The following options
in-lieu of construction of workforce unit on-site will be based on the number
of units as indicated in sections C.I.a/b and C.I.3 above.



         1.   Payment In-Lieu (Table 1-3).  Contributions per
unit listed in the table below shall accrue to the Boynton Beach Housing
Trust to be utilized to subsidize the creation of workforce housing within
the city. In-lieu of fees shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of
building permit.



 

Payment In Lieu of Construction of Workforce Housing Units
(per unit)


For-sale unit
 

$ 39,293



For rent units
 

$ 18,380




 



      Note: Payment-in-lieu amounts shall be revised every two (2)
years, based on (i) median single-family home sale price for Palm Beach
County provided by Realtors' Association of the Palm Beaches, and (ii)
average monthly apartment rent for the Boynton Beach market provided by
Reinhold P. Wolff Economic Research, Inc.



         2.   Donation of Land.  The value of the land shall
equal or exceed the total "in-lieu of" fee for all workforce units or shall
be of sufficient size to develop the same number of units.  The value of the
donated land must be verified by a MAI appraisal no more than three (3)
months old.  The appraisal shall be obtained by developer at developer's
cost to verify the value of donated land.  The land shall be deeded to the
city prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the
development.



         3.   Off-Site Construction.  The workforce housing
units may be built off-site.  All off-site workforce housing units shall
comply with all sections of these Regulations.



         4.   Purchase Market Rate Units.  Purchase an
equivalent number of existing market rate units to be deeded to the city or
sold to eligible households.  Such units shall be deed restricted to comply
with the Workforce Housing Ordinance.  The developer may retain the title to
off-site units subject to recordation of a city approved deed restriction.



   D.   The following requirements shall apply to built or purchased
workforce units:



      I.   Rental Housing Units.



         1.   Recording of the Restrictive Covenant.  A
restrictive covenant shall be recorded in the public records specifying the
income level served, rent levels, reporting requirement and all restrictions
applicable to the workforce housing units.  All leases on workforce housing
units shall contain language incorporating the restrictive covenant
applicable to the workforce housing units and shall reference the recorded
restrictive covenant.  The restrictive covenant shall remain in force for
fifteen (15) years.



         2.   Rental Rates.



            a.   Units targeted to low income households at
below eighty percent (80%) of the City of Boynton Beach median household
income shall not have rental rates that exceed one hundred percent (100%) of
the HUD determined fair market rent for the area.



            b.   Units targeted to moderate income households
at eighty percent (80%) to the one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the City
of Boynton Beach median household income, shall not exceed one hundred
percent (100%) of the HUD determined fair market rent for the area.



         3.   Tenant Income Qualification.  Tenant income
qualification records shall be maintained on-site and a yearly report shall
be forwarded to the Community Improvement Division of the City of Boynton
Beach for compliance determination.



      II.   For-Sale Housing Units.



         1.   Restrictive Covenant.  All deeds shall include the
restrictive covenant applicable to workforce housing units.  All sales
contracts shall state that the unit is part of a workforce housing program
and subject to the Land Development Regulations of the city.  The
restrictive covenant shall remain in force for fifteen (15) years.  The form
of deed for workforce housing units shall be approved by the City Attorney.



         2.   Resale.  The restrictive covenants shall state
that during the affordability term, the resale of a workforce housing unit
shall be subject to the following resale requirements.



            a.   All workforce housing unit owners shall
notify the city immediately that the unit is for sale.  The city shall have
first right of refusal to purchase the unit.  Upon receipt of notice that a
valid offer has been made on the unit, the city shall have fifteen (15) days
to invoke its right of refusal to purchase the units.



            b.   All workforce housing units are to be resold
only to low or moderate income qualified households at an attainable housing
cost for each targeted income range.



         3.   Required Occupancy.  Purchasers of workforce
housing units shall be required to occupy the unit.



         4.   Closing Costs.  No charges or fees shall be
imposed by the seller on the purchaser of a workforce housing unit which is
in addition to or more than charges imposed upon purchasers of market rate
units, except for administrative fees charged by the city/CRA, or their
designee.



         5.   Sales Price Calculations.  Sales prices for
workforce housing units will be calculated on the basis of:



            a.   An available fixed-rate thirty (30)-year
mortgage, consistent with a “blended rate” for Palm Beach County banks,
and/or the Florida Housing Finance Authority.  A lower rate may be used in
calculating workforce housing prices if the developer can guarantee the
availability of fixed-rate thirty (30)-year mortgage at this lower rate for
all workforce housing units required for the covered project;



            b.   A down payment of no more than ten percent
(10%) (including any down payment assistance provided by SHIP or other
sources) of the purchase price;



            c.   A calculation of property taxes; and



            d.   A calculation of homeowner insurance,
mortgage insurance, homeowner association fees, property management fees and
other closing costs.



         6.   Compliance.  Prior to request for final
certificate of occupancy for the development, the developer shall provide to
the city’s Community Improvement Department, or designee, documentation
sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the workforce housing program. 
Such documentation shall include but is not limited to information regarding
the identity and income qualification documentation for all occupants of the
workforce housing units, proof of recordation of restrictive covenant in
approved form.



         7.   Resale Requirements.  To maintain the availability
of workforce housing units which may be constructed or substantially
rehabilitated pursuant to the requirements of this program, the following
resale conditions shall be imposed on the workforce housing units and
included in the deed and restrictive covenant recorded in the Public Records
of Palm Beach County:



            a.   Location of Units.  All workforce housing
units constructed or substantially rehabilitated under this program shall be
situated within the development so as not to be in less desirable locations
than market-rate units in the development and shall, on average, be no less
accessible to public amenities, such as open space, as the market-rate units.



            b.   Integration.  Workforce housing units within
a development shall be integrated with the rest of the development and shall
be compatible in exterior design and appearance, construction, and contain
comparable HV/AC systems as market rate units.



            c.   Construction Phasing.  The construction
schedule for workforce housing units shall be consistent with or precede the
construction of market rate units. All workforce housing units must be deeded
to the city, deed-restricted, or receive a certificate of occupancy prior to
issuance of more than eighty percent (80%) of the certificate of occupancies
in the subject development.



            d.   Lot Premiums.  There shall be no lot
premiums charged on the workforce housing units.



            e.   Sales Price.  All required workforce housing
units shall be offered for sale or rent at an attainable housing cost for
each of the targeted income ranges.



            f.   City Approval.  The city, its successors and
assigns may enforce the covenants.  No amendments to the restrictive
covenant shall be made unless by written instrument approved by the city.



   E.   Monitoring and Compliance.



      1.   Qualified Buyers.  Final approval conditions: Final
conditions of approval shall specify that the workforce housing units are
sold to buyers whose income does not exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%)
of the Boynton Beach median household income.  The conditions will also
specify the requirements for reporting to the city's Community Improvement
Division on buyer eligibility, housing prices, as well as any applicable
requirement to record the restrictive covenant or to enforce resale
restrictions.



      2.   Surety.  Developers may substitute surety as outlined in
Chapter 2, Article III, Section 6, Land Development Regulations, in the
amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the developers' obligation for
workforce housing provision according to this section. The city shall, at all
times, have the authority to draw upon the surety to enforce the provisions
of this article should the applicant be in default of these requirements.



      3.   Enforcement.  The city may enforce the requirements of
the Workforce Housing Ordinance through any cause of action available at law
or equity, including but not limited to seeking specific performance,
injunctive relief, rescission of any unauthorized sale or lease, during the
term of the restrictive covenant.



      4.   Annual Report.  The Community Improvement Department
shall submit an annual report to the City Commissioners indicating the status
of the Workforce Housing Ordinance, including but not limited to the revenues
accrued to the Housing Trust Fund, the number of units created, leased and
sold.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-031, passed 12-6-11; Am. Ord.
13-034, passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 14-035, passed 1-6-15; Am. Ord. 15-031,
passed 12-1-15; Am. Ord. 16-021, passed 12-6-16; Am. Ord. 17-020, passed
9-19-17)



ARTICLE VI.  CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Short Title.  This article shall be known and cited as the
"City Concurrency Management System."



   B.   Purpose and Intent.  This article is intended to implement and
be consistent with the City of Boynton Beach Comprehensive Plan, in that land
development activity shall not degrade the level of service (LOS) standards
established in the city's Comprehensive Plan for public facilities, and in
that adequate public facilities are to be in place concurrent with new
development.  The Concurrency Management System (CMS) requires:



      1.   Inventory of Public Facilities and Capacities.  City
staff shall maintain an inventory of existing public facilities for which
level of service (LOS) standards have been adopted and for which concurrency
is to be determined.



      2.   Concurrency Review of Proposed Developments.  Each
development application must be reviewed to determine if adequate capacity is
or will be available to serve the proposed development.



      3.   Schedule of Improvements to Public Facilities.  The city
shall ensure the implementation of improvements to public facilities to
correct deficiencies or expand capacity to adequately serve existing and new
development.  The program will include capital projects in the city's
capital facilities budget and improvements required of new development.



   C.   Applicability.



      1.   Public Facilities/Services Subject to Concurrency
Review.  Based on the LOS standards set forth in the adopted Comprehensive
Plan, a concurrency determination shall be made for the following public
facilities/ services:



         a.   Roadways, county and state;



         b.   Roadways, local;



         c.   Potable water;



         d.   Sanitary sewer;



         e.   Solid waste;



         f.   Stormwater drainage;



         g.   Parks; and



         h.   Public school facilities that are under the
supervision of the School District of Palm Beach County.



      2.   Development Order Applications Subject to Concurrency
Review.  The following categories of development order applications shall
undergo concurrency review:



         a.   Master Plan/Site Plan;



         b.   Major Master Plan/Site Plan modification involving
increased intensity of development; and



         c.   Single-family subdivision plat for more than three
(3) lots.



   D.   Exemptions.  The following type of development orders or
permits are exempt from the concurrency requirements for public facilities:



      1.   One (1) single-family home or duplex on an existing
platted lot;



      2.   Replacement or modification of existing residential
buildings or  non-residential buildings, unless there is an increase in the
number of units or  increase in floor area or intensity of use; only the net
increase will be subject to concurrency review;



      3.   All development orders or permits approved prior to July
17, 1990;



      4.   Development located within the area designated as a
transportation concurrency exception area (TCEA) in the city's Comprehensive
Plan (roads only);



      5.   Development orders or permits applied for after November
7, 1989 and before February 1, 1990, and recorded on the previous approval
determination list pursuant to Article 12, the Palm Beach County Unified Land
Development Code (state and county roads only); and



      6.   Development orders and permits determined to be otherwise
fully vested by City Attorney and approved as such by the City Commission.



   E.   Long-Range Capacity Planning.



      1.   Applications for future land use map (FLUM) amendments
are subject to long-range capacity availability review.



      2.   Any privately-initiated application to rezone to a
planned zoning district requires a master plan in accordance with Chapter 2,
Article II, Section 2.D.6., and such master plan shall be subject to
concurrency review as required in Section 1.C.2. above.



      3.   Any application to rezone to a conventional zoning
district without a concurrent application for FLUM amendment is presumed
vested and shall not be subject to long-range capacity availability review.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 15-023, passed 10-6-15)



Sec. 2.   Concurrency Review Requirements.



   A.   Findings.  For all development subject to concurrency review,
the following findings shall be established:



      1.   The impacts created by the proposed development;



      2.   Whether the public facilities covered under the CMS will
be available concurrent with the impacts of new development at the adopted
LOS;



      3.   Facility(s) improvements or additions that are required
to ensure the finding of concurrency; and



      4.   The entity responsible for the implementation of all
required facility(s) improvements or additions.



   B.   Minimum Requirements for Concurrency.  A development order
shall only be issued if adequate levels of service are available for all
types of public facilities/services listed in Section 1.C.1. above.  For
these facilities, concurrency will be achieved if the following conditions
are met:



      1.   Potable Water, Sanitary Sewer, Drainage, and Solid
Waste.  The applicant has complied with the requirement of Chapter 26,
Section 26-34, Capital Facilities Charges and Connection Charges of the Code
of Ordinances, and:



         a.   The necessary facilities and services exist at the
time the development order application is being evaluated;



         b.   The development order is conditioned such that the
necessary facilities and services will be in place when development impacts
occur; or



         c.   A development agreement guarantees that the
necessary facilities and services will be in place when the development
impacts occur.



      2.   Parks and Recreation.  The applicant has complied with
the requirements of the Park and Recreation Facilities Impact Fee ordinance,
and:



         a.   The necessary facilities and services exist at the
time the development order application is being evaluated;



         b.   The development order is conditioned such that the
necessary facilities and services will be in place when development impacts
occur;



         c.   A development agreement guarantees that the
necessary facilities and services will be in place when the development
impacts occur; or



         d.   A development agreement guarantees that the adopted
level of service standards will be maintained with new facilities. Completion
of the new facilities must occur within one (1) year of the development order
approval.



      3.   Roads.  The applicant has complied with the requirements
of Palm Beach County Traffic Performance Standards (TPS) ordinance, if
applicable, and:



         a.   The adopted LOS standards are maintained with
existing public facilities at the time the development order application is
being evaluated;



         b.   The development order is conditioned such that the
adopted level of service standards will be maintained when development
impacts occur; or



         c.   A development agreement guarantees that the adopted
level of service standards will be maintained when the development impacts
occur.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Concurrency Review Procedures.



   A.   Responsibility.  The Planning and Zoning Division is
responsible for coordination of the concurrency review as part of the
development review process for all development order applications as listed
in Section 1.C.2. above.  The Building Division is responsible for the
coordination of the concurrency review for single-family subdivision plats.



      1.   City-Owned Facilities.  The following departments or
persons are responsible for evaluation of adequacy of existing and planned
facilities with regard to concurrency:



         a.   The Utilities Department shall evaluate potable
water, sanitary sewer and public drainage system;



         b.   The Parks and Recreation Department shall evaluate
recreation and open space; and



         c.   The City Engineer shall evaluate local roads.



      2.   On-Site Drainage System.  The Engineering Department
shall evaluate private, on-site drainage system.



      3.   Roads Under Jurisdiction of Palm Beach County.  The
Traffic Division of Palm Beach County shall review concurrency for compliance
with the Traffic Performance Standards (TPS).  No building permits may be
issued by the city until the Traffic Division approves the analysis for
traffic concurrency requirements.



      4.   Concurrency for Solid Waste Disposal.  Concurrency for
solid waste disposal shall be evidenced by the annual certification of
availability of solid waste disposal capacity issued by the Palm Beach County
Solid Waste Authority.



      5.   School Concurrency for Residential Developments.  The
School District of Palm Beach County shall conduct a concurrency review for
public school facilities.  No building permits may be issued by the city
until the School District issues a concurrency determination letter for
subject development.



   B.   Capacity Availability Review for FLUM Amendments.  All land
use amendment applications shall be subject to long-term capacity
availability review for water, sewer and road facilities.  Such reviews will
be based on impacts for the most intensive uses permitted under the requested
land use classification.



   C.   Demonstration of Compliance by Applicant.  The burden of
showing compliance with adopted LOS standards and meeting concurrency shall
be that of the applicant.  Applications for development approval shall
provide sufficient and verifiable information showing compliance with these
standards, and/or enabling the city to conduct the review for concurrency as
detailed in this article.  The applicant will be directed to the appropriate
staff to assist in the preparation of the necessary information.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Concurrency Rights Reservation and Effective Period.



   A.   County and State Roadways.  The Palm Beach County Traffic
Division's letter of compliance with the TPS ordinance shall constitute a
certificate of concurrency, in that the capacity reservation shall expire on
the build-out date listed in the letter.  Upon its expiration, no permits
shall be issued without submittal of a new letter of compliance from Palm
Beach County.



   B.   Other Facilities/Services.  Approved development order shall
constitute a certificate of concurrency in that the capacity of public
facilities upon which the concurrency review was based shall be reserved for
the life of the development order and shall expire upon its expiration.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 5.   Proportionate Fair-Share Program.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this section is to
establish a method whereby the impacts of development on transportation
facilities can be mitigated by the cooperative efforts of the public and
private sectors, to be known as the Proportionate Fair-Share Program, as
required by and in a manner consistent with Florida Statutes as amended from
time to time.



   B.   Applicability.  The Proportionate Fair-Share Program shall
apply to all developments that fail to meet the standards of this article on
a roadway within the city that is not the responsibility of Palm Beach County
or the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT).  The Proportionate
Fair-Share Program does not apply to developments of regional impact (DRIs)
using proportionate fair-share under Florida Statutes, projects exempted from
this article, or for projects that received traffic concurrency approval
prior to January 1, 2007.



   C.   General Requirements.  An applicant may choose to satisfy the
transportation concurrency requirements by making a proportionate fair-share
contribution, so long as each of the following requirements is met:



      1.   The proposed development is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan and applicable land development regulations.



      2.   The road improvement necessary to maintain the LOS for
transportation is identified in the five (5)-year schedule of capital
improvements in the Capital Improvement Element (CIE) of the Comprehensive
Plan.



      3.   Any improvement project proposed to meet the developer's
fair-share obligation shall meet the city's design standards for locally
maintained roadways.



   D.   Intergovernmental Coordination.  Pursuant to policies in the
Intergovernmental Coordination Element of the Comprehensive Plan, the city
shall coordinate with Palm Beach County and other affected jurisdictions,
such as FDOT, regarding mitigation to non-city thoroughfare roads impacted by
developments located within the city and applying for proportionate
fair-share mitigation.  An interlocal agreement may be established with
other affected jurisdictions for this purpose.



   E.   Application Process.



      1.   In the event of a lack of capacity, the applicant shall
have the opportunity to satisfy transportation concurrency requirements
through the Proportionate Fair-Share Program subject to the requirements of
Section 5.C. above.



      2.   Eligible applicants shall submit the application for
review by the City Engineer, who within fourteen (14) working days, will
certify that the application is sufficient and complete.  If an application
is determined to be insufficient, incomplete, or inconsistent with the
general requirements of the Proportionate Fair-Share Program as indicated in
Section 5.C. above, then the applicant will be notified in writing of the
reasons for such deficiencies.  If such deficiencies are not remedied by the
applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written notification,
then the application will be deemed withdrawn.



      3.   Pursuant to Florida Statutes, as amended from time to
time, proposed proportionate fair-share mitigation for development impacts to
facilities on the SIS requires the concurrency of the FDOT.  The applicant
shall submit evidence of an agreement between the applicant and the FDOT for
inclusion in the proportionate fair-share agreement.



      4.   When an application is deemed sufficient and complete,
the applicant shall be advised in writing and a proposed proportionate
fair-share obligation and binding agreement prepared by the city shall be
executed by the applicant and delivered to the appropriate parties for
review, including a copy to the FDOT for any proposed proportionate
fair-share mitigation on a SIS facility, no later than sixty (60) days from
the date at which the applicant received the notification of a sufficient and
complete application. If the agreement is not received by the city within
these sixty (60) days, then the application will be deemed withdrawn.



      5.   No proportionate fair-share agreement will be effective
until approved by the city through an administrative approval.



   F.   Determining Proportionate Fair-Share Obligation.



      1.   Proportionate fair-share mitigation for transportation
concurrency impacts may include, without limitation, separately or
collectively, private funds, contributions of land, and construction and
contribution of facilities.



      2.   A development eligible for participation under the
Proportionate Fair-Share Program shall not be required to pay more than its
proportionate fair-share.  The fair market value of the proportionate
fair-share mitigation for the impacted facilities shall not differ regardless
of the method of mitigation.



      3.   The methodology used to calculate a development's
proportionate fair-share obligation shall be as provided for in Florida
Statutes:



         a.   The cumulative number of trips from the proposed
development expected to reach roadways during peak hours from the complete
build out of a stage or phase being approved, divided by the change in the
peak hour maximum service volume (MSV) of roadways resulting from
construction of an improvement necessary to maintain the adopted LOS,
multiplied by the construction cost, at the time of developer payment, of the
improvement necessary to maintain the adopted LOS.  Mathematically stated as:




Proportionate Fair-Share =  [[(Development Tripsi)/(SV Increasei)] x Costi]




            Where:



         Development Tripsi = Those trips from the stage or phase of
development under review that are assigned to  roadway segment "i" and have
triggered a deficiency per the city's concurrency management system; SV
Increasei = Service volume increase provided by the eligible improvement to
roadway segment "i" per Section 5.C. above;



         Costi = Adjusted cost of the improvement to segment "i".
Cost shall include all improvements and associated costs, such as design,
right-of-way acquisition, planning, engineering review, inspection,
administration, and physical development costs directly associated with
construction at the anticipated cost, including contingencies, in the year it
will be incurred.



      4.   For the purposes of determining proportionate fair-share
obligations, the City Engineer shall determine improvement costs based upon
the actual and/or anticipated cost of the improvement in the year that
construction will occur.



   G.   Proportionate Fair-Share Agreements.



      1.   Upon execution of a proportionate fair-share agreement
("agreement"), the applicant shall receive a letter of concurrency
approval.  Should the applicant fail to apply for a development permit
within one (1) year, then the agreement shall be considered null and void,
and the applicant shall be required to reapply, unless the city and the
applicant mutually agree to an extension.



      2.   Payment of the proportionate fair-share contribution is
due in full no later than issuance of the first building permit, and shall be
non-refundable.  If the payment is submitted more than ninety (90) days from
the date of execution of the agreement, then the proportionate fair-share
cost shall be recalculated at the time of payment, pursuant to Section 5.E.
above and adjusted accordingly.



      3.   In the event an agreement requires the applicant to pay
or build one hundred percent (100%) of one (1) or more road improvements, all
such improvements shall be commenced prior to issuance of a building permit
and assured by a binding agreement that is accompanied by a performance
security, as determined by the city, which is sufficient to ensure the
completion of all required improvements.



      4.   Dedication of necessary rights-of-way for facility
improvements pursuant to a proportionate fair-share agreement shall be
completed prior to issuance of the first building permit.



      5.   Any requested change to a development subsequent to the
issuance of a development order may be subject to additional proportionate
fair-share contributions to the extent the change would generate additional
traffic that would require additional mitigation.



      6.   Applicants may submit a letter to withdraw from the
proportionate fair-share agreement at any time prior to the execution of the
agreement.  The application fee and any associated advertising costs paid to
the city will be non-refundable.



   H.   Appropriation of Fair-Share Revenues.



      1.   Proportionate fair-share revenues shall be placed in the
appropriate project account for funding of scheduled improvements in the CIE,
or as otherwise established in the terms of the proportionate fair-share
agreement.  Proportionate fair-share revenues may be used as the fifty
percent (50%) local match for funding under the FDOT TRIP, or any other
matching requirement for state and federal grant programs as may be allowed
by law.



      2.   In the event a scheduled facility improvement is removed
from the CIE, then the revenues collected for its construction may be applied
toward the construction of another improvement within the city that would
mitigate the impacts of development pursuant to the requirements of Section
5.C. above.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE VII.  ADMINISTRATIVE AND DECISION MAKING BODIES



Sec. 1.   Reserved.



   Editor's note—Part III, Chapter 1, Article VII, Section 1, "General,"
was repealed in its entirety by Ord. No. 13-017, § 3, adopted 6-18-13.  The
City Commission and city boards are regulated by the Palm Beach County Code
of Ethics as amended from time to time by Palm Beach County.



Sec. 2.   Director of Planning and Zoning.



   A.   General.  Pursuant to the Charter of the City, there is hereby
created the position of Director of Planning and Zoning.



   B.   Duties and Responsibilities.  The duties and responsibilities
of the Director of Planning and Zoning shall be:



      1.   To implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan,
including the supervision of and participation in specialized planning
activities and research that is essential to the preparation of the Plan.



      2.   To coordinate the above plans with the Planning and
Development Board as appropriate.



      3.   To serve as principal agent of the city in contracted
planning activities.  This shall include preparation of the scope of work of
each contract, as well as supervision of progress once contract is
consummated.



      4.   To act as technical advisor to department heads and
similar officials on planning matters.



      5.   To perform all work as required or directed by the City
Manager or designee.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Planning and Development Board.



   A.   Establishment and Composition.



      1.   The City of Boynton Beach Planning and Development Board
was created and established, consisting of seven (7) regular members and two
(2) alternate members appointed by the City Commission.



      2.   The Mayor and City Commission shall appoint the members
of the Planning and Development Board in accordance with the appointment
procedures followed by the Commission.  The nomination shall be subject to
the confirmation of a majority vote of the City Commission.



      3.   In appointing members to the Planning and Development
Board, the City Commission shall give preference, when possible, to urban
planners, developers, realtors, and design professionals licensed in the
disciplines of architecture, landscape architecture, and civil engineering.



      4.   Each Board member and alternate member shall meet the
minimum qualifications for appointment and membership as outlined in City
Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 2, Article I, Section 2-16 and Section
2-17 respectively.



   B.   Terms of Membership; Removal; Vacancies.



      1.   On first appointment to the Board, three (3) members and
two (2) alternate members shall each have an initial term of one (1) year. 
On first appointment to the Board, four (4) members shall have two (2)-year
terms.  Thereafter, the term of office for each member of the Planning and
Development Board shall be two (2) years.  Subsequent alternate members
shall be appointed for one (1)-year terms.



      2.   The appointees of the Planning and Development Board
shall be members until their term expires.  Each member shall remain until
his successor is duly appointed and qualified.  Any member appointed to
serve in lieu of any member on account of death, resignation, removal or
disability of such member, shall serve only for the unexpired term of such
original member.



      3.   Should a member of the Planning and Development Board
move outside the city limits, the member shall become disqualified, and a new
member shall be appointed by the City Commission.



      4.   Any vacancy shall be filled with an appointment by the
City Commission.



      5.   The City Commission shall appoint two (2) alternate
members to serve when members of the Planning and Development Board are
absent.  The alternates shall reside within the jurisdictional boundaries of
the city and all other restrictions set forth herein which pertain to members
of the Planning and Development Board shall apply to the alternates.



      6.   A member of the Board is permitted to have three (3)
absences during any one (1) year period.  The fourth absence shall result in
removal from the Board.



   C.   Selection of Chair and Vice Chair.  At the first regular
meeting of the Planning and Development Board in January of each year, the
Board shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson from among its members.



   D.   Rules of Procedures.



      1.   The Planning and Development Board shall meet on the
fourth Tuesday of each month unless otherwise rescheduled in connection with
holidays, planned absences, or at other such times as the chairperson may
determine.  The Board shall operate in accordance with Robert's Rules of
Procedure as amended and clarified from time to time.  All meetings of the
Board shall be open to the public, and a record of all meetings shall be kept
and maintained in accordance with Florida Public Records Laws.



      2.   On behalf of the Board, the City Clerk shall keep minutes
of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if
absent or abstaining, indicating such fact.  No member shall abstain from
voting unless he or she has a conflict of interest pursuant to the provisions
contained herein or in accordance with F.S. Chapter 112.  The records of the
Board shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be public
records.



   E.   Quorum.  Four (4) members of the Planning and Development
Board who are in attendance shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
convening a meeting and transacting the business at hand.



   F.   Advisory Authority, Functions, Powers, and Duties.  The
Planning and Development Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the City
Commission by conducting investigations and holding public hearings regarding
the following:



      1.   Ordinances, regulations, and other proposals promoting
orderly development along lines indicated as desirable by the Comprehensive
Plan;



      2.   Proposed developments and determination of conformance to
the principles and requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and Land
Development Regulations;



      3.   Changes or amendments relating to the boundaries of the
city, its zoning districts, or future land use map classifications;



      4.   Changes or amendments to the text of the Comprehensive
Plan or Land Development Regulations;



      5.   Other duties which may be lawfully assigned to it, or
which may have a bearing on the preparation or accomplishment of the plan;



      6.   Project designs, aesthetics, quality, and impact upon the
value of property and the physical environment of the city; and



      7.   The promotion of sustainable development activities.



   G.   Review of Applications.  Staff shall review each of the
following types of applications and requests and make a recommendation to the
Planning and Development Board, who shall have the authority and duty to hear
and make recommendations to the City Commission:



      1.   Annexation;



      2.   Comprehensive Plan amendments;



      3.   Conditional use;



      4.   Rezoning;



      5.   Master Plan (new);



      6.   Major Master Plan modification;



      7.   Site Plan;



      8.   Site Plan time extension;



      9.   Major Site Plan modification;



      10.   Vacation and abandonment;



      11.   Master Site Plan (new);



      12.   Major Master Site Plan modification;



      13.   Use approval;



      14.   Waiver (in PID);



      15.   Community Design Appeal;



      16.   Height exception;



      17.   Variance to Land Development Regulations; and



      18.   Wireless communication facilities (WCF).



   H.   Action.  No action of the Planning and Development Board shall
be considered a final action of the city until ratified by the City
Commission.  The procedure for ratification shall be as follows:



      1.   All matters which have been reviewed and acted on by the
Board shall be summarized in writing as a proposed development order.  The
form of the proposed development order shall be approved by the City Attorney.



      2.   All proposed development orders shall be submitted to the
City Commission at a regular City Commission meeting following action by the
Board.  When a legislative item, such as a land use amendment, is
consolidated with a quasi-judicial item, such as a rezoning, both items shall
proceed using the quasi-judicial process, but consolidation shall not alter
the legal standard for review, or the burden of proof.



      3.   The City Commission may table a proposed development
order to ensure that proper notice and opportunity to be heard is provided to
the applicant, the public, and any other interested parties.  All documents
and evidence that were submitted to the Planning and Development Board
constitute part of the record of the proceeding before the City Commission
and it is presumed that the City Commission accepted and considered the
documents and evidence in its consideration of the issues before the
Commission.



      4.   Following approval of a development order by the City
Commission, the City Clerk shall date and sign the development order and
issue it as a final order.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Historic Resources Preservation Board.



   A.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the regulations and
standards contained herein.



   B.   Establishment, Composition and Terms.  The Historic Resources
Preservation Board shall consist of seven (7) members and two (2) alternate
members who shall be appointed by the City Commission.  Members need not be
residents or owners of businesses that are within the city, but preference
shall be given to individuals who reside or have a principal place of
business in the city.  Where possible, a minimum of two (2) members shall be
chosen from among the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural
history, archaeology, landscape architecture or planning.  A minimum of
three (3) additional members of the Board shall be experienced in the areas
of commercial development, real estate, banking or law.  The two (2)
remaining members shall be citizen members at large.  The two (2) alternate
members shall be from any of the foregoing professions or citizen members at
large.  All members shall have demonstrated a special interest, experience
or knowledge in historic preservation or closely related disciplines.



   Members of the Board shall serve three (3) year terms. Of the initial
appointments, four (4) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3)
years and three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years.
Alternate members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. Vacancies
on the Board, including expired terms, shall be filled within sixty (60) days
by persons with the same background as the original appointee, or related
field, in order to maintain the desired Board makeup.



   The Board shall hold a minimum of four (4) meetings per year at regular
intervals. All meetings of the Board shall be publicly announced and will
have a previously advertised agenda. The meetings shall be open to the public.



   Persons serving on the board are encouraged to attend educational
meetings or workshops to develop a special interest, expertise, experience or
knowledge in preservation, architecture, or quasi-judicial boards.



   The city shall appoint a professionally qualified historic preservation
planner to advise and assist the Board, carry out delegated responsibilities,
and undertake the requirements for Certified Local Government certification.



   C.   Procedures and Quorum.  The Board shall adopt rules of
procedures, subject to any limitations prescribed by law.  The rules of
procedures shall be available for public inspection upon request.  Four (4)
members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.



   The Board shall select a chairman and other officers and shall
prescribe their duties and powers.  Planning and Zoning staff shall attend
all meetings, acting in an advisory capacity and participating fully in Board
discussions, but having no right to vote.  The Board shall keep minutes of
its proceedings, record the vote on each question and keep records of its
discussions, recommendations and other official actions.  Summary minutes
will be prepared and made available to the public after adoption by the Board.



   D.   Removal.  Any member of the Board may be removed pursuant to
the procedures outlined in the City Code of Ordinances.



   E.   Powers and Duties of the Board.  The Board shall have the
following powers and duties within the incorporated city limits of Boynton
Beach, Florida:



      1.   To recommend to the City Commission the following:



         a.   Nomination of properties and districts to the
National Register of Historic Places, as a required duty of being a certified
local government.



         b.   Nominations of properties and districts to the
Boynton Beach Register of Historic Places.



         c.   Adoption, modification, or replacement of a Design
Guidelines Handbook.



      2.   To hold public hearings and to approve or deny
applications for certificates of appropriateness or certificates of economic
hardship affecting proposed or designated properties or properties within
districts;



      3.   To advise and assist owners of properties on physical and
financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse, and
on procedures for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places;



      4.   To call upon available city staff members as well as
other experts for assistance and/or technical advice;



      5.   To authorize a member of the Board to testify before a
board or commission on any matter affecting historically, culturally,
archaeologically, and architecturally significant properties and resources;



      6.   To confer recognition upon the owners of properties and
districts by means of certificates, plaques or markers;



      7.   To recommend amendments or changes to these Regulations;



      8.   To inform and educate the citizens of the city concerning
the historic, cultural, archaeological, and architectural heritage of the
city; and



      9.   To participate in survey and planning activities of the
Certified Local Government;



      10.   To coordinate with the State of Florida's Division of
Historical Resources Certified Local Government program by satisfying the
following requirements:



         a.   The State Historic Preservation Officer shall be
given thirty (30) calendar days prior notice of all meetings and within
thirty (30) days following such meetings shall be provided with the minutes
and record of attendance of the Historic Resources Preservation Board and the
public.



         b.   The State Historic Preservation Officer shall be
notified of any change of Historic Resources Preservation Board members
within thirty (30) days of their appointment.



         c.   Notify the State Historic Preservation Officer
immediately of all new historic designations or alterations to existing
designations.



         d.   Submit amendments to the ordinance to the State
Historic Preservation Officer for review and comment at least thirty (30)
days prior to adoption.



         e.   Submit an annual report by November 1 covering
activities of the previous October 1 through September 30 and shall include
the following information:



            (1)   A copy of the Rules of Procedure;



            (2)   A copy of the Historic Preservation
Ordinance;



            (3)   Resumes of the Historic Resources
Preservation Board members;



            (4)   Changes to the Historic Resources
Preservation Board membership;



            (5)   New local designations and National Register
listings;



            (6)   A review of survey and inventory activity
with a description of the system used;



            (7)   A program report on each grant-assisted
activity; and



            (8)   Number of projects reviewed.



      11.   To undertake any other actions or activity necessary or
appropriate to the implementation of its powers and duties or to
implementation of the purpose of these Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-007, passed 2-15-11; Am. Ord.
12-008, passed 5-15-12)



Sec. 5.   City Commission.



   A.   Local Planning Agency.  The City Commission is hereby
designated as the city's local planning agency to act on behalf of the city
under the terms and provisions of the local government Comprehensive Planning
Act, having the general responsibility for overseeing a comprehensive
planning program and the preparation and amendment of the Comprehensive Plan
or elements or portions thereof applicable to the areas under the
jurisdiction of the city as provided in said Act.



   B.   Finality and Review.  All decisions of the Planning and
Development Board shall be advisory to the City Commission.  Once final, a
decision may be reviewed by the filing of a Petition for Writ of Certiorari
in the Circuit Court of the 15th Judicial Circuit in and for Palm Beach
County, Florida, and in accordance with the procedure and within the time
provided by court rule and such time shall commence to run from the date of
the decision sought to be reviewed.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE VIII.  APPEALS



Sec. 1.   Administrative Official.



   A.   Eligibility.  Appeals of a decision of an administrative
official may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, board, or
bureau of the governing body affected by any decision of an administrative
official under any ordinance enacted pursuant to the Land Development
Regulations.



   B.   Filing.  Appeals of a decision of an administrative official,
excluding the Building Official, shall be filed within fifteen (15) calendar
days after rendition of the order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by the administrative official.  For appeals of a decision made by the
Building Official, the notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within
thirty (30) calendar days after such decision is rendered.  When necessary,
a current certified survey and a fee as adopted by resolution of the City
Commission, plans, drawings, documents and/or other material constituting the
record upon which the action was taken shall be collected by the
administrative official and, together with the completed appeal, forwarded to
the appropriate appeal board for placement on the board's next available
agenda.



   C.   Stay of Work.  Upon posting of acceptable surety (see Chapter
2, Article III, Section 6) by the appellant in an amount equal to one hundred
ten percent (110%) of the potential costs of delays and damages as certified
by a design professional, all work on the premises and all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed will be stayed, unless the administrative
official from whom the appeal was taken, certifies that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril of life or
property.  In such case, proceedings or work shall not be stayed except by a
restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record
on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on
due cause shown.



   D.   Assignment of Appeals.  The City Commission or the Building
Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall review all appeals.  The assignment of
each is as follows:



      1.   City Commission.  The City Commission shall hear and
decide all appeals regarding the administration, interpretation, or
enforcement of any standard, provision, or regulation contained in the land
development regulations, except for that which is identified below.



      2.   Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals.  The owner of
a building, structure, or service system, or duly authorized agent may appeal
a decision of the Building Official or the Floodplain Administrator, as
applicable, in his/her enforcement or administration of Chapter 4, Article
IX, Building, Construction and Historic Preservation Requirements; Chapter 4,
Article X, Flood Prevention Requirements; or whenever any one (1) of the
following conditions are claimed to exist:



         a.   The Building Official or the Floodplain
Administrator, as applicable, rejected or refused to approve the mode or
manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the
installation or alteration of a building, structure, or service system;



         b.   The provisions of the city's current edition of the
Administrative Amendments to the Florida Building Code do not apply to this
specific case;



         c.   That an equally good or more desirable form of
installation can be employed in a specific case; or



         d.   The true intent and meaning of the city's current
edition of the Administrative Amendments to the Florida Building Code have
been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted.



         e.   An application made by the owner or tenant of a
property which operates as a group home is denied. The Building Board of
Adjustment and Appeals shall convene within thirty (30) calendar days of the
date that a written appeal is filed with the City. If the Building Board of
Adjustment and Appeals is unable to convene within 30 days, the appeal may be
heard by the City’s Magistrate and the matter will be added to the agenda
of the next available Code Enforcement Hearing date.



   E.   Hearing of Appeals.  The City Commission or Building Board of
Adjustment of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in
interest.  Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by
attorney.



   F.   Review of Administrative Orders.  In exercising its powers,
the City Commission or the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals may,
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official and may make
any necessary order, requirement, decision, or determination, and to that
end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whose action is being
appealed.  The concurring vote of a majority of the members present shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of
any administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which the board or commission is required to pass.



   G.   Indemnification.  In the event a claim or lawsuit is brought
against the city, its officers, employees, servants or agents, the applicant
hereby agrees to indemnify, save, and hold harmless the city, its officers,
employees, servants or agents and to defend said persons from any such
claims, liabilities, causes of action, and judgments of any type whatsoever
arising out of or relating to the appeals from decisions of an administrative
official whether the appellant is the applicant or any other party.  The
appellant agrees to pay all costs, attorney's fees, and expenses incurred by
the city, its officers, employees, servants or agents in connection with such
claims, liabilities or suits.  Nothing contained herein, however, shall act
as a waiver of any of the city's immunities provided for in F.S. § 768.28.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 2017-014, passed 7-18-17; Am. Ord.
17-029, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 2.   Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



   A.   Eligibility.  Appeals of decisions by the Building Board of
Adjustment and Appeals may be taken by any aggrieved party affected by a
Board decision.



   B.   Filing.  Appeals for judicial relief shall be filed with the
Palm Beach County Circuit Court within thirty (30) calendar days after
rendition of a Board decision.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   City Commission.



   A.   Eligibility.  Appeals of decisions by the City Commission may
be taken by any aggrieved party affected by a City Commission decision.



   B.   Filing.  Appeals for judicial relief shall be filed with the
Palm Beach County Circuit Court within thirty (30) calendar days after
rendition of the City Commission decision.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Withdrawal or Denial of Appeal.



   A.   Refiling After Denial.  Upon denial of an application for
relief hereunder, in whole or in part, a period of one (1) year must elapse
prior to the filing of a subsequent application affecting the same property
or any portion thereof.



   B.   Refiling After Withdrawal with Prejudice.  Upon the withdrawal
of an application, in whole or in part, a period of six (6) months must
elapse prior to the filing of a subsequent application affecting the same
property or any portion thereof, unless, however, the decision of the
applicable Advisory Board is without prejudice; and provided that the period
of limitation shall be increased to a two (2)-year waiting period in the
event such an application, in whole or in part, has been twice or more denied
or withdrawn.



   C.   Refiling After Withdrawal without Prejudice.  An application
may be withdrawn without prejudice by the applicant as a matter of right;
provided the request for withdrawal is in writing and executed in a manner
and on a form prescribed by the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals and
filed with the Board at least one (1) week prior to any hearing scheduled
concerning the application; otherwise, all such requests for withdrawal shall
be with prejudice.  When an application is withdrawn without prejudice, the
time limitations for re-application provided herein shall not apply.  No
application may be withdrawn after final action has been taken.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE IX.  NOTICE OF INTENT



Sec. 1.   Statement of Intent.



   The city from time to time will propose changes to the Land Development
Code of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Boynton Beach.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Purpose.



   The purpose of this section is to provide an administrative procedure
for the public and the development community to be notified of such changes
in land development regulations which may impact proposed plans for
development within the City of Boynton Beach as early in the Code revision
process as possible to best ensure that affected parties do not unnecessarily
expend time, money and resources on proposed development projects which will
be subject to such revisions to land development regulations.



   It is further the purpose of this section to ensure that upon the
issuance of the notice of intent, as hereinafter provided, no proposed use or
land development project affected by a pending regulatory change shall be
approved by any city officer, official, commission, board, agency or body,
whether elected or appointed, unless said proposed land development project
conforms with the pending regulatory change and/or the proposed land
development project approval is conditioned on such conformance pursuant to
the pending regulatory change as currently drafted or as finally approved,
whichever is appropriate.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Terms and Definitions.



   See Chapter 1, Article II for the definitions of "Affected Parties" and
"Development Activity."



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Authorization.



   At the time the City Commission authorizes, by resolution, the
investigation, study, development, drafting or consideration of a change to a
land development regulation, a notice of intent of the pending regulatory
change shall be issued.  The effective date of the notice of intent shall be
deemed to be the date of said authorization by the City Commission.



   At the next Commission meeting following the notice of intent, members
of the public shall have the opportunity to address the City Commission in a
public hearing format regarding a filed notice of intent.  After the public
hearing, the City Commission by majority vote shall either approve or
disapprove the further processing of the proposed regulation which is the
subject matter of the notice of intent.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 5.   Contents of the Notice.



   The notice of intent shall include:



   A.   A statement of purpose;



   B.   A brief description of the pending regulatory change which
shall include as much specificity as possible; recognizing however that
changes may occur as the pending regulation proceeds through the drafting,
review, public meeting and public hearing process.  The description shall
include a statement of the possible effect that the pending regulation may
have on development.  In addition, the description shall provide an
indication of the provisions of the existing code that may require
modification;



   C.   A statement of the projected time frame for the adoption of the
pending regulation; and



   D.   A statement of the point in the development approval process at
which the pending regulation would apply.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 6.   Posting of Notice.



   The notice of intent shall be posted in the Development Department, and
in a conspicuous location in City Hall.



   From and after the notice of intent, applicants for appropriate
certificates, permits, and other applicable development applications,
including but not limited to plats, site plans, rezonings, variances, and
building permits, shall be provided written notice of the pending land
development regulatory changes which may potentially affect the applicant. 
Applicants shall be provided written notice by mail and through the
availability of notices in the Development Department, and by posting of the
notice of intent.  To the extent that affected parties have comments, they
shall be afforded the opportunity to file written opinion or objections with
the Development Director.



   Neither the failure of the city to provide written notice nor the
failure of an applicant for development to observe the posted notice nor the
failure of the city to provide posted notice shall invalidate the
applicability of this article to said applicant for development approval.



   The Planning and Development Board shall be provided with a copy of all
notices of intent upon issuance.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 7.   Implementation.



   The pending regulatory change shall be considered by the City
Commission at a public hearing within a time period prescribed by the city at
the time of the filing of the notice of intent.



   If additional time is required for study and deliberation due to the
scope of the proposed regulatory changes or arising from procedural issues,
upon a majority vote of the City Commission, the time prescribed by the city
in the notice of intent may be extended for an additional period of time
approved by the City Commission upon expiration of the initial period of time
stated in the notice of intent.



   If no final action has been taken by the City Commission within the
time limits set forth herein, the notice of intent will expire.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 8.   Pending Development Permits.



   A notice of intent shall have no effect on any complete application for
development activity (a master plan, site plan, rezoning, variance, or
building permit) pending for approval.



   Except as provided above, no application for a business tax certificate
or other development activity (a master plan, site plan, rezoning, variance,
or building permit) shall be accepted for processing by the city following
the issuance of a notice of intent unless said application conforms with the
pending regulatory change and/or the application is conditioned on such
conformance pursuant to the pending regulatory change as currently drafted or
as finally approved, whichever is appropriate.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 9.   Pending Regulations.



   Pending regulations subject to the notice of intent include development
regulations as defined by Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time and
Comprehensive Plan amendments which are a condition precedent to land
development regulatory changes.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 10.  Compliance.



   Evidence of general compliance with the procedures of this section of
the Code shall be sufficient to sustain the regulation upon adoption.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



CHAPTER 2.  LAND DEVELOPMENT PROCESS



Article I.   Overview.



Article II.   Planning and Zoning Division Services.



Article III.   Engineering Division Services.



Article IV.   Building Division Services.



Article V.   Business Tax Services.



Article VI.   Impact and Selected Fees.



ARTICLE I.  OVERVIEW



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of this chapter is
to consolidate the procedures and applications for development approval. 
The format is designed to allow users to quickly and efficiently ascertain
the various steps involved in the application process; from the
pre-application conference to final approval.



   B.   Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for definitions and
acronyms relative to land development applications and processes.



   C.   Rules.  The regulations and provisions of this chapter shall
be interpreted to represent the minimum requirements adopted for the
protection and promotion of the public health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience, order, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare.  In
addition, whenever the word "district" is used, in this chapter it is
construed to mean zoning district.



   D.   Severability.  Should any section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause, phrase, or other part of this chapter be declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of this article as a whole or any article, section, subsection,
paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word thereof, other than that so
declared to be invalid.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Types of Land Development Applications.



   A.   Table 2-1.  Applications by City Departments.



   Legend:



   HRPB:   Historic Resources Preservation Board



   P&Z:   Planning and Zoning Division



   P&D:   Planning and Development Board



   CRA:   Community Redevelopment Agency



   CC:   City Commission



 

APPLICATION TYPE
 
CODE SECTION
 
REVIEWING AUTHORITY (STAFF)
 
APPROVING AUTHORITY
 
PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED?




ARTICLE II.  PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION SERVICES
Standard Applications


Annexation
 
Art II, Sec. 2.A.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes


Comprehensive Plan Amendment


   Text
 
Art. II, Sec. 2.B.2.
 
City Initiated Only


   Future Land Use Map (FLUM)
 
Art II, Sec. 2.B.3.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes


Conditional Use
 
Art. II, Sec. 2.C.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes*


   Conditional Use Time Extension
 
Art. II, Sec. 2.C.6.


Rezoning
 
Art. II, Sec. 2.D.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes*


   Master Plan (New)
 
Art. II, Sec. 2.D.6.


   Master Plan Modification (Major)
 
Art. II, Sec. 2.D.6.g.


   Master Plan Modification (Minor)
 
Art. II, Sec. 2.D.6.h.
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


Sign Program
 
Art. II, Sec. 2.E.
 
Director of P&Z
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


Site Plan Review
 
Art. II, Sec. 2.F.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes*


   Site Plan Time Extension
 
Art. II, Sec. 2.F.6.


   Site Plan Modification (Major)
 
Art. II, Sec. 2.F.7.


   Site Plan Modification (Minor)
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


Vacation and Abandonment
 
Art. II, Sec. 2.G.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes*


Planned Industrial Development (PID) Applications


Master Site Plan (New) PID Zoning District Only
 
Art. II, Sec. 3.A.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes


   Master Site Plan Modification, Major
 
Art. II, Sec. 3.A.6.


   Master Site Plan Modification, Minor
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


Technical Site Plan (New) PID Zoning District Only
 
Art. II, Sec. 3.B.
 
Director of P&Z
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


   Technical Site Plan Modification, Major
 
Art. II, Sec. 3.B.6.


   Technical Site Plan Modification, Minor


Waiver
 
Art. II, Sec. 3.C.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes


Relief Applications


Administrative Adjustment
 
Art. II, Sec. 4.A.
 
Director of P&Z
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


Community Design Appeal
 
Art. II, Sec. 4.B.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes


Height Exception
 
Art. II, Sec. 4.C.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes


Reasonable Accommodation
 
Art. II, Sec. 4.F.
 
Director of P&Z
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


Variance to Land Development Regulations
 
Art. II, Sec. 4.D.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes*



Waiver

 

Art. II, Sec. 4.E.

 

Director of P&Z

 

See Site Plan Review

 

See Site Plan Review



Permit Applications


Sign Permit
 
Art. II, Sec. 5.A.
 
Director of P&Z
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


Zoning Permit
 
Art. II, Sec. 5.B.
 
Director of P&Z
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


Historic Preservation



Certificate of Appropriateness

 
Art. II, Sec. 6.A.
 
Director of P&Z
 
HRPB
 
Yes


Historic District or Properties Designation
 
Art. II, Sec. 6.B.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes*


Historic Preservation Property Tax Exemption Application
 
Art. II, Sec. 6.C.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes


Other Applications


Certificate of Conformity
 
Art. II, Sec. 7.A.
 
Director of P&Z
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


Lot Line Modification
 
Art. II, Sec. 7.B.
 
Director of P&Z
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


Mobile Vendor Approval
 
Art. II, Sec. 7.C.
 
Director of P&Z
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


Mobile Vendor Assembly
 
Art. II, Sec. 7.C.
 
See Special Events
 
See Special Events
 
No


Modification to Development Order
 
Art. II, Sec. 7.D.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
Yes


Sidewalk Café Approval
 
Art. II, Sec. 7.E.
 
Director of P&Z
 
CC
 
No


Zoning Verification Letter
 
Art. II, Sec. 7.G.
 
Director of P&Z
 
Director of P&Z
 
No


ARTICLE III.  ENGINEERING DIVISION SERVICES


Preliminary Plat
 
Art. III, Sec. 2.B.
 
City Engineer
 
City Engineer
 
No


Final Plat
 
Art. III, Sec. 2.C.
 
City Engineer
 
CC
 
Yes


Land Development Permit (LDP)
 
Art. III, Sec. 3.
 
City Engineer
 
City Engineer
 
No


Right-of-Way Permits
 
Art. III, Sec. 4.
 
City Engineer
 
City Engineer
 
No


Engineering Division Waiver
 
Art. III, Sec. 5.
 
City Engineer
 
City Engineer
 
No


ARTICLE IV.  BUILDING DIVISION SERVICES


Building Permit
 
Art. IV, Sec. 2.
 
Building Official
 
Building Official
 
No


Sign Permit
 
Art. IV, Sec. 3.
 
Building Official
 
Building Official
 
No


Variance
 
Art. IV, Sec. 4.
 
Building Official
 
Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals
 
Yes


ARTICLE V.  BUSINESS TAX SERVICES


Seasonal Sales Event Approval
 
Art. V, Sec. 3.
 
Business Tax Manager
 
Business Tax Manager
 
No


Special Temporary Sales Event Approval
 
Art. V, Sec. 4.
 
Business Tax Manager
 
Business Tax Manager
 
No




 



*   Quasi-judicial proceedings are required pursuant to Part II (City Code
of Ordinances), Chapter 2, Article I, Section 2-20.



   B.   Withdrawal.  By written request, the applicant shall have the
right to withdraw an application at any time prior to the final action of the
application by the decision making body or person.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-002, passed 3-1-11; Am. Ord.
12-010, passed 6-19-12; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord. 13-027, §
2, passed 10-1-13; Am. Ord. 13-033, § 2, passed 12- 3-13; Am. Ord. 15-003,
passed 3-17-15)



Sec. 3.   Review Process for Applications Requiring Public Hearings,
Generally.



   This section generally describes the review process for land
development applications requiring public hearings.  The required plan(s),
application(s), fee(s), and supporting document(s) are dependent upon the
type, character, and complexity of the proposed project or relief being
sought.



   A.   Staff Review.  Each land development application that requires
a public hearing shall be reviewed by staff to ensure compliance with all
applicable codes, standards, and regulations; redevelopment plans;  and the
Comprehensive Plan's goals, objectives, and policies.  Unless otherwise
specified, the application shall be processed in accordance with the
following actions:



      1.   Completeness Review.  This section applies to any land
development application in this chapter, unless otherwise provided for in the
regulations for that specific application.  No review shall commence until
the application is deemed complete by the reviewing authority.



      2.   Analysis and Recommendations.  Staff comments and
recommendations shall identify noncompliance and deficiencies with the
standards and requirements of these Land Development Regulations or any other
applicable codes.  During this informal procedure, staff comments and
recommendations are forwarded to the applicant so that each issue can be
completely resolved or adequately addressed, as determined by staff, prior to
Advisory Board review.  An applicant may orally or in writing, challenge any
staff comment or recommendation by contacting the issuing department directly
and presenting specific grounds for the challenge.  The issuing department
will either affirm or reverse its original comment or recommendation, but all
such action shall be based on the provisions of appropriate codes,
ordinances, rules, regulations, standard drawings, redevelopment plans, or
Comprehensive Plan.  A staff comment becomes a recommendation when it is not
based on a specific code, ordinance, rule, regulation, standard drawing,
redevelopment plan, or goal, objective, or policy of the Comprehensive
Plan.  Such staff recommendation becomes compulsory when it is approved as
part of the conditions of approval and development order by the applicable
Advisory Board or City Commission.



      3.   Forward to Applicable Advisory Board.  Upon conclusion
of staff review, the Director of Planning and Zoning, designee, or reviewing
authority will transmit the document with staff comments and recommendations
to the applicable Advisory Board for their review and recommendation.



   B.   Advisory Board Review.



      1.   Notification.  The Planning and Zoning Division shall
notify the applicant in writing, of the date, time, and location of the
Advisory Board meeting.  The applicant may opt to postpone Advisory Board
review by submitting a written request to the Director of Planning and
Zoning, designee, or to the appropriate reviewing authority.  In all
instances, the applicant shall be responsible to comply with the applicable
public notice requirements of City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 2,
Article I, Section 2-20.



      2.   Action.  The Advisory Board will consider all presented
items, including the staff report, exhibits, and recommendations, in
conjunction with any testimony or other information presented at the meeting,
and recommend that City Commission:



         a.   Approve the application;



         b.   Approve the application subject to conditions;



         c.   Table or defer their decision to a subsequent
meeting in order to collect additional information or conduct further
analyses; or



         d.   Deny the application.



   C.   City Commission Review.  After the Advisory Board conducts its
review and formulates a recommendation, the Director of Planning, designee,
or reviewing authority will forward the items to the City Commission for
final review and approval.



      1.   Notification.  The Planning and Zoning Division shall
notify the applicant in writing, of the date, time, and location of the City
Commission meeting.  The applicant may opt to postpone City Commission
review by submitting a written request to the Director of Planning and
Zoning, designee, or to the appropriate reviewing authority.  In all
instances, the applicant shall be responsible to comply with the applicable
public notice requirements of City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 2,
Article I, Section 2-20.



      2.   Action.  The City Commission will review all presented
items, including the staff report, exhibits, and recommendations, in
conjunction with any testimony or other information presented at all
meetings, and vote to:



         a.   Approve the application;



         b.   Approve the application subject to conditions;



         c.   Table or defer their decision to a subsequent
meeting in order to collect additional information or conduct further
analyses; or



         d.   Deny the application.



   The action of the City Commission is the final decision.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Expedited Development Review Program.



   A.   Applicability.



      1.   Eligible Uses.  New and expanding establishments in the
following categories are eligible for expedited reviews for site plans (and
related applications), building permit applications, and required inspections:



         a.   Bioscience;



         b.   Medical or pharmaceutical research and development;



         c.   Aviation/aerospace/engineering;



         d.   Communications/information technology;



         e.   Business and financial services (non-retail); and



         f.   Education related to the above industry clusters.



      2.   Economic Development.  Establishments may also qualify
for the expedited permitting program if the company is a sanctioned project
by the State of Florida or other recognized economic development organization
(Florida Office of Tourism, Trade and Economic Development (OTTED),
Enterprise Florida, or Business Development Board of Palm Beach County).



      3.   Affordable and Workforce Housing.  Residential
developments that provide affordable housing and workforce housing units, as
defined in the city's Workforce Housing Ordinance, shall be afforded
expedited reviews for site plans, building permit applications, and required
inspections.



      4.   Sustainable Development.  Development applications for
residential and commercial environmentally responsible buildings shall be
afforded expedited reviews for site plans (and related applications),
building permit applications, and required inspections.  The project must be
registered with a nationally recognized green certification agency, including
but not limited to:



         a.   USGBC – United States Green Building Council;



         b.   FGBC – Florida Green Building Coalition;



         c.   Green Globes;



         d.   NAHB – National Association of Home Builders,
National Green Building Standard; and



         e.   All entities that apply for this expedited review
program shall provide a detailed explanation of how the project will advance
the city's economic, housing, or environmentally responsible goals.



   B.   Benefits of Program.  Entities that have been accepted into
the expedited permitting program shall receive the following benefits:



      1.   Point of Contact.  The City Manager shall appoint a
single point of contact at the city who shall have the responsibility of
assisting the applicant throughout the development application and permitting
process;



      2.   Timetable.  The Planning and Zoning Division, Building
Division, Engineering Division of Public Works, and other applicable city
departments shall establish the necessary steps required for project approval
and permitting in a pre-application meeting and subsequently, within three
(3) business days, prepare an optimal timetable for the project's completion
of the development and application review process;



      3.   Priority Review.  The project shall receive priority at
every phase of the review process by city staff, including face-to-face
meetings as needed.  However, public hearings are subject to the
availability of the relevant board and the decisions of such boards are not
guaranteed to be made immediately.  Therefore, to the extent possible,
public hearing scheduling shall be expedited if applicable to a particular
development application;



      4.   Comments.  Comments relative to review by the 1)
Planning and Zoning Division Planning; and 2) Building Division shall be
provided to the applicant within seven (7) business days of the submission of
a completed development application.  The city and the applicant shall make
a mutual commitment to provide all other development and permit application
review comments and corresponding revisions thereto in a thorough and timely
manner;



      5.   Conflict Resolution.  Should any issues arise at any
point during the development application review and permitting process, the
city will use the most expeditious means to resolve the issue.  A face to
face meeting between city staff and the applicant's representatives, if
necessary, shall be scheduled within three (3) business days of the
applicant's notification of the issues; and



      6.   Staff Report.  A description of the benefit to the city,
as defined in paragraph 4.e. herein, shall be included in the staff report
for the project for the Advisory Boards and City Commission meetings.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 5   Green Building Program.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The Green Building Program establishes
procedures and incentives for the implementation of green building
standards.  The program is intended to encourage the incorporation of green
building practices into development projects.  The program may be applied to
any development within the city, including redevelopment projects and
government initiated development projects, submitted for city review.



   B.   Government Leadership.  To demonstrate the city's commitment
to a green building program, the city shall comply with the Green Building
Program established herein for all government buildings pursuant to F.S. §
255.2575(2), and



      1.   Track and report the city's annual water and energy use;
and



      2.   Publish an annual report that outlines the city's energy
and water use performance for the prior year and outline methodologies for
potential reductions in keeping with the approved Climate Action Plan
initiatives.



   C.   Scope and Applicability.  This program applies to all lands
private and public within the city and the city-owned well fields. The scope
of its application shall be for development approvals and building permits
submitted for the voluntary green building program. Such plans and approvals
shall be reviewed for compliance with the appropriate parts of the adopted
city's Comprehensive Plan and the land development regulations in addition to
the requirements of the Green Building Program.



   D.   Incentives. The city shall provide the following incentives to
encourage the use of this program and are hereby authorized:



      1.   Expedited Permitting.  For any voluntary program
participant, the city shall provide expedited review in accordance with
Section 4 above as approved in Ordinance 09-024. All such applications for
expedited review shall be accompanied by the appropriate forms, evidence of a
completed green building certification application according to the
requirements of the certifying entity, and proof of payment of the
application fee required to process the application for certification. A city
staff member shall be designated as project manager and shall work in close
contact with the applicant and certifying agent. The project manager shall
oversee the expedited review of the project once formal plans have been
prepared and submitted to the city.



      2.   Fees and Tax Incentives.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  Within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the effective date of this program, the city shall establish an
incentive program to promote early adoption of green building practices by
applicants for new site plans and building construction permits for buildings
regulated by this code. The incentive program shall be funded by funds
deposited in the Green Building Fund, subject to the availability of funds.
As part of the incentive program, the city and/or the Boynton Beach Community
Redevelopment Agency shall establish a property tax incentive along with the
Green Building Fee Incentive for Qualifying Green Building Program Projects,
and may provide grant funding to help defray the costs associated with the
early adoption of the Green Building Program. Property tax incentives shall
be incorporated into a developers agreement pursuant to the requirements of
the Green Building Program.



         b.   Green Building Fund.  There is established a fund
designated as the Green Building Program Fund, herein referred to as "Fund,"
separate from the General Fund of the City of Boynton Beach. All additional
monies obtained in connection with the Green Building Fee (subparagraph "c"
below) shall be deposited into the Fund without regard to fiscal year
limitations and used solely to pay the cost of operating and maintaining the
Fund for the purposes contained in this subsection. All funds, interest and
other amounts deposited into the Fund shall not be transferred or revert to
the General Fund of the city at the end of any fiscal year or at any other
time, but shall continually be available for the uses and purposes set forth
in this section. The Fund shall be used as follows:



            (1)   Staff salaries and operating costs to
provide technical assistance, plan review, and inspections and monitoring of
green buildings achieving certification through the Green Building Program;



            (2)   Education, training and outreach to the
public and private sectors on green building practices; and



            (3)   Incentive funding for public and private
buildings as provided herein, including establishing a Energy
Efficiency/Water Conservation Revolving Loan fund;



            (4)   Incentive funding for energy efficiency and
water conservation efforts in city owned facilities pursuant to the city's
GHGE reduction goal adopted in the Climate Action Plan.



         c.   Green Building Fee. A Green Building Fee, herein
referred to as "Fee" is established to fund the implementation of this
program and the Fund. Current fee schedules shall be maintained and available
to the public in the Development Department. Fees shall be paid at the time
each type of building construction permit is issued, according to the fee
schedule approved by the City Commission. The Green Building Fee associated
with the Green Building Program is subject to amendment by resolution of the
City Commission.



         d.   Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA) Tax Increment
Financing Funding. CRA Board approved tax increment finance funding incentive
for projects within the CRA district participating in the program
incorporated as part of the city's developer's agreement, requiring proof of
certification and annual reporting as outlined in the program.



      3.   Signage.  The city shall allow the following bonuses to
the currently allowed signage regulations:



         a.   One (1) additional temporary construction sign may
be installed that notes that "This project is a City of Boynton Beach Green
Building Project by [Company Name]." This additional temporary construction
sign must meet the standard dimensional requirements as set forth in Chapter
4, Article IV, Section 4.B.3.



         b.   The notation "City of Boynton Beach Green Building
Project" may be added on the project entry monument signage. The additional
sign area to include the city approved notation letters and logo shall be a
maximum of four (4) inches high by forty-two (42) inches wide. Additional
sign area greater than that allowed by the land development regulations shall
be permitted for this notation only.



      4.   Marketing.  For any program participant, the city shall
provide the following marketing incentives, including but not limited to:



         a.   The inclusion of program participants on a webpage
dedicated to the program;



         b.   The creation of promotional documents such as a
program logo for a participant's advertisements or brochures; and



         c.   Press releases.



      5.   Green Building Award.  For the purpose of publicly
recognizing outstanding commitment to the green building, the program shall
provide for an award called the "City of Boynton Beach Green Building Award"
to be awarded annually by the city to one (1) program participant obtaining
the most elective points and greatest annual energy reduction.



   E.   Certification Verification. The applicant shall provide
documentation to the city verifying the authenticity of a project's green
certification as outlined in the Green Building Program. The program shall be
subject to certification by a qualified third party.



   F.   Education and Training. The city, in conjunction with the ICC,
FGBC, USGBC, GBI or other state or nationally recognized high-performance
green building rating system, may conduct training workshops for the purpose
of educating potential or current program participants about the program.



      1.   The city will attempt to make available a meeting space
at a government facility for green building programs offered by organizations
that are of a general nature (not product specific). Organizations shall
contact the facility's staff to make arrangements.



      2.   Development Department staff shall be encouraged to
attend at least eight (8) hours of green building training annually.



(Ord. 11-014, passed 4-27-11; Am. Ord. 15-020, passed 8-18-15)



Sec. 6.   Development Orders.



   The City Clerk or designee will record specific action by the Advisory
Board and City Commission with respect to each staff comment or
recommendation.  The City Clerk shall also sign and witness the completed
record of the proceedings which then becomes the official and final
development order.



   For the purpose of the issuance of development orders and permits, the
City of Boynton Beach has adopted level of service standards for public
facilities and services which include roads, sanitary sewer, solid waste,
drainage, potable water, and parks and recreation.



   Compliance with levels of service as stated in the Boynton Beach
Comprehensive Plan is required.  See Chapter 1, Article VI for additional
regulations regarding the concurrency management system.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-014, passed 4-27-11)



Sec. 7.   Revocation of a Development Approval.



   Unless described otherwise in this article, the following procedures
shall outline the revocation of a development approval:



   A.   Initiation.  The Director of Planning and Zoning shall
investigate alleged violations of imposed condition or conditions.  The
Director of Planning and Zoning shall determine whether or not to terminate
or suspend a development approval.  If the Director of Planning and Zoning
determines that a termination, or suspension, of a development approval is
appropriate, a recommendation, including the reason or reasons for their
determination, shall be made to the City Commission who shall conduct a
public hearing on the matter.



   B.   Grounds for Revocation.  The following are grounds for
revocation of a development approval:



      1.   Misleading Information.  The intentional provision of
materially misleading information by the applicant (the provision of
information is considered "intentional" where the applicant was aware of the
inaccuracies or could have discovered the inaccuracies with reasonable
diligence); and



      2.   Noncompliance.  The failure to correct any violation of
any condition of a development approval within the time specified by the city
and/or after notification from the city of violations of the development
approval.



   C.   Notice and Public Hearing.  Notice of the hearing shall be
provided to the development approval holder at least ten (10) working days
prior to the hearing.  Such notice shall be in writing and delivered by
personal service or certified mail and shall advise of the Director of
Planning and Zoning's recommendation as well as the date and location of the
hearing before the agency.



   D.   Decision and Notice.  The agency shall prepare a development
order approving, approving with conditions, or denying the Director of
Planning and Zoning's recommendation.  The development order shall contain
findings that address the basis for condition or conditions that have been
violated and the harm such violation has caused.  In the case of suspension
of the use, the development order shall state the length of time such
violation can be cured.  In the case of a termination, the development order
shall state the reason such violation cannot be cured.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-014, passed 4-27-11)



ARTICLE II.  PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION SERVICES



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this article is to set
forth uniform procedures, well-defined application processes, and information
to guide the processing of complete land development applications that are
administered by the Planning and Zoning Division.  Each application is
reviewed to ensure that:



      1.   Compliance.  Development of individual sites within the
city is consistent with all land development regulations and all other
applicable standards and requirements set forth by the city or other public
entities having jurisdictional responsibility, prior to the issuance of a
development permit;



      2.   Public Purpose.  Development and supportive facilities
and services further the public health, safety, appearance, and general
welfare; and



      3.   Compatibility.  Development is compatible and
coordinated with existing and anticipated development in the immediate area
surrounding the site.



   B.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee shall be responsible for the overall coordination and administration
of land development applications within this article.



   C.   Preapplication Conference.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of a
preapplication conference is for staff and the applicant to collaborate and
discuss the city's overall community goals, objectives, policies, codes, and
regulations.  It also allows the applicant to receive information or a
description of the relevant review procedures anticipated from each staff
discipline, Advisory Board, and City Commission.  Opinions expressed at the
conference are not binding for formal review purposes.



      2.   Applicability.  A preapplication conference is required
for the following types of applications:



         a.   Standard Applications.



            (1)   Annexation.



            (2)   Comprehensive Plan future land use map
(FLUM) amendment.



            (3)   Conditional use.



            (4)   Rezoning.



            (5)   Sign Program.



            (6)   Site Plan, including modifications.



            (7)   Vacation and abandonment.



         b.   Planned Industrial Development Applications.



            (1)   Master Site Plan, including modifications.



            (2)   Technical Site Plan, including modifications.



            (3)   Use approval.



         c.   Relief Applications.



            (1)   Community Design Appeal.



            (2)   Height exception.



            (3)   Variance to Land Development Regulations.



         d.   Other Applications.



            (1)   Mobile vending unit (MVU).



            (2)   Wireless communication facilities (WCF).



   D.   Submittal Requirements.  Unless otherwise contained herein,
all application forms described in this article shall be approved by
resolution and maintained by the Planning and Zoning Division.  In order for
an application to be considered, the complete application must be submitted
to the Planning and Zoning Division.  When submitted for review, it shall be
accompanied by all documentation required by the respective application
checklist.



   E.   Completeness.  If the application is not complete, it shall
not be subject to further review until all identified deficiencies have been
remedied.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or designee may rule that
certain items are not required for the review to commence.  A determination
of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the
substantive requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, the Land Development
Regulations, or any other applicable codes. 



   F.   Fees.  Fees shall be paid at the time each type of land
development application is submitted, according to the fee schedule approved
by the City Commission.



   G.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the applications and
processes contained herein.



   H.   Quasi-Judicial Hearings.  See City Code of Ordinances Part II,
Chapter 2, Article I, Section 2-20 for the types of land development
applications regulated under this article that require quasi-judicial
hearings.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Standard Applications.



   A.   Annexation.



      1.   General.



         a.   Voluntary Annexations.  A privately-initiated
application for the voluntary annexation of real property into the corporate
limits of the city shall be made by petition of all owners of said real
property and filed in accordance with the provisions of F.S. Chapter 171.



         b.   Other Annexation Methods.  These city-initiated
methods include annexation by referendum, annexation of enclaves through
interlocal agreements, and annexation through interlocal service boundary
agreements, processed in accordance with F.S. Chapter 171. 



         c.   Future Land Use Map (FLUM) and Zoning of Property
to be Annexed.  Application for the city FLUM classification and zoning
district must accompany all privately-initiated applications for
annexation.  FLUM reclassification and rezoning for developed properties to
be annexed through any of the city-initiated methods listed in subparagraph
b. above, may be delayed if no application for building or site improvements
is submitted prior to the adoption of the annexation ordinance; however, such
reclassification and rezoning must be initiated within six (6) months of the
annexation.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.



         a.   Compliance with Statutory Requirements.  Areas
proposed for annexation must comply with the requirements in F.S. Chapter 171.



         b.   Consistency with Comprehensive Plan.  An
application for annexation shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.



      4.   Approval Process.  An application for annexation
requires two (2) advertised public hearings and shall be processed in
accordance with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3 and comply with F.S. Chapter
171.



   B.   Comprehensive Plan Amendments.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to provide a means for amending the city's Comprehensive Plan
in accordance with F.S. Chapter 163.



         b.   Authority.  The City Commission has the authority
to amend the Comprehensive Plan upon compliance with the provisions of F.S.
Chapter 163 and of this subsection.  The City Commission has designated
itself as the Local Planning Agency (LPA) for the city.



         c.   Types of Amendments.  Amendments to the
Comprehensive Plan include text amendments and site-specific amendments to
the future land use map (FLUM).



      2.   Text Amendment.  A text amendment to the Comprehensive
Plan shall only be initiated by the city.



      3.   Future Land Use Map (FLUM) Amendment.



         a.   General.



            (1)   The purpose of this subsection is to provide
a means for changing the boundaries and/or classifications of the FLUM
through site-specific amendments to the Comprehensive Plan. 



            (2)   A request for FLUM amendment shall be
considered either large scale or small scale, based on F.S. Chapter 163.



            (3)   Applications for large scale FLUM amendments
shall not be submitted more than two (2) times during any calendar year,
except for those applications exempted by F.S. Chapter 163.



            (4)   All privately initiated FLUM amendments
shall be accompanied by an application to rezone to a zoning district
consistent with the requested FLUM classification.  See Section 2.D. below
for the process by which lands are rezoned to a different zoning district.



         b.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above
for the submittal requirements of this application.



         c.   Review Criteria.  All privately initiated FLUM
amendments shall be reviewed concurrently with the accompanying zoning
request.  Except for city-initiated FLUM amendments, which shall at a
minimum meet criterion (2) for “Consistency,” approval of a FLUM
amendment/zoning request shall be based on one (1) or more of the following
factors:



            (1)   Demonstration of Need.  A demonstration of
need may be based upon changing conditions that represent a demand for the
proposed land use classification and zoning district.  Appropriate data and
analysis that adequately substantiates the need for the proposed land use
amendment and rezoning must be provided within the application.



            (2)   Consistency.  Whether the proposed FLUM
amendment and rezoning would be consistent with the purpose and intent of,
and promote, the applicable Comprehensive Plan policies, redevelopment plans,
and Land Development Regulations.  Approvals of requests to rezone to a
planned zoning district may include limitations or requirements imposed on
the master plan in order to maintain such consistency.



            (3)   Land Use Pattern.  Whether the proposed
FLUM amendment and rezoning would be contrary to the established land use
pattern, or would create an isolated zoning district or an isolated land use
classification unrelated to adjacent and nearby classifications, or would
constitute a grant of special privilege to an individual property owner as
contrasted with the protection of the public welfare.  This factor is not
intended to exclude FLUM reclassifications and rezonings that would result in
more desirable and sustainable growth for the community.



            (4)   Sustainability.  Whether the proposed FLUM
amendment and rezoning would support the integration of a mix of land uses
consistent with the smart growth or sustainability initiatives, with an
emphasis on 1) complementary land uses; 2) access to alternative modes of
transportation; and 3) interconnectivity within the project and between
adjacent properties.



            (5)   Availability of Public
Services/Infrastructure.  All requests for FLUM amendments shall be reviewed
for long-term capacity availability at the maximum intensity permitted under
the requested land use classification.  An accompanying request to rezone to
a planned zoning district is subject to concurrency review pursuant to
Chapter 1, Article VI, Concurrency.



            (6)   Compatibility.  The application shall
consider the following factors to determine compatibility:



               (a)   Whether the proposed FLUM amendment
and rezoning would be compatible with the current and future use of adjacent
and nearby properties, or would negatively affect the property values of
adjacent and nearby properties.



               (b)   Whether the proposed FLUM amendment
and rezoning is of a scale which is reasonably related to the needs of the
neighborhood and the city as a whole.



            (7)   Alternative Sites.  Whether there are
adequate sites elsewhere in the city for the proposed use in zoning districts
where such use is already allowed.



         d.   Approval Process.  An application for FLUM
amendment shall be processed in accordance with F.S. Chapter 163.



         e.   Denial.  No application for the same FLUM
amendment shall be submitted within one (1) year from the date of denial by
the City Commission.



   C.   Conditional Use, Including Time Extension.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of
this subsection is to set forth uniformed procedures, well-defined
application processes, and information to guide the review of conditional use
submittals.  In addition to that described in this section, it is also the
intent to provide for separate submittal requirements and expedited review
process for those conditional uses that qualify as a sustainable development
and meets the intent of the city's green building initiatives.



         b.   Applicability.  The procedures, requirements, and
standards of this section shall apply to any use that is identified with a
"C" in the use matrix (Table 3-28) of Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



         c.   Terms and Definitions.  As defined by Chapter 1,
Article II, a use that because of special requirements or characteristics may
be allowed in a particular zoning district, but only with conditions as
necessary to make the use compatible with other uses permitted in the same
zone or vicinity.



         d.   Rules.  For the purpose of this subsection, a
"site plan" shall be construed to include either a new site plan or a major
site plan modification. 



         e.   Use Matrix.  Conditional uses are identified with
a "C" in the use matrix (Table 3-28).  See Chapter 3, Article IV, Section
3.C. for the legend of the use matrix.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  The submittal requirements and
process for this type of application will vary depending on whether the
request is for use approval only or use approval in connection with
improvements requiring site plan review (e.g. construction of new building,
modifications to existing building or site, etc.).  See subsection 1.D.
above for the submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  See Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 4
for the review standards applicable to the  evaluation of conditional uses,
which will vary depending on whether the request is for use approval only or
use approval in connection with improvements requiring site plan review (e.g.
construction of new building, modifications to existing building or site,
etc.).  In instances when site plan review is required, the review criteria
of Section 2.F.3. below shall also apply.



      4.   Approval Process.  The Planning and Development Board
and City Commission shall consider only such conditional uses as are
authorized under the terms of the zoning regulations of Chapter 3.  An
application for conditional use approval requires review by the City
Commission and shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article I,
Section 3.  The Commission, upon recommendation of the Board, may grant
conditional uses absolutely or conditioned upon the faithful adherence to the
review criteria contained in Section 2.C.3. above.  The Commission may also
deny requests for conditional uses when not in harmony with the intent and
purpose of this section.



      5.   Expiration.  The applicant shall secure a business tax
receipt within the time frame established by the City Commission.  The
conditional use shall expire if the applicant is unable to secure a business
tax receipt within that timeframe; however, if the conditional use was
approved in connection with a site plan, then the expiration of the
conditional use shall be the same as the expiration of the corresponding site
plan in accordance with Section 2.F.5. below.



      6.   Time Extension.  At its discretion, the City Commission
may extend the approval of a conditional use that is in connection with site
plan approval, if such request for extension is filed prior to the date of
expiration of the original approval period.  In this instance, the request
for extension shall be processed in accordance with Section 2.F.6. below.



   D.   Rezoning, Including Master Plan.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to provide a means for changing the zoning district boundaries
or designations through site-specific amendments to the official zoning
map.  It is not intended to relieve particular hardships or to confer
special privileges or rights to any person, but only to make necessary
adjustments in response to or based upon changed conditions.



         b.   Authority.  The City Commission has the authority
to amend the official zoning map upon compliance with the provisions of this
subsection.



         c.   Initiation.  Amendments to the official zoning map
may be proposed by the owner (or agent) of the affected land or
city-initiated.



         d.   Consistency with Future Land Use Map (FLUM) of
Comprehensive Plan.  No application to rezone lands may be submitted that
would result in an inconsistency with the FLUM classification.  See Section
2.B.3. above for the process by which to amend the FLUM classification.



         e.   Rezoning to Planned Zoning Districts.  A master
plan, along with the concurrent filing and review of a site plan application,
shall be required when a privately-initiated application is made to rezone
lands to a planned zoning district.  The master plan shall be an integral
component of the rezoning application; however, city-initiated rezoning can
proceed in advance of the master plan/site plan submittal. The master plan
shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 2.D.6. below.  See Section 2.F.
below for additional regulations pertaining to the site plan application.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  Except for city-initiated rezonings,
which shall at a minimum meet criterion (2) for “Consistency” approval of
an amendment to the official zoning map processed with or without the FLUM
amendment shall be reviewed based on one (1) or more of the following factors:



         a.   Demonstration of Need. A demonstration of need for
the proposed zoning district and the land use classification. Appropriate
data must be provided within the application.



         b.   Consistency. Whether the proposed FLUM amendment
and rezoning would be consistent with the purpose and intent of, and promote,
the applicable Comprehensive Plan policies, Redevelopment Plans, and Land
Development Regulations. Approvals of a request to rezone to a planned zoning
district may include limitations or requirements imposed on the master plan
in order to maintain such consistency.



         c.   Land Use Pattern. Whether the proposed
rezoning/FLUM amendment would be contrary to the established land use
pattern, or would create an isolated zoning district or land use
classification unrelated to adjacent and nearby classifications, or would
constitute a grant of special privilege to an individual property owner as
contrasted with the protection of the public welfare. This factor is not
intended to exclude rezonings and FLUM amendments that would result in more
desirable and sustainable growth for the community.



         d.   Sustainability.  Whether the proposed
rezoning/FLUM amendment would support the integration of a mix of land uses
consistent with smart growth or sustainability initiatives, with an emphasis
on 1) complementary land uses; 2) access to alternative modes of
transportation; and 3) interconnectivity within the project and between
adjacent properties.



         e.   Availability of Public Services/Infrastructure.
Requests for rezoning to planned zoning districts and FLUM amendments shall
be subject to review pursuant to Chapter 1, Article VI Concurrency.



         f.   Compatibility.  The application shall consider the
following compatibility factors:



            (1)   Whether the proposed rezoning and FLUM
amendment, if submitted concurrently, would be compatible with the current
and future use of adjacent and nearby properties, or would negatively affect
the property values of adjacent and nearby properties.



            (2)   Whether the proposed rezoning and FLUM
amendment, if submitted concurrently, is of a scale which is reasonably
related to the needs of the neighborhood and the city as a whole.



         g.   Direct Economic Development Benefits. For
rezoning/FLUM amendments involving rezoning to a planned zoning district, the
review shall consider the economic benefits of the proposed amendment,
specifically, whether the proposal would:



            (1)   Further implementation of the Economic
Development (ED) Program;



            (2)   Contribute to the enhancement and
diversification of the city's tax base;



            (3)   Respond to the current market demand or
community needs or provide services or retail choices not locally available;



            (4)   Create new employment opportunities for the
residents, with pay at or above the county average hourly wage;



            (5)   Represent innovative methods/technologies,
especially those promoting sustainability;



            (6)   Be complementary to existing uses, thus
fostering synergy effects; and



            (7)   Alleviate blight/economic obsolescence of
the subject area.



         h.   Economic Development Impact Determination for
Conventional Zoning Districts. For rezoning/FLUM amendments involving
rezoning to a conventional zoning district, the review shall consider whether
the proposal would further Economic Development Program, but also determine
whether the proposal would:



            (1)   Represent a potential decrease in the
possible intensity of development, given the uses permitted in the proposed
land use category and/or zoning district; and



            (2)   Represent a potential decrease in the number
of uses with high probable economic development benefits.



         i.   Commercial and Industrial Land Supply. The review
shall consider whether the proposed rezoning/FLUM  amendment would reduce
the amount of land available for commercial/industrial development. If such
determination is made, the approval can be recommended under the following
conditions:



            (1)   The size, shape, and/or location of the
property makes it unsuitable for commercial/industrial development; or



            (2)   The proposed rezoning/FLUM amendment
provides substantiated evidence of satisfying at least four (4) of the Direct
Economic Development Benefits listed in subparagraph "g" above; and



            (3)   The proposed rezoning/FLUM amendment would
result in comparable or higher employment numbers, building size and
valuation than the potential of existing land use designation and/or zoning.



         j.   Alternative Sites. Whether there are sites
available elsewhere in the city in zoning districts which already allow the
desired use.



         k.   Master Plan and Site Plan Compliance with Land
Development Regulations.  When master plan and site plan review are required
pursuant to Section 2.D.1.e. above, both shall comply with the requirements
of the respective zoning district regulations of Chapter 3, Article III and
the site development standards of Chapter 4.



      4.   Approval Process.  An application for rezoning approval
requires review by the City Commission and shall be processed in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.



      5.   Denial.  Within one (1) year from the date of denial by
the City Commission or withdrawal of the application by the applicant, no
application for same or similar zoning may be submitted, with the exception
of applications which are initiated by the city.



      6.   Master Plan.



         a.   General.  The purpose of this subsection is to set
forth well-defined application processes, review criteria, and uniform
procedures for the rezoning of lands to planned districts (as defined by
Chapter 1, Article II).



         b.   Submittal Requirements.  The applicant is required
to complete the rezoning application (see Section 1.D. above), including that
which pertains to master plan review, in addition to the site plan
application, and provide all documentation required by the respective
application checklist.



   When a project is to be completed in two (2) or more phases, more than
one (1) phase may be included in a single site plan, or individual site plans
may be submitted for each phase and filed concurrently with the submittal of
the master plan.  The Director of Planning and Zoning may waive the
requirement that all site plans be submitted simultaneously, provided that
the site plan for the first phase is representative of the subsequent
phase(s) and adequate to show compliance with all applicable development
standards and regulations.



         c.   Review Criteria.  The master plan shall comply
with the requirements of the respective zoning district regulations of
Chapter 3, Article III and site development standards described in Chapter
4.  In addition, the site plan shall be consistent with the master plan. 
See Section 2.F.3. below for the review criteria of a site plan.



         d.   Approval Process.  A privately-initiated request
to rezone (and its accompanying master plan) shall be reviewed concurrently
with the processing of the site plan application.  Both applications require
review by the City Commission and shall be processed in accordance with
Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.



         e.   Expiration.  A master plan, which is an integral
component of a rezoning application to a planned zoning district pursuant to
except as provided in Section 2.D.1.e. above, shall remain valid unless the
corresponding site plan expires.  In these instances, the official zoning
map retains the planned zoning district designation, but the property does
not possess a valid development order or development permit, and no permits
may be granted by the city on the subject property.  The submittal and
approval of a new rezoning application, which includes a new or modified
master plan, and concurrent site plan application, except as provided in
Section 2.D.1.e. above, shall be required in order to commence development,
redevelopment, or other site improvements.



         f.   Modification to Master Plan.  Changes to master
plans are either "minor" or "major" based on criteria within this section. 
A pre-application conference with staff is a prerequisite to filing an
application for modification.  The site plan must be consistent with the
master plan; therefore, any request to modify a master plan may require the
submittal of a concurrent request for site plan modification in accordance
with Section 2.F.7. below.  Staff shall consider the following factors in
determining whether the proposed master plan modification is considered
"major":



            (1)   The modification increases the buildable
square footage (intensity) or number of dwelling units (density) by more than
five percent (5%);



            (2)   The modification either adds or eliminates a
point of ingress and egress;



            (3)   The modification eliminates, reduces, or
changes the location of the required or provided open spaces and pedestrian
plazas such that it diminishes their value, performance, efficiency,
effectiveness, practicality, or does not otherwise meet the intent of these
Regulations;



            (4)   The modification causes the development to
be below the development standard for the zoning district in which it is
located or any other applicable standard in the Land Development Regulations;



            (5)   The modification alters the project so that
the modified master plan does not resemble the approved master plan;



            (6)   The modification affects or does not comply
with a condition of approval of the preceding development order; and



            (7)   The modification is proposed to a city-owned
or operated facility and does not adversely impact adjacent properties and/or
public lands.



         g.   Major Master Plan Modification.



            (1)   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D.
above for the submittal requirements of this application.



            (2)   Review Criteria.  The proposed master plan
shall comply with the requirements of the respective zoning district of
Chapter 3, Article III, and the site development standards described in
Chapter 4.



            (3)   Approval Process.  An application for major
master plan modification requires review by the City Commission and shall be
processed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.



            (4)   Expiration.  There is no expiration of a
major master plan modification.



            (5)   Miscellaneous.  At the time the City
Commission approves a request for a major master plan modification, any
previously approved master plan, including any conditions of approval, shall
be null and void.  All future development shall be consistent with the
master plan, as modified and approved by the City Commission, including all
corresponding conditions of approval.



         h.   Minor Master Plan Modification.



            (1)   Submittal Requirements.  The applicant
shall submit a letter explaining the modification(s) along with the master
plan (in the number of copies specified by the Division).  The applicant
shall also provide consent from the property owner to file an application for
the minor master plan modification.



            (2)   Review Criteria.  The proposed master plan
shall comply with the following: 1) all applicable conditions of approval of
the preceding master plan; 2) requirements of the respective zoning district
of Chapter 3, Article III; and 3) the site development standards described in
Chapter 4.



            (3)   Approval Process.  The application shall be
reviewed by staff and action will be taken by the appropriate administrative
official.  Upon approval of a minor master plan modification, all future
development shall be consistent with the master plan, as modified, including
all previously approved conditions of approval associated with the master
plan.



   E.   Sign Program.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of
this subsection is to create a comprehensive and efficient process by which
to review project signage within certain types of developments.



         b.   Applicability.  Pursuant to Chapter 4, Article IV,
Section 6, a sign program shall be required for all permanent types of signs
proposed within non-residential and mixed use developments containing
multiple tenants.  For the purposes of this subsection, a "site plan" shall
be construed to include either a new site plan or a major site plan
modification. 



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  The sign program shall comply with the
sustainable and green checklist, and the requirements of the site development
standards described in Chapter 4.



      4.   Approval Process.  The sign program shall be approved in
accordance with site plan review (Section 2.F. below) or its equivalent.



   F.   Site Plan, Including Time Extension and Modifications.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to set forth uniform procedures, well-defined application
processes, and information to guide the review of site plan submittals.  It
is also the intent to provide for separate submittal requirements and
expedited review processes for those developments that qualify as a
sustainable development (as defined by Chapter 1, Article II, Definitions)
and meets the intent of the city's green building initiatives.



         b.   Applicability.  No building permits shall be
issued for projects requiring site plan approval until after the plan has
been approved by the city.  The following work shall be required to undergo
site plan review as required by this section:



            (1)   All new developments;



            (2)   All modifications to existing development
that expand floor area, require increased parking, intensify the use of a
structure, or change the occupancy of a building;



            (3)   Exterior remodeling, alterations,
modifications; or



            (4)   Community gardens containing storage and/or
agricultural structures that are greater than one hundred (100) square feet
as provided for in the Supplemental Regulations (Chapter 3, Article V,
Section 3).



         c.   Exemptions.  The following work shall not be
required to undergo site plan review as required by this chapter:



            (1)   The construction of a single-family home or
a duplex;



            (2)   Interior renovations, except projects as
specified in Section 2.F.1.b.(2) above;



            (3)   Installation of fire sprinklers;



            (4)   Replacement of existing electrical
components;



            (5)   Installation of fire alarms; or



            (6)   Voluntary life safety responsive projects
when endorsed by the Fire Marshal, Director of Development or Director of
Planning and Zoning.



         d.   Waiver of Site Plan Review.  Notwithstanding
compliance with the concurrency regulations of Chapter 1, Article VI, the
Director of Planning and Zoning or designee may waive the requirement for
site plan review based upon all of the following factors: 



            (1)   The remodeling, alteration, or redevelopment
does not change the preexisting appearance or configuration of the buildings
or site;



            (2)   The remodeling, alteration, or redevelopment
does not reduce emergency vehicle access to the buildings or site;



            (3)   The change of use would not represent an
increase in the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces;



            (4)   Compliance with the city's development
regulations is maintained.  The work shall be subject to site plan review in
those instances when an applicant disputes a determination from the Director
of Planning and Zoning regarding compliance; and



            (5)   Any work, improvement, or modification to a
developed site or building that meets the intent of the city's green building
initiatives.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  The site plan shall comply with the
following: 1) requirements of the respective zoning district regulations of
Chapter 3, Article III; 2) site development standards described in Chapter 4;
and 3) the best development practices in the sustainable and green
checklist.  See Section 2.D.6.c. above for additional regulations regarding
the requirement that the site plan be consistent with the master plan when
rezoning lands to a planned zoning district.



      4.   Approval Process.  An application for site plan approval
requires review by the City Commission and shall be processed in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.



      5.   Expiration.



         a.   General.  Upon approval of a site plan by the City
Commission, the applicant shall have eighteen (18) months to secure a
building permit from the Development Department.



         b.   Sustainable Development.  If approved as a
sustainable development, the applicant for a sustainable project shall be
required to secure a building permit in the time period in accordance with
Table 2-2:



            (1)   Table 2-2.



 

Property Size
(in square feet)
 
Number of
Dwelling Units
(Residential Only)
 
Time Period


< 40,000 s.f.
 
< 80 du
 
3 years


> 40,000 s.f.
 
> 80 du
 
5 years



 



      In addition, the applicant shall be required to submit an annual
progress report to the Director of Planning and Zoning indicating the status
of the project and any updates demonstrating its completion.  The city
reserves the right to revoke the development order of any sustainable
development after the initial eighteen (18) months if it is subsequently
determined that it is not a sustainable development.  In these instances,
the applicant may request a site plan time extension in accordance with
Section 2.F.6. below.



         c.   Null and Void.  All previous approvals shall be
null and void if the applicant is unable to secure a building permit within
the above timeframes.  For the purposes of this section, minor permits
issued by the Departments of Development or Public Works (e.g. clearing and
grubbing; walls and fences; docks, land development; utilities; etc.) shall
not constitute the type of permit necessary to extend the life of a
development order for site plan review purposes.



      6.   Time Extension.



         a.   General.  An applicant may request to extend the
approval of a site plan for an additional time period, not to exceed eighteen
(18) months, provided that such request for extension is filed prior to the
date of the expiration of the original eighteen (18)-month period.  For the
purposes of the subsection, a "site plan" shall be construed to include
either a new site plan or a major site plan modification.  There is no limit
to the number of extensions that may be requested.



         b.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above
for the submittal requirements of this application.



         c.   Review Criteria.  The site plan time extension
shall comply with the requirements of the respective zoning district
regulations of Chapter 3, Article III and site development standards
described in Chapter 4.  In addition, the following information shall be
used to justify an application for site plan time extension:



            (1)   Are there any recently adopted amendments to
the Comprehensive Plan, redevelopment plans, or Land Development Regulations
that would cause the approved site plan in its current configuration to
become noncompliant?



            (2)   In determining good faith, some factors to
be considered are the following:  1) the extent to which a land development
permit (if applicable) has been applied for by the applicant and/or approved
by the Engineering Division; 2) when construction approved by such land
development permit has occurred (construction which is commenced immediately
preceding expiration generally indicating a lack of good faith); 3) the
extent to which there has been a bona fide continuous effort to develop but
because of circumstances beyond the control of the applicant, it was not
possible to meet the time limitation; and 4) the applicant has applied for or
secured any building permits, or other types of permits from external
agencies, including anticipated dates for the issuance of the aforementioned
permits?



            (3)   Has the applicant paid any impact fees,
including utilities or art in public places?



            (4)   Does the site plan comply with the
concurrency requirements and of Palm Beach County and the city's Land
Development Regulations?



            (5)   Other pertinent information can the
applicant provide that would justify the request for site plan time extension?



         d.   Approval Process.  An application for site plan
time extension requires review by the City Commission and shall be processed
in accordance with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.



         e.   Expiration.  Upon approval of site plan time
extension by the City Commission, the applicant shall have the time approved
by the City Commission to secure a building permit from the Development
Department.  All previous approvals shall become null and void if the
applicant is unable to secure a building permit within the above timeframe.



         f.   Extension.  The applicant may file a subsequent
request for site plan time extension beyond that of the original extension;
however, each subsequent request for site plan time extension shall be valid
for a time period not to exceed one (1) year.  Each subsequent request for
site plan time extension shall be filed prior to the expiration date of the
preceding site plan time extension period.



         g.   Miscellaneous.  The original conditions of
approval of the site plan are still applicable and must be addressed, unless
otherwise approved by the City Commission.  In granting such extensions the
City Commission may require modification to or impose additional conditions
of approval to the site plan. 



      7.   Modification to Site Plan.



         a.   General.  An applicant may request to modify an
approved site plan.  Changes to site plans are either "minor" or "major"
based on criteria within this section.  The applicant shall schedule a
pre-application conference with staff and bring the proposed site plan and
any other affected plan or exhibit to the meeting.  Staff shall consider the
following factors in determining whether the proposed site plan modification
is considered "major":



            (1)   The modification increases the buildable
square footage of the development by more than five percent (5%); the
threshold increases to ten percent (10%) if considered a sustainable
development and meets the intent of the city's green building initiatives.



            (2)   The modification reduces the provided number
of parking spaces below the required number of parking spaces.



            (3)   The modification causes the development to
be below the development standard for the zoning district in which it is
located or any other applicable standard in the Land Development Regulations.



            (4)   The modification has an adverse effect on
adjacent or nearby property or reduces required physical buffers, such as
fences, trees, or hedges.



            (5)   The modification adversely affects the
elevation design of the structure or reduces the overall design of the
structure below the standards stated in the community design plan.



            (6)   The modified development meets the
concurrency requirements of the Boynton Beach Comprehensive Plan.



            (7)   The modification alters the project so that
the modified site plan does not resemble the approved site plan.



            (8)   The modification affects or does not comply
with a condition of approval of the development order.



            (9)   The modification is proposed to a city-owned
or operated facility and causes a de minimus impact to abutting and adjacent
properties and/or public lands.



         b.   Major Modification.



            (1)   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D.
above for the submittal requirements of this application.



            (2)   Review Criteria.  The proposed major site
plan modification shall comply with the requirements of the respective zoning
district regulations of Chapter 3, Article III and site development standards
described in Chapter 4.



            (3)   Approval Process.  An application for major
site plan modification requires review by the City Commission and shall be
processed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.



            (4)   Expiration.  Upon approval of a major site
plan modification by the City Commission, the applicant shall have eighteen
(18) months to secure a building permit from the Development Department. 
All previous approvals shall be null and void if applicant is unable to
secure a building permit within the above timeframe.



         For the purposes of this section, minor permits issued by
the Departments of Development or Public Works (e.g. clearing and grubbing;
walls and fences; docks, land development; utilities; etc.) shall not
constitute the type of permit necessary to extend the life of a development
order for a major site plan modification.



            (5)   Extension.  An applicant may request to
extend the approval of a major site plan modification for a time period not
to exceed eighteen (18) months, provided that such request for extension is
filed prior to the date of the expiration of the original eighteen (18)-month
period.  The request shall be processed in accordance with Section 2.F.6.
above.



            (6)   Miscellaneous.  At the time the City
Commission approves a request for a major site plan modification, any
previously approved site plan, including any conditions for approval, shall
be null and void.  All future development shall be consistent with the
master site plan, as modified and approved by the City Commission, including
all corresponding conditions of approval.



         c.   Minor Modification.



            (1)   Submittal Requirements.  The applicant
shall submit a letter explaining the modification(s) along with the affected
plans and exhibits (in the number of copies specified by the Division).  The
applicant shall also provide consent from the property owner to file an
application for the minor site plan modification.



            (2)   Review Criteria.  The proposed minor site
plan modification shall comply with the requirements of the respective zoning
district regulations of Chapter 3, Article III and site development standards
described in Chapter 4.



            (3)   Approval Process.  The application shall be
reviewed by staff and action will be taken by the appropriate administrative
official.  Upon approval of a minor site plan modification, all future
development shall be consistent with the site plan, as modified, including
all previously approved conditions of approval associated with the site plan.



      8.   Miscellaneous.



         a.   Site plan review shall be required in conjunction
with a master plan when rezoning lands to a planned zoning district, except
as provided in Section 2.D.1.e.  See Section 2.D.6. above for additional
regulations pertaining to the rezoning process.  In such instances, the site
plan shall be consistent with the master plan.



         b.   Staff may recommend as a condition of approval of a
site plan for a development with multiple and/or components, that a Unity of
Title among the parcels and/or components be required.  However, in cases
where Unit of Title is a condition of site plan approval, this condition may
be released under the following conditions:



            (1)   If the property is not owned by a single
owner/entity the project as a whole, including its various components, is
administered by a property owner's association with fee reserves for property
maintenance of at least six (6) months.  For the purposes of this section,
the term "reserves" means:



               (a)   Unless and to the extent that these
fees are not provided by other associations, an account shall be maintained
by the property owner's association (POA), separate and apart from the POA's
general operating account, for capital expenditures and deferred
maintenance.  The reserve account shall include, but is not limited to the
amount necessary for routine maintenance of the common areas, and shall
include but is not limited to building/structure painting, landscaping
maintenance, storm water infrastructure maintenance, and pavement
resurfacing, regardless of the amount of deferred maintenance expense or
replacement cost.



               (b)   The amount to be reserved shall be
computed by means of a formula which is based upon estimated remaining useful
life and estimated replacement cost or deferred maintenance expense of each
reserve item.  The POA shall adjust replacement reserve assessments annually
to take into account any changes in estimates or extension of the useful life
of a reserve item caused by deferred maintenance.  Reserve funds and any
interest accruing thereon shall remain in the reserve account or accounts,
and shall be used only for authorized reserve expenditures.



               (c)   The POA shall provide the city with a
copy of the annual POA finance report for a period of one (1) year from the
date of issue of the last certificate of occupancy (C.O.) for any
structure/building on the project.



            (2)   The owners of the various components have
executed perpetual cross access and shared parking agreements to the extent
required by the approved site plan.



            (3)   A sign program approved by the city is in
place that regulates all project signage in conformance with the city Land
Development Regulations and is applicable to all components of the project.



            (4)   The owners have agreed to the continued
calculation of overall project density based on the entire project despite
the creation of individual parcels with multiple owners.



   G.   Vacation and Abandonment.



      1.   General.  The purpose of this subsection is to establish
uniform procedures for the vacation and abandonment of city rights-of-way
(e.g. street, alley, etc.), special purpose easements, and other non- fee
interests of the city.  When approved for vacation and abandonment, the city
relinquishes its interest in the above, based in part, on the finding that
the subject right-of-way no longer serves a public purpose.  For the
purposes of this subsection, a "site plan" shall be construed to include
either a new site plan or a major site plan modification.   



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  The vacation and abandonment of a
right-of-way, special purpose easement, or other non-fee interest of the city
shall be based on a demonstration that the above interest no longer serves a
public purpose and there is no encumbrance which would prohibit the clear
transfer of ownership of such land.  The following review criteria shall be
used to justify an application:



         a.   Access.  Does the subject land provide a legal
means of access to a lot of record, subdivision, or development?  Would the
vacation and abandonment cause or result in a permanent stoppage,
interruption, or an unacceptable level of service for the subject lot or on
neighboring lots, subdivisions, or developments with respect to police, fire,
or other emergency services; or solid waste removal?



         b.   Utilities.  Does the subject land contain,
support, or allow potable water, sanitary sewer, or any other utility (e.g.
cable, telephone, electricity, gas, etc.), which would be permanently stopped
or interrupted, or cause an unacceptable level of service to the subject lot
or neighboring lots, subdivisions, or developments?



         c.   Drainage and Wastewater Management.  Does the
subject land contain, support, or allow a legal means of drainage or
wastewater management for such lot or on neighboring lots, subdivisions, or
developments, which would cause or result in a stoppage, interruption, or
unacceptable level of service?



         d.   Conservation.  Does the subject land contain,
support, or allow the means for the conservation or preservation of flora or
fauna?



      4.   Approval Process.  An application for vacation and
abandonment approval requires review by the City Commission and shall be
processed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.  All
applications shall be approved either by ordinance or record plat.  The
Planning and Zoning Division may reject the application if a similar
application has been considered at any time within one (1) year of the date
the later application is submitted.



      5.   Allocation of Lands.  The vacation and abandonment of
city streets, alleys, utility easements, special purpose easements, canals,
water bodies and other non-fee interests of the city can be accomplished in
several ways.  The city's authority to accomplish this is derived from the
Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. § 166.011) as adopted by the state legislature
via Chapter 73-129, as amended from time to time.  Therefore, the city
ordinance(s) control this issue.



   There are several ways that vacation and abandonments can de
delineated.  The area to be vacated or abandoned can be divided equally with
the adjacent property owners, or divided unequally with the adjacent property
owners.  Curvilinear areas usually are divided equally amongst the property
owners via the adjacent property line extensions.  Irregular-shape water
bodies are usually divided from property line extensions that are at right
angles to the determined centerline of the water body.  This is normally
performed by a registered land survey (licensed with the state) to determine
the centerline of an irregular shaped water body and provide a "Map of
Survey" of the determined centerline.  This is also known as a "Specific or
Special Purpose Survey."  The definition of a "Map of Survey" is a graphical
or digital depiction of the facts of size, shape, identity, geodetic
location, or legal location determined by a survey.  The term "Map of
Survey" (Survey Map) includes the terms: Sketch of Survey, Plat of Survey, or
other similar titles.  "Map of Survey" or "Survey Map" may also be referred
to as "a map" or "the map."  The common types of vacations or abandonments
are as follows:



         a.   Equal Split.  Typically, the process of vacation
or abandonment is divided equally to be "allocated" to each adjacent property
owner.  This is the most equable way of elimination of city ownership of a
right-of-way, easement of special easement.  Figure A below depicts this
concept:









 



         b.   Unequal Split.  There are unusual circumstances
that originally created a street right-of-way or a utility easement.  Most
notably, this is done by different deeds or adjoining record plats that
create the noted right-of-way or easement.  When vacating or abandoning a
segment of land created by such unusual input, the reversion of the land
should be divided along the common line that created the right-of-way or
easement.  Thus, the "allocation" to each adjacent property owner will be
unequal, based on the instruments that created the original right-of-way or
easement.  Figure B below depicts this mechanism:









 



         c.   One-way Allocation.  When right-of-ways or
easements are adjacent to a quasi-judicial entity (i.e., an interstate
highway or regional roadway) or a transportation corridor (i.e., FEC R/R),
the vacation or abandonment process tends to allocate said action to the
adjacent property owner on one (1) side of the vacation or abandonment
task.  This is normally due to no requirements to allocate any excess land
to a quasi-judicial entity or a transportation corridor that has not
previously been required.  Figure C below depicts this action:









 



         d.   Equal Split on a Curvilinear Parcel.  Generally,
the process of vacation or abandonment is divided equally to be "allocated"
to each adjacent property owner.  This is done by extension of those
adjacent property lines extended to the longitudinal centerline of the
curvilinear parcel.  It should be noted that not all "allocated" parcels
will be the same I size in that those properties located on the inside of
curvilinear portion will be slightly larger and those properties located on
the outside of the curvilinear portion.  Figure D below depicts this action:









 



         e.   Irregular Water Body or Land Parcel.  When an
irregular configuration or land mass is to be vacated or abandoned,
difference divisional characteristics are used.  As a rule, a dimensional
meander or survey line may be used to create the longitudinal "centerline" of
the parcel.  This is usually performed by a registered land survey licensed
with the state.  This is plotted on a "Map of Survey" as defined previously,
to reflect all existing property lines external to the land mass to be
vacated or abandoned.



   Where said property lines are connected to the external edge of the
land mass (or shoreline in water body cases), a connection is made to the
determined centerline of the land mass (or lake or stream) at right angles to
the determined centerline.  In general, this provides the best equitable
division of the land mass (or water body) to the adjacent property owners. 
Refer to Figure E below for this delineation:









 



         f.   Other.  There are other ways to assign vacated or
abandoned land mass components, right-of-ways or easements, but those noted
above are the most commonly used when allocating vacations or abandonments.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-010, passed 6-19-12; Am. Ord.
15-023, passed 10-6-15)



Sec. 3.   Planned Industrial Development (PID) Applications.



   A.   Master Site Plan, Including Modifications.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to set forth well-defined application processes, review
criteria, and uniform procedures for the development of lands designated as
mixed use pods within planned industrial development (PID) zoning districts.



         b.   Applicability.  Pursuant to the PID regulations of
Chapter 3, Article III, Section 6.B.8., the establishment of a mixed use pod
shall require the concurrent approval of a master site plan.  This master
site plan is the conceptual plan for the entire mixed use pod with which
individual technical site plans and buildings are to be consistent. 
Technical site plans shall be reviewed and approved only after the City
Commission approves the mixed use pod (hereinafter "master site plan").  See
Section 3.B. below for additional regulations pertaining to the technical
site plan application.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  The master site plan shall comply with
the following:  1) the requirements of the PID zoning district of Chapter 3,
Article III; 2) site development standards described in Chapter 4; and 3) the
best development practices in the sustainable and green checklist. 



      4.   Approval Process.  An application for master site plan
approval requires review by the City Commission and shall be processed in
accordance with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.  Upon approval of the
master site plan at a public hearing, the city shall announce that the
approval of a technical site plan is required prior to the issuance of any
building permits pursuant to Section 3.B. below; that the approval process
for the technical site plan requires the review and approval of the technical
site plan by city administrative staff; and that the review and approval of
the technical site plan does not require any additional public notices or
hearings.



      5.   Expiration.  The approval of a master site plan shall
remain valid indefinitely.



      6.   Modification to Master Site Plan.



         a.   General.  An applicant may request to modify an
approved master site plan.  Changes to master site plans are either "minor"
or "major" based on criteria within this section.  The applicant shall
schedule a pre-application meeting with staff and bring the proposed master
site plan and any other affected plan or exhibit to the meeting.  Staff
shall consider the following factors in determining whether the proposed
master site plan modification is considered "major":



            (1)   Changes to the previously approved minimum
or maximum square footage of non-residential uses by more than five percent
(5%); the threshold increases to ten percent (10%) if considered a
sustainable development and meets the intent of the city's green building
initiatives;



            (2)   Increases in height above that which has
been approved by the master site plan;



            (3)   Increases in the maximum number of
residential units as indicated on the master site plan;



            (4)   Elimination of principle open spaces and
principle pedestrian plazas;



            (5)   Description of changes proposed to the
approved architectural design whereby the proposed design is inconsistent
with the approved design and that such changes results in a downgraded
elevation;



            (6)   Increases in degree of approved waivers;



            (7)   All other revisions to the master site plan
include but are not limited to the following: 1) relocation of approved
square footage; 2) conversion of square footage from one (1) component to
another (e.g. commercial to office); and 3) conversion from one (1) use to
another shall be processed as a minor master site plan modification in
accordance with Section 3.A.6.c. below.



         b.   Major Master Site Plan Modification.



            (1)   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D.
above for the submittal requirements of this application.



            (2)   Review Criteria.  The proposed master site
plan shall comply with the requirements of the PID zoning district and the
site development standards described in Chapter 4.



            (3)   Approval Process.  An application for major
master site plan modification approval requires review by the City Commission
and shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.



            (4)   Expiration.  Approval of a major master
site plan modification shall remain valid indefinitely.  At the time the
City Commission approves a request for a major master site plan modification,
any previously approved master site plan, including any conditions for
approval, shall be null and void.  All future development shall be
consistent with the requirements and conditions contained in the master site
plan, as modified and approved by the City Commission.



         c.   Minor Master Site Plan Modification.



            (1)   Submittal Requirements.  The applicant
shall submit a letter explaining the requested modification(s) along with the
proposed master site plan (in the number of copies specified by the
Division).  The applicant shall also provide written consent from the
property owner to file an application for the minor master site plan
modification.



            (2)   Review Criteria.  The proposed master site
plan shall comply with the following:  1) all applicable conditions of
approval of the preceding master site plan; 2) requirements of the PID zoning
district; and 3) the site development standards described in Chapter 4.



            (3)   Approval process.  The application shall be
reviewed by staff and action will be taken by the appropriate administrative
official.  Upon approval of a minor master plan modification, all future
development shall be consistent with the master site plan, as modified,
including all previously approved conditions of approval associated with the
master site plan.



         d.   Technical Site Plan Consistency with Master Site
Plan.  Modifications to master site plans that represent changes to the
technical site plan will require the subsequent submittal of a new technical
site plan.



      7.   Miscellaneous.  Staff may recommend as a condition of
approval of a master site plan for a development with multiple and/or
components, that a unity of title among the parcels and/or components be
required.  However, in cases where unity of title is a condition of master
site plan approval, this condition may be released under the following
conditions:



         a.   If the property is not owned by a single
owner/entity the project as a whole, including its various components, is
administered by a property owner's association with fee reserves for property
maintenance of at least six (6) months.  For the purposes of this section,
the term "reserves" means:



            (1)   Unless and to the extent that these fees are
not provided by other associations, an account shall be maintained by the
property owner's association (POA), separate and apart from the POA's general
operating account, for capital expenditures and deferred maintenance.  The
reserve account shall include, but is not limited to the amount necessary for
routine maintenance of the common areas, and shall include but is not limited
to building/structure painting, landscaping maintenance, storm water
infrastructure maintenance, and pavement resurfacing, regardless of the
amount of deferred maintenance expense or replacement cost.



            (2)   The amount to be reserved shall be computed
by means of a formula which is based upon estimated remaining useful life and
estimated replacement cost or deferred maintenance expense of each reserve
item.  The POA shall adjust replacement reserve assessments annually to take
into account any changes in estimates or extension of the useful life of a
reserve item caused by deferred maintenance.  Reserve funds and any interest
accruing thereon shall remain in the reserve account or accounts, and shall
be used only for authorized reserve expenditures.



            (3)   The POA shall provide the city with a copy
of the annual POA finance report for a period of one (1) year from the date
of issue of the last certificate of occupancy (C.O.) for any
structure/building on the project.



         b.   The owners of the various components have executed
perpetual cross access and shared parking agreements to the extent required
by the approved master site plan.



         c.   A sign program approved by the city is in place
that regulates all project signage in conformance with the city Land
Development Regulations and is applicable to all components of the project.



         d.   The owners have agreed to the continued calculation
of overall project density based on the entire project despite the creation
of individual parcels with multiple owners.



   B.   Technical Site Plan, Including Modifications.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to set forth uniform procedures, well-defined application
processes, and information to guide the processing and review of technical
site plan submittals.  It is also the intent to provide for separate
submittal requirements and expedited review processes for those developments
that qualify as a sustainable development (as defined by Chapter 1, Article
II, Definitions) and meets the intent of the city's green building
initiatives.



         b.   Applicability.  A technical site plan is required
only in conjunction with the approval of a master site plan of a mixed use
pod within a PID.  See Section 3.A. above for additional regulations
regarding the master site plan.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  The technical site plan shall be
consistent with the corresponding master site plan and comply with the
following: 1) any applicable conditions of approval of the master site plan;
2) all applicable requirements of the PID zoning district; 3) the site
development standards described in Chapter 4; and 4) the best development
practices in the sustainable and green checklist.



      4.   Approval Process.  Within ten (10) business days
following staff review of a technical site plan, the Director of Development
or designee shall take the following action: 1) approve the technical site
plan as submitted; 2) approve the technical site plan with staff conditions;
or 3) deny the technical site plan.  Once a development order is issued, the
five (5) day review period has elapsed, and all conditions have been
satisfied, individual buildings on a technical site plan may be phased
incrementally.  Buildings allowed strictly through the permitting process
may not exceed the building envelope as shown on the approved technical site
plan.



      5.   Expiration.  Upon approval of a technical site plan, the
applicant shall have two (2) years to secure a building permit.  All
previous approvals shall become null and void if the applicant is unable to
secure a building permit within the above timeframe.  For the purposes of
this section, minor permits issued by the Departments of Development or
Public Works (e.g. clearing and grubbing; walls and fences; docks, land
development; utilities; etc.) shall not constitute the type of permit
necessary to extend the life of a development order.



      6.   Modification of Technical Site Plan.



         a.   General.  An applicant may request to modify an
approved technical site plan.  Changes to technical site plans are either
"inconsistent" or "consistent" with the master site plan based on criteria
within this section.  The applicant shall schedule a pre-application
conference with staff and bring the proposed technical site plan and any
other affected plan or exhibit to the meeting.  Staff shall consider the
following factors in determining whether the proposed technical site plan
modification is considered "inconsistent" with the master site plan:



            (1)   Changes which violate the project's
previously approved minimum or maximum square footage of non-residential uses;



            (2)   Increases in height above that which has
been approved by the technical site plan;



            (3)   Increases in the maximum number of
residential units as indicated on the technical site plan;



            (4)   Elimination of principal open spaces and
principal pedestrian plazas;



            (5)   Changes to approved architectural design
standards whereby proposed architectural design standards are inconsistent
with approved architectural design standards;



            (6)   Increases in degree of approved waivers;



         b.   Inconsistent with Master Site Plan.  Any proposed
modification to a technical site plan that staff determines to be
inconsistent with its corresponding master site plan shall require the
approval of a master site plan modification in accordance with Section 3.A.6.
above, prior to the commencement of staff review on the subject technical
site plan.



         c.   Consistent with Master Site Plan.



            (1)   Submittal Requirements.  The applicant
shall be required to submit a letter explaining the proposed modification(s)
to the technical site plan.  The letter shall be accompanied by the amended
technical site plan (in the number of copies specified by the Division)
illustrating the proposed changes.  The applicant shall have consent from
the property owner to initiate the review of a minor technical site plan
modification.



            (2)   Review Criteria.  The proposed technical
site plan shall comply with the following:  1) all applicable conditions of
approval of the preceding technical site plan; 2) all applicable requirements
of the PID zoning district; and 3) the site development standards described
in Chapter 4.



            (3)   Approval Process.  The application shall be
reviewed by staff and action will be taken by the appropriate administrative
official.  Upon approval of a minor technical site plan modification, all
future development shall be consistent with the technical site plan, as
modified, including all previously approved conditions of approval associated
with the technical site plan.



   C.   Waiver (Mixed Use Pod).



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to provide an efficient relief process to allow for deviations
from certain requirements and standards of Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 of these
Land Development Regulations.  The intent of this application is not to
provide a means for circumventing any such requirement or standard but to
allow for a departure from the Code upon demonstration that the subject
request satisfies the intent of the review criteria contained herein.



         b.   Applicability.  The requested waiver shall be
processed concurrent with the review of a master site plan unless otherwise
determined by the Director of Planning and Zoning or designee.  The City
Commission may waive or modify the requirements or standards that pertain to
the following:



            (1)   Building setbacks;



            (2)   Drive aisle widths and parking dimensions;



            (3)   Perimeter buffer widths;



            (4)   Type and size of dwelling units;



            (5)   Parking space requirements;



            (6)   Internal landscape requirements; and



            (7)   Other waivers to the following:  1) PID
zoning regulations of Chapter 3, Article III, excluding maximum building
height; and 2) any site development standard described in Chapter 4 as
necessary to further economic development, affordable and workforce housing,
sustainable development and green building initiatives, and to support the
uses that are eligible for the Expedited Development Review Program in
accordance with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 4.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  The applicant shall submit a
letter that addresses the review criteria of Section 3.D.3. below, in
addition to submitting any plans and exhibits required by the accompanying
master site plan or technical site plan, whichever is applicable.



      3.   Review Criteria.  The applicant shall justify each
waiver request as part of the application for master site plan or master site
plan modification.  The applicant shall document the nature of the request,
the extent of its departure from the standard regulation, and the basis for
the request.  The city may request additional information and documentation
from the applicant, such as a shared-parking study, or other type of
performance related analysis that further justifies the waiver request.



      4.   Approval Process.  An application for waiver approval
requires review by the City Commission and shall be processed in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.



      5.   Denial.  Upon the denial of an application for relief
hereunder, in whole or in part, a period of one (1) year must elapse prior to
the filing of the same or similar application affecting the same property or
any portion thereof; however, this restriction shall not apply to
applications which further the city's economic development, workforce
housing, or green building programs.



      6.   Expiration.  A waiver shall remain valid as long as the
corresponding master site plan or technical site plan approval remains in
effect, or unless there is any amendment to the original waiver.  Any
amendment to the original approval shall require application for, and
approval of, a new waiver.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-010, passed 6-19-12)



Sec. 4.   Relief Applications.



   Each application for relief shall be considered unique and not set
precedent for subsequent requests.



   A.   Administrative Adjustments.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to provide an efficient relief process to allow for reductions
in the minimum yard setbacks within certain conventional single-family
residential zoning districts, in order to better facilitate and accommodate
minor building additions, home expansions, and site improvements.  The
intent of this application is not to provide a means of circumventing the
minimum yard requirements of respective zoning districts but to allow for
reductions that would have negligible impacts upon the subject site and
surrounding properties and represent compliance with the general intent of
the city's zoning regulations.



         b.   Applicability.



            (1)   Principal Buildings.  The administrative
adjustment process to reduce minimum yard requirements for principle
buildings shall be applicable to those single-family and two-family dwelling
units located in the R-1-AAB; R-1-AA; R-1-A; and R-1 zoning districts.  See
Chapter 3, Article III, Section 2 for additional regulations pertaining to
administrative adjustments within each respective district.



            (2)   Accessory Structures, Building
Appurtenances, and Site Improvements.  The administrative adjustment process
to reduce setback requirements shall be applicable to the following:



               (a)   Private pump housing and equipment for
swimming pools and spas in accordance with Chapter 3, Article V, Section
3.D.3.;



               (b)   Heating, ventilation, and air
conditioner units (including compressors and condensers) in accordance with
Chapter 3, Article V, Section 3.R.;



               (c)   Compost bins and tumblers in
accordance with Chapter 3, Article V, Section 3.U.;



               (d)   Generators and fuel tanks in
accordance with Chapter 3, Article V, Section 3.T.; and



               (e)   Solar photovoltaic (PV) arrays that
are erected or installed at-grade (ground level) in accordance with Chapter
3, Article V, Section 3.W.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  The applicant shall submit a
letter that addresses the review criteria of Section 4.A.3. below, in
addition to the following items:



         a.   Proof of property ownership by petitioner(s), such
as a deed or purchase contract agreement;



         b.   Justification statement detailing the need for the
setback adjustment, including site constraints and restrictions, building
orientation, and floor plan functionality (for applications associated with
the principal building);



         c.   Two (2) sealed surveys by a registered surveyor in
the State of Florida, not older than six (6) months old, and illustrating the
following:



            (1)   All property lines;



            (2)   North arrow;



            (3)   Existing structure(s) and paving;



            (4)   Existing ground elevation;



            (5)   Rights-of-way, including ground elevation;



            (6)   Easements upon or adjacent to the site;



            (7)   Legal description;



            (8)   Lot size [in acres, to the nearest
one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre]; and



            (9)   Location sketch of property.



         d.   Two (2) sketches, drawn to scale, and properly
illustrating the following:



            (1)   Location of all existing structure(s) on
property;



            (2)   Location and dimension of any new
construction;



            (3)   Setback dimensions to all property lines;



            (4)   Location of, and dimensions to streets,
alleys, and easements on or adjacent to the subject property;



            (5)   Floor plans of proposed addition(s) and of
adjacent habitable space in the existing structure; and



            (6)   Location, number and size of existing and
proposed parking spaces on the property.



         e.   Photographs depicting the existing conditions on
the property, area of the proposed addition(s), accessory structure, or site
improvement, and the view(s) facing abutting or adjacent properties.



         f.   For applications associated with the principal
building, an affidavit from adjacent property owners or legal representative,
which affirms that such owners have completely examined the required plans
and exhibits and have no objection to the subject request for administrative
adjustment to reduce the yard setbacks as requested by the petitioner.



      3.   Review Criteria.  In each application for administrative
adjustment, staff shall review the proposed floor plan (for applications
associated with the principal building), building orientation, accessory
structure or site improvement, and existing site constraints to ensure that
the subject request would have negligible impacts upon abutting and
surrounding properties.  Additionally, staff shall consider the established
character of the neighborhood, massing of the subject building or proposed
addition, and reasonableness of the subject application to justify a
reduction in the minimum required yard or setback, whichever is applicable. 



      4.   Approval Process.  The application for administrative
adjustment shall be reviewed by staff and action will be taken by the
appropriate administrative official.



   B.   Community Design Appeal.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to provide a relief process that allows for deviations from
specific build-to line requirements of Chapter 3, Article III and any
community design standard of Chapter 4 of these Land Development
Regulations.  The intent of this application process is not to provide a
means of circumventing such standards but to allow for flexibility, and
alternative ways to meet the intent of the Code to yield high quality design,
architectural detail, and visual interest without negative impacts to the
subject site or surrounding properties.



         b.   Applicability.  This application shall be
applicable to any requested deviation from specific build-to line
requirements of the Mixed-Use Urban Building and Site Regulations (Table
3-4); Urban Commercial District Overlay Zone (Table 3-26); or any community
design standard of Chapter 4 of these Land Development Regulations.  The
requested appeal shall be processed concurrent with a site plan unless
otherwise determined by the Director of Planning and Zoning or designee. 



         c.   Rules.  For the purposes of this subsection, a
"site plan" shall be construed to include a new site plan, major
modification, or minor modification.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  In granting relief to any community
design standard of Chapter 4, the City Commission must find that the subject
appeal meets the intent of the affected standard, does not diminish its
practical application, and that an acceptable development product and/or
design will result.  The following review criteria shall be used to justify
an application for appeal:



         a.   Whether the proposed request will demonstrate
consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. 



         b.   Whether the proposed request will not significantly
detract from the livability or appearance of the city and will be consistent
with the established or desired character of the area, or with the
redevelopment plan, where applicable.



         c.   On balance, whether the proposed request will be
consistent with the purpose of the standard for which a deviation is
requested.  Granting the request will equally or better meet the purpose of
the standard to be appealed.



         d.   Whether the proposed request is intended to save or
preserve existing trees or desired flora.



            (1)   Whether the applicant is unable to design or
locate proposed buildings, structures, or improvements and preserve the
tree(s) and comply with all provisions of these community design standards
without causing the applicant undue hardship; and



            (2)   Whether it is not feasible to transplant the
trees to another location on the subject site considering the following: 1)
shape and dimensions of the real property; 2) location of existing structures
and infrastructure improvements; and 3) size, age, health, and species of
trees sought to be protected.



         e.   Whether the proposed request will have adverse
environmental impacts that cannot be prevented by the imposition of
conditions.



         f.   Whether the proposed request will have an adverse
impact on property values of abutting or adjacent land.



         g.   Whether the proposed request will seriously reduce
the quality or quantity of light and air available to adjacent properties.



         h.   Whether the proposed request is necessary to
further the objectives of the city to assist with economic development and
business promotion.



         i.   Whether the proposed request meets the purpose and
intent of these regulations but conflicts with another site development
standard or requirement, including sustainable development and green
initiatives.



      4.   Approval Process.  An application for community design
appeal requires review by the City Commission and shall be processed in
accordance with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.



      5.   Expiration.  Pursuant to Section 4.B.1.b. above, the
community design appeal shall be processed concurrent with a site plan.  The
approval of an appeal shall remain valid as long as the corresponding site
plan approval remains in effect.  See Section 2.F.5. above for additional
information regarding the expiration and extension of a site plan.



   C.   Height Exception.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to provide an efficient relief process that would allow for
certain eligible building appurtenances and structures, which are ordinarily
erected or located on top of or within a building, to exceed the maximum
building height allowed by the respective zoning district upon demonstrating
compliance with the review criteria herein.  The intent of this application
is not to provide a means of circumventing the maximum height allowed for
buildings within the respective zoning district, but to strategically
accommodate and design those appurtenances and structures with design
flexibility, while providing visual interest and enhancement to building
façades without negligible impacts upon the subject site and surrounding
properties.



         b.   Applicability.  No portion of any principal or
ancillary structure proposed within the city shall exceed the maximum height
allowed by the respective zoning district, except for as follows:  water
cooling and fire towers, radio and television towers of commercial nature,
spires and finials, domes, cupolas, bell and clock towers, flagpoles,
electrical and mechanical support systems, green elements such as PV arrays,
parapets and similar structures or architectural enhancements, and their
necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected within or on top of a
structure above the district height limitation after obtaining approval of a
height exception from the City Commission.  A request for height exception
shall be processed concurrent with a site plan unless otherwise determined by
the Director of Planning and Zoning or designee, or if the height exception
application is in connection with a single-family or duplex home located on
an individually platted lot within a single-family or two-family residential
district.



         c.   Rules.  For the purposes of this subsection, a
"site plan" shall be construed to include a new site plan or major
modification.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  In considering an application for
exception to the district height regulation, the City Commission shall make
findings indicating the proposed exception has been studied and considered in
relation to the following standards, where applicable:



         a.   On the subject site or surrounding properties,
whether the height exception would adversely affect any of the following: 
1) light and air; 2) property values; 3) the living conditions; or 4)
existing or proposed land uses;



         b.   Whether the height exception would be a deterrent
to the development or improvement of adjacent properties in accord with
existing regulations;



         c.   Whether the height exception would contribute to
the architectural character and form of the proposed project;



         d.   Whether the height exception would positively
contribute to the city's desired image, streetscape design, or recommendation
of any applicable redevelopment plan;



         e.   Whether the height exception would contribute,
incentivize, or serve as a catalyst for sustainable development and other
green initiatives;



         f.   Whether the height exception is necessary and not
proposed in a manner with which the principle objective is to maximize
project visibility without concern for architectural or aesthetic integrity;
and



         g.   Whether sufficient evidence has been presented to
justify the need for a height exception.



      4.   Approval Process.  An application for height exception
approval requires review by the City Commission and shall be processed in
accordance with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.



      5.   Expiration.  An approval for height exception shall
remain valid as long as the corresponding site plan approval remains in
effect.  Further, a time extension for site plan approval shall
simultaneously extend approval of the corresponding height exception.  Where
no site plan is required in connection with a request for height exception
approval, the height exception shall remain in effect for one (1) year.  See
Section 2.F.5. above for information on the site plan approval period and
extension process.



   D.   Variance to Land Development Regulations.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to provide an efficient relief process to allow for deviations
from certain requirements and standards of Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 of these
Land Development Regulations in circumstances when the applicant is able to
demonstrate a hardship.  The intent of this application is not to provide a
means for circumventing any such requirement or standard, but to allow for a
departure from the Code upon demonstration that the subject request
satisfactorily addresses the review criteria contained herein, and without
the necessity of amending the regulation or rezoning the property to
accommodate the requested relief.  The City Commission has the authority and
duty to authorize, upon appeal, such a variance from the terms of a city
ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest when, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance
would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.



         b.   Applicability.  Generally, the variance process
shall be available when a petitioner requests a deviation from a quantifiable
standard, measure, or regulation.  For clarification, the variance process
shall not be available in the following instances:



            (1)   When another relief process is available;



            (2)   No nonconforming use of neighboring lands,
structures, or buildings in other zoning districts shall be considered
grounds for the authorization of a variance;



            (3)   Chapter 3:



               (a)   Article I – overview and use of
terms;



               (b)   Article III - future land use map
(FLUM) classifications and corresponding zoning districts, and density
regulations;



               (c)   Article IV – any use regulations in
the use matrix, including the regulations pertaining to hazardous and toxic
waste; nonconforming uses; and the operational performance standards; and



            (4)   As otherwise determined by the Director of
Planning and Zoning or designee.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  In order for the City Commission to
grant a variance, the applicant must demonstrate that:



         a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist
which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved, and which are
not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning
district.



         b.   That special conditions and circumstances do not
result from the actions of the applicant for the variance.



         c.   That granting the variance requested will not
confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this section
to other lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning district.



         d.   That literal interpretations of the provisions of
the ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same zoning district under the terms of the ordinance and
would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant.



         e.   That the variance granted is the minimum variance
that will make possible reasonable use of the land, structure or building.



         f.   That the granting of the variance will be in
harmony with the general intent and purpose of this chapter and that such
variance will not be injurious to the area involved or be otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.



      4.   Approval Process.  An application for variance approval
requires review by the City Commission and shall be processed in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.  In addition, in recommending approval
of a variance, the Planning and Development Board may determine the following:



         a.   The Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity with this section.  Violations of such conditions
and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this section.



         b.   The Board may prescribe a reasonable time limit
within which the action for which the variance is required shall begin, be
completed, or both.



      5.   Denial.  Upon the denial of an application for relief
hereunder, in whole or in part, a period of one (1) year must elapse prior to
the filing of the same or similar application affecting the same property or
any portion thereof.



      6.   Miscellaneous.  A variance shall remain valid
indefinitely unless there is change in its application on the subject
property.  In other words, the variance is specific to the improvement for
which the application was made.  Any amendment to the original approval that
increases the amount of building or site, which would be subject to the
variance, shall require the application for, and approval of, a new variance.



   E.   Waiver (Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone).



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to provide an efficient relief process to allow for deviations
from certain requirements and standards of Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 as they
pertain to the Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone (OAOZ). The intent of this
application is not to provide a means for circumventing any such requirement
or standard but to allow for a departure from the code upon demonstration
that the subject request satisfies the intent of the review criteria
contained herein.



         b.   Applicability.  For property located within the
OAOZ, the waiver process shall be available for deviations from any
development and design standards of Chapter 3, Article III, Section 8.D.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  The applicant shall submit a
letter that addresses the review criteria of Section 3.E.3. below, in
addition to submitting any plans and exhibits required by the accompanying
site plan, whenever applicable.



      3.   Review Criteria.  The applicant shall justify each
waiver request as part of the application for site plan or site plan
modification.  The applicant shall document the nature of the request, the
extent of its departure from the standard regulation, and the basis for the
request. The City may request additional information and documentation from
the applicant, such as a shared-parking study, or other type of performance
related analysis that further justifies the waiver request.  The burden of
proof shall be on the applicant to present a superior design alternative and
demonstrate that the application would further the purpose and intent of the
OAOZ and not have any detrimental impact on adjacent properties or the
surrounding area.



      4.   Approval Process. A waiver request may be approved by
staff if the subject request is reviewed concurrently with a minor site plan
modification application, and such application requires administrative review
pursuant to the review criteria of Section 2.F. above. Otherwise, the waiver
application requires review by the City Commission and shall be processed in
accordance with Chapter 2, Article 1, Section 3.



      5.   Denial.  Upon the denial of an application for relief
hereunder, in whole or in part, a period of one (1) year must elapse prior to
the filing of the same or similar application affecting the same property or
any portion thereof; however, this restriction shall not apply to
applications which further the City's economic development, workforce
housing, or green building programs.



      6.   Expiration.  A waiver shall remain valid as long as the
corresponding site plan or site plan modification approval remains in effect,
or unless there is any amendment to the original waiver. Any amendment to the
original approval shall require application for, and approval of, a new
waiver.



   F.   Requests for Accommodation.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is
to implement a procedure for processing requests for reasonable accommodation
to the city's Code of Ordinances, Land Development Regulations, rules,
policies, and procedures for persons with disabilities as provided by the
federal Fair Housing Amendments Act (42 U.S.C. 3601. et. seq.) ("FHA") and/or
Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Amendments Act (42 U.S.C. Section
12131, et. seq.) ("ADA").



         b.   Applicability. Any person who is disabled, or
qualifying entities, may request a reasonable accommodation with respect to
the city's Land Development Regulations, Code of Ordinances, rules, policies,
practices and/or procedures as provided by the FHA and the ADA pursuant to
the procedures set out in this section. For purposes of this section, a
"disabled person" is an individual that qualifies as disabled and/or
handicapped under the FHA and/or ADA. The word "individual" shall include,
for purposes of this section, multiple people, or qualified entities.



         c.   Notice to the Public of Availability of
Accommodation. The city shall endeavor to provide notice to the public,
advising that a disabled person may request a reasonable accommodation. Such
notice may include, but is not limited to, displaying a notice in the city's
public notice bulletin board and to maintain copies available for review in
the Planning and Zoning Division, the Building Division, and the City Clerk's
Office upon request, and advising that the public disabled person may request
a reasonable accommodation as provided herein.



      2.   Submittal Requirements. A request by an applicant for
reasonable accommodation under this section shall be either oral or
written.  A written request may be submitted by completion of a reasonable
accommodation request form, which form is maintained by (and shall be
submitted to) the Planning and Zoning (“P and Z”) Division of the
Department of Development or other designee. The reasonable accommodation
form shall contain such questions and requests for information as are
necessary for processing the reasonable accommodation request. The reasonable
accommodation request form shall be substantially in the form set forth in
Subsection 3. below. The following considerations shall be applicable for any
application, information or documentation required:



         a.   Confidential Information. Should the information
submitted by the disabled person to the city include medical information or
records, including records indicating the medical condition, diagnosis, or
medical history of the disabled person, such disabled person may, at the time
of submitting such medical information, request that the city, to the extent
allowed by law, treat such medical information as confidential information of
the disabled person The city shall thereafter endeavor to provide written
notice to the disabled person and/or their representative, of any request
received by the city for disclosure of the medical information or
documentation which the disabled person has previously requested be treated
as confidential by the city. The city will cooperate with the disabled person
to the extent allowed by law, in actions initiated by such disabled person,
to oppose the disclosure of such medical information or documentation, but
the city shall have no obligation to initiate, prosecute or pursue any such
action, or to incur any legal or other expenses (whether by retention of
outside counsel or allocation of internal resources) in connection therewith,
and may comply with any judicial order without prior notice to the disabled
person. This section shall be subject to local, state, and federal revisions
to privacy laws, including but not limited to the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), as it may be amended from time to
time.



         b.   Address of Applicant/Address of Housing. Unless
governed by 42 USC § 290dd, in which case the address shall not be required,
the applicant may be requested to provide documentation to substantiate a
claim for verifying applicability.



         c.   Fee. There shall be no fee imposed by the city in
connection with a request for reasonable accommodation under this section or
an appeal of a determination on such request to the City Commission, and the
city shall have no obligation to pay a requesting party's, or an appealing
party's, as applicable, attorneys' fees or costs in connection with the
request, or an appeal.



         d.   City Assistance. The city shall provide such
assistance and accommodation as is required pursuant to FHA and ADA in
connection with a disabled person's request for reasonable accommodation,
including, without limitation, assistance with reading application questions,
responding to questions, completing the form, filing an appeal, and appearing
at a hearing, to ensure the process is accessible.



         e.   Findings for Reasonable Accommodation.



            (1)   In determining whether the reasonable
accommodation request shall be granted or denied, the requesting party shall
be required to establish that they are protected under the FHA and/or ADA by
demonstrating that they are handicapped or disabled, as defined in the FHA
and/or ADA. Although the definition of disability is subject to judicial
interpretation, for purposes of this section the disabled individual must
show:



               (i)   A physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more major life activities;



               (ii)   A record of having such impairment; or



               (iii)   That they are regarded as having
such impairment.



            (2)   The requesting party will then have to
demonstrate that the proposed accommodations sought by the requesting party
are reasonable and necessary to afford handicapped and/or disabled persons
equal opportunity to use and enjoy housing.



            (3)   The foregoing (as judicially interpreted)
shall be the basis for a decision upon a reasonable accommodation request
made by the applicant to the Planning and Zoning Director, or his/her
designee, or by the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals in the event of
an appeal.



         f.   Action by Appropriate City Official. A written
determination shall be issued by the Planning Director, or his or her
designee. within forty-five (45) days of receipt of an application determined
to be sufficient.



            (1)   If reasonably necessary to reach a
determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the Planning and
Zoning Director, or his/her designee, may, prior to the end of said
forty-five (45) day period, request additional information from the
requesting party, specifying in sufficient detail what information is
required.



            (2)   The requesting party shall have fifteen (15)
days after the date of the request for additional information to provide the
requested information. In the event a request for additional information is
made, the forty-five (45) day period to issue a written determination shall
no longer be applicable, and the Planning and Zoning Director, or his/her
designee, shall issue a written determination within thirty (30) days after
receipt of the additional information.



            (3)   If the requesting party fails to provide the
requested additional information within said fifteen (15) day period, the
Planning and Zoning Director, or his/her designee, shall issue a written
notice advising that the requesting party had failed to timely submit the
additional information and therefore the request for reasonable accommodation
shall be deemed abandoned and/or withdrawn and no further action by the city
with regard to said reasonable accommodation request shall be required.



         g.   Notice of Proposed Decision. The Planning and
Zoning Director, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to consider
and act on requests for reasonable accommodation. When a reasonable
accommodation request form has been completed and submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Division, it will be referred to the Planning and Zoning Director,
or his/her designee, for review and consideration. The Planning and Zoning
Director, or his/her designee, shall issue a written determination within
forty-five (45) days of the date of receipt of a completed application and
may, in accordance with federal law:



            (1)   Grant the accommodation request;



            (2)   Grant a portion of the request and deny a
portion of the request, and/or impose conditions upon the grant of the
request; or



            (3)   Deny the request, in accordance with federal
law.



         Any such denial shall be in writing and shall state the
grounds therefore. All written determinations shall give notice of the right
to appeal to the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The notice of
determination shall be sent to the requesting party, i.e. the disabled
individual or his/her representative, by certified mail, return receipt
requested.



         h.   Appeal. Within thirty (30) days after the Planning
and Zoning Director, or his/her designee's, determination on a reasonable
accommodation request is mailed to the requesting party, such applicant may
appeal the decision. All appeals shall contain a statement containing
sufficient detail of the grounds for the appeal. Appeals shall be to the
Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals which shall, after public notice to
the parties and a public hearing for appeal, render a written determination
as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later than sixty (60) days
after an appeal has been filed. The decision of the Building Board of
Adjustment and Appeals shall be a final determination, subject only to appeal
by petition of certiorari to the Fifteenth (15th) Judicial Circuit Court,
pursuant to all applicable local and state laws and standards governing
petitions for certiorari.



         i.   Stay of Enforcement. While an application for
reasonable accommodation, or an appeal of a determination of same, is pending
before the city, the city will not enforce the subject zoning ordinance,
rules, policies, and procedures against the applicant.



      3.   Request Form for Reasonable Accommodation.



         a.   Contents of Reasonable Accommodation Request Form.
The contents of a reasonable accommodation request form shall contain the
following items, to the extent provided by law:



            (1)   Name and contact information of the
applicant;



            (2)   Description of property at which reasonable
accommodation is requested, including the address of such location;



            (3)   Description of the accommodation and the
specific regulation(s) and/or procedure(s) from which accommodation is sought;



            (4)   Reasons the accommodation may be necessary
for the applicant or the individuals with disabilities seeking the specific
accommodation, and if relating to housing, why the requested reasonable
accommodation is necessary to use and enjoy the housing;



            (5)   Description of the qualifying disability or
handicap;



            (6)   Other relevant information pertaining to the
disability or property that may be needed bv the city in order for it to be
able to evaluate the request for reasonable accommodation;



            (7)   Signature of applicant;



            (8)   Date of application.



      4.   Expiration of Approvals. Approvals of requests for
reasonable accommodation shall expire within one hundred eighty (180) days if
not implemented.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-002, passed 3-1-11; Am. Ord.
13-033, § 3, passed 12-3-13)



Sec. 5.   Permit Applications.



   A.   Sign Permit.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of
this subsection is to set forth well-defined application processes, review
criteria, and uniform procedure to guide in the processing and review of sign
permit applications to ensure compliance with the design objectives of
Chapter 4, Article IV, Section 1.B. (i.e. identification, aesthetics, land
values, safety, sustainability, and compatibility).



         b.   Applicability.  Excluding those signs and support
structures exempt from the permitting requirements of the sign standards in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article IV, Section 1.E., it shall be unlawful for
any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert any sign in the
city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a sign permit for
each such sign.  These directives shall not be construed to require any
permit for the cleaning, maintenance, or repair of a sign or sign structure
for which a permit has previously been issued under this article, provided
that such sign or structure is not modified in any way.  Signs and
structures supporting signs previously erected without a valid permit shall
be in violation of this article and shall be deemed illegal signs.  It shall
be mandatory to obtain a permit for an illegal sign, or to immediately remove
such sign and the structure supporting such sign upon notice that the sign or
structure supporting the sign is illegal.  The notice shall contain a time
period for removal.  Signs and sign support structures shall be processed
under a separate permit (in accordance with Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 3)
if the Building Official determines that compliance with the Florida Building
Code is required.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  The sign permit shall comply with the
sign standards of Chapter 4, Article IV.  The Building Official shall make
the determination as to whether a sign permit requires compliance with the
Florida Building Code.  In these instances, the sign permit shall be
reviewed in accordance with the procedures described in Chapter 2, Article
IV, Section 3.



      4.   Approval Process.  The Director of Planning and Zoning
or designee shall have three (3) days to review an application for a sign
permit to ensure that it is complete.  If an application is found to be
incomplete, the Director of Planning and Zoning shall send a letter to the
applicant indicating the noted deficiencies (with appropriate code
references).  Once an application is deemed to be complete, staff will
promptly conduct a review of the application and within forty-five (45) days,
the Director of Planning and Zoning or designee shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application for a sign permit.



      5.   Expiration.  Any permit for a sign may be revoked by the
city upon the determination that the sign is not in full compliance with the
provisions of these Land Development Regulations or other applicable codes. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the work is not complete within
ninety (90) days of the issuance of such permit.



      6.   Appeal.  Any appeal of a decision made by a city
official shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 1, Article VIII,
Section 1 (Appeals from an Administrative Official).



   B.   Zoning Permit.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of
this subsection is to set forth a well-defined application process, review
criteria, and uniform procedure for the processing of zoning permits and
zoning verification letters, to ensure that certain structures and site
improvements comply with the respective requirements and standards described
in these Land Development Regulations and the city's Code of Ordinances.



         b.   Applicability.  A permit, issued by the Planning
and Zoning Division, shall be required for accessory structures and site
improvements proposed on any parcel or development unless otherwise specified
herein.  The following types of requests or improvements do not require a
building permit but do require a zoning permit or zoning verification.  Such
improvements or requests include but are not limited to the following:



            (1)   Accessory structures, limited to a maximum
of one (1) open air structure or gazebo less than one hundred (100) square
feet and used in connection with a principal residential dwelling or use. 
Chickee huts are exempt from the above size limitation;



            (2)   Animal enclosures;



            (3)   Fences on residential property
(single-family; two-family; and single-family attached if fee-simple
ownership) with a maximum height of six (6) feet; unless used as a barrier
around a swimming pool, spa, or rooftop equipment;



            (4)   Impervious surfaces that are unenclosed and
uncovered, including but not limited to driveways, patios, steps, stoops,
terraces, sidewalks, and the like, regardless of proposed surface materials
(e.g., pavers, asphalt, concrete, etc.).



      The zoning permit shall not be applicable to new impervious
surfaces and improvements normally administered by other Divisions in the
city, such as by the Engineering or Building Divisions.  A land development
permit (LDP) from the Engineering Division shall be required in lieu of a
zoning permit for any proposed driveway, patio, terrace, sidewalk, or the
like in excess of eight hundred (800) square feet.  Impervious surfaces or
improvements that would require a building permit (in lieu of a zoning
permit) include reinforced concrete pads connecting with existing buildings
to be used as a slab for future building additions; required handicapped
accessible routes; framed decking improvements; or other similar
improvements. 



      It should be noted that any proposed impervious surface and/or
site improvement that decreases permeable land area in excess of eight
hundred (800) square feet on any given parcel in the city shall be reviewed
for compliance with the drainage standards of Chapter 4, Article VIII,
Section 3.G. and/or the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction
Standards.  This review requires the submittal of a drainage plan prepared
by a licensed professional engineer based on the design standards referenced
above.



            (5)   Community gardens.  See site plan review
(Section 2.F. above) for community gardens containing storage and/or
agricultural structures that are greater than one hundred (100) square
feet.  All agricultural structures and storage structures greater than one
hundred (100) square feet shall require approval of a building permit in
accordance Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 2.



         c.   Compliance with Florida Building Code.  Any
proposed structure or improvement that includes an electrical, plumbing, or
other similar component which is subject to compliance with the Florida
Building Code, shall require a building permit, and the review for such
improvement that would have been conducted as part of the zoning permit
process, will alternatively occur as part of the review for the building
permit.  See Chapter 2, Article IV for additional regulations regarding the
building permit review process and procedures.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  Each structure or improvement shall
comply with the following:  1) all zoning requirements of Chapter 3,
including the supplemental regulations of Article V;  2) all applicable site
development standards described in Chapter 4; and 3) the applicable
regulations of City Code of Ordinances Part II.  Notwithstanding compliance
with the aforementioned regulations and standards, their specific provisions
are referenced as follows:



         a.   Fences.  Chapter 3, Article V, Section 2;



         b.   Arbors, trellises, and pergolas.  Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 3.F.;



         c.   Open air structures and gazebos.  Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 3.G.;



         d.   Permanent sheds and storage structures.  Chapter
3, Article V, Section 3.E.1.;



         e.   Decks, patios, steps, stoops, and terraces
(unenclosed and uncovered).  Chapter 3, Article V, Section 3.B.;



         f.   Animal enclosure.  City Code of Ordinances Part
II, Chapter 4, Section 4-4; and



         g.   Driveways for single-family and duplex dwellings. 
Chapter 4, Article V, Section 2.B.



      4.   Approval Process.  The application shall be reviewed by
staff and action will be taken by the appropriate administrative official. 



      5.   Expiration.  A zoning permit is valid for a period not
to exceed six (6) months from the date of issuance.  If construction of the
improvement covered by the zoning permit has not commenced within this time
period, the permit shall expire and be cancelled with written notice to the
applicant.



      6.   Time Extension.  An extension of the permit for a period
not to exceed ninety (90) days may be requested in writing by the applicant
if received by the Division prior to permit expiration.  The fee for
requesting a permit extension shall be approved by the City Commission and
may be modified from time to time.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 6.   Historic Preservation Applications.



   A.   Certificate of Appropriateness.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of
this subsection is to set forth a uniformed procedure, well-defined
application process, and information to guide in the review of Certificate of
Appropriateness submittals.



         b.   Applicability.  The Board or staff shall review
actions affecting the exterior of Properties and all Resources, including
non-contributing Properties, within Districts.  Utilizing the Design
Guidelines Handbook, the Board reviews applications for Certificates of
Appropriateness for alterations, new construction, demolitions, relocations
affecting proposed or designated Properties or Properties within Historic
Districts.



         c.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II
for definitions and terms associated with historic preservation.



         d.   Review Authority.  The required level of review
shall be depicted in a "Historic Resources Preservation Board Certificate of
Appropriateness Approval Matrix" (the "Matrix"). The Matrix will contain a
list of design features, such as roofing materials, window types, shutter
types, etc. The Matrix will indicate whether such features may be
administratively reviewed or if Board review is required.  The Board shall
approve or amend the "Historic Resources Preservation Board Certificate of
Appropriateness Approval Matrix" as needed.



         If staff does not grant administrative approval of an
application, the application may be referred to the Board for review.  Any
applicant may request referral to the Board rather than administrative
review.  An application referred by staff or an applicant will be considered
in accordance with the application review schedule contained in Section 2.b.
below.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.



         a.   Application and Fees.  Requests for Certificates
of Appropriateness shall be made only on application forms approved by the
Board.  Submittal of the application must be made with the appropriate site
plans, drawings, photographs, descriptions, and other documentation needed to
provide staff and the Board with a clear understanding of the proposed
action.  Application fees and other applicable charges shall be established
by resolution adopted by the City Commission.



         b.   Completeness Review and Board Agenda.  Staff shall
review all applications for Certificates of Appropriateness to determine
whether an application is complete.  If the application is incomplete, staff
will notify the applicant of what additional information is necessary.  An
application will not be reviewed until staff determines that it is complete.



         All Certificates of Appropriateness applications eligible
for administrative review will be reviewed in a timely manner and a written
decision sent to the applicant.  All Certificate of Appropriateness
applications requiring Board review will be scheduled for hearing by the
Board at the first available meeting approximately six (6) weeks after
receipt of the completed application. The meeting shall be publicly announced
and will have a previously advertised agenda.  The Board may suspend action
on the application for a period not to exceed thirty days in order to seek
technical advice from outside its members or to meet further with the
applicant to revise or modify the application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  See Chapter 4, Article IX, Section
6.D. for the review criteria applicable to the Certificate of Appropriateness.



      4.   Approval Process.



         a.   Decisions.  Decisions regarding application for
Certificates of Appropriateness shall be based on the application, the
application's compliance with this Ordinance, and the evidence and testimony
presented in connection with the application.



         Any conditions or requirements imposed shall be related to
the Certificate of Appropriateness sought by the applicant. If conditions or
requirements are imposed as a condition of approval, the Board may direct
staff to review the amended plans and approve the COA if all conditions or
requirements have been addressed.



         b.   Notice of Decision on Application. Staff shall
notify the applicant in writing of any decision on the application within
five (5) working days from the date of the decision.



      5.   Certificate of Economic Hardship.  Prior to taking an
appeal of a decision to the City Commission on an application for Certificate
of Appropriateness, an applicant may file a request in writing for a
Certificate of Economic Hardship.  Utilizing information supplied by the
applicant, the Board reviews requests for Certificates of Economic Hardship
to determine if a decision regarding a Certificate of Appropriateness
application has caused or will cause an economic hardship.



         a.   Application.  A request for a Certificate of
Economic Hardship must be submitted in writing within 30 days of the date of
the hearing at which the Board's decision on the Certificate of
Appropriateness application is announced.



         b.   Board Agenda and Notice.  The Board shall schedule
a public hearing within 60 working days from the receipt of the application
and shall provide notice of such hearing in the same manner as for the
Certificate of Appropriateness application.



         c.   Negotiations Prior to Certificate of Economic
Hardship Hearing.  During the period between receipt of the Certificate of
Economic Hardship application and the Board's public hearing, the applicant
shall discuss the proposed action with staff, other City officials and local
preservation organizations to consider alternatives that will avoid an
economic hardship and have the least adverse effect to the Property and/or
the District. Staff may request information from various City departments and
other agencies in order to negotiate an alternative resolution that is in the
best interest of the applicant and the City. If negotiations are successful
staff shall make written recommendations to the Board regarding such
alternatives.



         d.   Determination of Economic Hardship.  The applicant
has the burden of proving by competent substantial evidence that the Board's
decision regarding the Certificate of Appropriateness application has caused
or will cause an economic hardship.  To determine economic hardship, the
applicant shall submit the following with the request for a Certificate of
Economic Hardship:



            (1)   Proposed construction, alteration,
demolition and removal costs;



            (2)   Structural and condition reports from a
licensed professional with experience in assessing historic buildings;



            (3)   Estimates as to the economic feasibility of
rehabilitation or reuse;



            (4)   The purchase price of the property-details
of annual debt service or mortgage payments, recent appraisals, assessments,
and real estate taxes;



            (5)   Details of any income obtained from the
property and cash flows for the previous two (2) years;



            (6)   The status of any leases or rentals; and



            (7)   Details of any listings of the property for
sale or rent for the previous two (2) years.



            The applicant may submit or the Board may request any
further additional information relevant to the determination of economic
hardship.



            The effect of denial of the application for
Certificate of Economic Hardship is that the decision regarding the
Certificate of Appropriateness is upheld.  If the application for
Certificate of Economic Hardship is granted, the Board may issue the
Certificate of Economic Hardship without conditions.  Alternatively, the
Board may issue the Certificate with conditions that will avoid the economic
hardship and have the least adverse effect to the Property and the District.



            Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
ad valorem tax relief, loans or grants, requiring the owner to market and
offer the Property for sale for a fair market price with appropriate
preservation protections for a period of time not to exceed six (6) months,
acquisition by a third party for a fair market value, Building and Zoning
Code modifications, relaxation of the provisions of this ordinance,
recommendation by the City Manager some or all of the applicable Board fees
be waived, or such other relief as appropriate.



      6.   Appeal of Certificate of Appropriateness and Certificate
of Economic Hardship Decisions.  Any applicant may appeal a decision of the
Board to the City Commission regarding an application for Certificate of
Appropriateness and/or an application for Certificate of Economic Hardship. 
The applicant shall file a written notice of the appeal with staff within 30
days of the date of the hearing at which the Board's decision on the
application is announced.  The City Commission shall place the matter on the
Commission's agenda within 45 working days from the date of the written
notice of appeal.  The meeting at which the appeal is placed on the agenda
shall be no later than 60 working days from the date of the written notice of
appeal.



      Consideration of the appeal by the City Commission shall be de
novo review. The City Commission shall be required to apply the applicable
standards and criteria set forth in this ordinance.



      A decision of the City Commission may be appealed to a court of
competent jurisdiction within thirty (30) days after the hearing at which the
decision is announced.



   B.   Historic District or Properties Designation.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of
this subsection is to set forth a uniformed procedure, well-defined
application process, and information when designating a district as
"historic" as defined in these Land Development Regulations.



         b.   Applicability.  This application shall be
applicable to all improved property that meets the criteria of Chapter 4,
Article IX, Section 6.C.  Applications for historic designation may be
initiated by only the following:



            (1)   Historic Resources Preservation Board,
herein referred to as "Board" (see Chapter 1, Article VII, Section 4).



            (2)   City Commission.



            (3)   A property owner for designation of a Site.



            (4)   A simple majority of property owners within
the proposed District under consideration for designation.



            For District designations, each Property shall be
allotted one (1) vote.  The identity of the property owners shall be
determined by the most current Palm Beach County Tax Rolls.



         Only the Board or the City Commission may initiate
designation of a property or district owned by the City, County, State or by
an entity created by state law.



         c.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II
for definitions and terms associated with historic preservation.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  Nominations for historic
designations shall be made only on application forms approved by the Board.



      3.   Review Criteria.  See Chapter 4, Article IX, Section
6.C. for the review criteria applicable to designating a district as historic.



      4.   Approval Process.



         a.   Board Agenda.  Following staff determination that
an application for designation is complete; the application shall be
scheduled for a public hearing by the Board.



         b.   Board Public Hearing Notice.  The Board shall
advertise and hold a public hearing in accordance with the following public
noticing requirements:



            (1)   For the proposed designation of an
individual site, the applicant, at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the
date set for the public hearing, shall:



               (a)   Mail a notice of the time, place and
subject matter of the public hearing to any owner of abutting or adjacent
property as determined by the Historic Preservation Planner.



               (b)   Post one (1) sign for each street
frontage of the property in a prominent location.



            (2)   For the proposed designation of a historic
district, the applicants), at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date
set for the public hearing, shall:



               (a)   Mail a notice of the time, place and
subject matter of the hearing to any owner of real property within 400 feet
of district subject to potential designation.



               (b)   Post signs in prominent locations
along public streets at the outer boundaries of the proposed district in such
a manner as will assure that the signs will be seen by as many affected
property owners as possible



         Signs shall be legible from a distance of 100 feet and
shall contain a description of the approval being sought, the date, time and
location of the hearing, and a statement that the application being
considered is available for inspection in the Development Department of the
City of Boynton Beach.  Minimum sign size shall be 24" wide by 18" high.



         c.   No Action Permitted During Pendency.  During the
period that a designation application is pending, no changes to the property
or district shall be made unless first approved by the Board.  The
application is considered "pending" until the final decision on the
designation is made by the City Commission.



         d.   Board Recommendations.  The Board shall make a
recommendation as to the proposed designation at the public hearing, based on
findings of fact which support the recommendation.  The Board's
recommendation shall be reduced to writing within 15 working days after the
hearing date.  If the Board votes to recommend approval, it will forward the
application with recommendations to the City Commission.  If the Board
recommends denial, no further action is required unless an applicant, or not
less than two-thirds of the affected property owners (in the case of a
District), appeals to the City Commission.  In such event the City
Commission may reconsider designation or require the Board to do so.



         e.   City Commission Decision.  Following the Board
hearing, a designation application with a Board recommendation for approval
shall be scheduled for hearing by the City Commission.  The City Commission
may approve or deny the designation application.  Alternatively, the City
Commission may approve the designation with conditions or delay designation
for up to one (1) year.  The City Commission shall make written findings of
fact on which its decision is based.



         f.   Boynton Beach Register of Historic Places.  A
Resource designated by the City Commission as historic shall be listed in the
Boynton Beach Register of Historic Places.  The Register shall be updated
periodically and the inventory material will be open to the public. 
Inventory materials shall be compatible with the Florida Master Site File and
duplicates of all inventory materials will be provided to the State Historic
Preservation Office.  Resources listed in, or eligible for listing in the
National Register or on the Boynton Beach Register of Historic Places, either
as a Property or as a Contributing Property within a District, may be
entitled to modified enforcement of the City's applicable building and zoning
codes, if in accord with the Design Guidelines Handbook.



         g.   Designation Recorded.  The historic designation
ordinance shall be recorded in the Official Records of Palm Beach County. 
Boundaries for historic districts and individual properties identified in the
ordinance shall be clearly established.  The designation shall be noted in
the official records of the City's Planning & Zoning and Building Departments
to ensure that all City actions taken in connection with the subject property
or district are taken subject to the designation.



         h.   Historic District Street Signs. For Districts, the
City shall erect standardized street signs identifying the District within
two (2) years from the date of such designation, subject to economic
feasibility.  The design shall be first approved by the Board.



   C.   Historic Preservation Property Tax Exemption Application.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of
this subsection is to set forth a uniformed procedure, well-defined
application process, and information to guide in the review of Historic
Preservation Property Tax Exemption submittals.



         b.   Applicability.  This application shall be
applicable to all improved property that meets the criteria of Chapter 4,
Article IX, Section 6.E.



         c.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II
for definitions and terms associated with historic preservation.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Chapter 4, Article IX,
Section 6.E for the submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  See Chapter 4, Article IX, Section
6.E. for the review criteria applicable to the Historic Preservation Property
Tax Exemption.



      4.   Approval Process.  An application for historic
designation shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 4, Article IX, Section 6.E.



Sec. 7.   Other Applications.



   A.   Certificate of Conformity.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of
this subsection is to set forth a uniform procedure to excuse any existing
nonconformance of a parcel due to the necessary expansion of an abutting
right-of-way such as through eminent domain action by the city or other
governmental entity.  Any nonconforming parcel so created shall be deemed a
conforming parcel upon the issuance of a certificate of conformity as
provided herein.



         b.   Applicability.  This subsection shall apply to all
properties impacted by the necessary expansion of an abutting right-of-way. 
Site improvements and conditions, including nonconforming features and uses
existing prior to the time of the road widening, shall not be affected by
this subsection.  This subsection alone shall not cause a specific use on a
property impacted by roadway expansion to cease.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  The applicant shall submit a
letter indicating the details of the right-of-way expansion, along with the
proposed site plan (in the number of copies specified by the Division).  The
site plan shall depict the following:  1) location of the ultimate
right-of-way lines; 2) impervious surface (e.g. asphalt, concrete, etc.); and
3) configuration and dimensions of affected parking and landscaped areas. 
If the right-of-way expansion impacts either a landscape buffer abutting a
right-of-way or a perimeter landscape buffer, then a revised landscape plan
shall be required (in the number of copies specified by the Division).



      3.   Review Criteria.  The granting of a certificate of
conformity shall be provided, contingent upon compliance with the following
review criteria:



         a.   Safety.  The remainder parcel can reasonably and
safely function after the completion of the roadway expansion.



         b.   Reduction in Development Standards.  If a
reduction in the size of a lot causes a nonconformity with respect to the
minimum required lot area, setbacks, off-street parking, landscaping, sign
location, or other development regulations, the structure(s) on the property,
the use(s) within the structure(s), and other site improvements may continue
to exist in the configuration remaining after the condemnation, except that:



            (1)   Access.  The length of access ways shall
not be less than ten (10) feet measured from the right-of-way, unless
otherwise approved by the City Engineer;



            (2)   Direction.  Ingress and egress to and from
the site shall be in a forward direction.  No backing out onto a
right-of-way is allowed pursuant to Chapter 4, Article VII, Section 3.B.3.;



            (3)   Landscaping.  In instances when off-street
parking areas are exposed to public rights-of-way as a result of the roadway
expansion, all properties shall provide a landscape strip abutting the
subject roadway, to the maximum extent possible as deemed appropriate by the
city.  This requirement to have landscape strips abutting rights-of-way is
for the purpose of screening off-street parking areas, and is not construed
to supplant or supersede the provision for sidewalks and other non-vehicular
use areas.



         c.   Off-Street Parking Areas.  A structure or other
site improvement may be enlarged or expanded if the enlarged or expanded
portion meets the requirements of these regulations.  In all instances,
there shall be no reduction in required off-street spaces designated for
physically disabled persons.  Where off-street parking areas are reduced as
a result of roadway widening, the following mitigating actions are
encouraged: 



            (1)   The use of off-site parking in accordance
with Chapter 4, Article V, Section 2.A.3.;



            (2)   Joint access and cross parking agreements in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Section 3.B.; or



            (3)   Shared parking agreements in accordance with
Chapter 4, Article V, Section 3.C.



         d.   Damage and Restoration of Structures.  Structures
and buildings that are nonconforming due to setback deficiencies as a result
of a widening of a right-of-way, and which were issued a certificate of
conformity, shall be allowed to restore or reconstruct the building or
structure, but in accordance to what was approved in the original certificate
of conformity.



         e.   Signs.  Any existing, legally established
freestanding sign(s) located on the property, which become(s) nonconforming
as a result of the roadway widening project, may be relocated elsewhere
on-site, in compliance with the standards of this subsection, and with
Chapter 4, Article IV of these Land Development Regulations.



         f.   Vacant Lots.  A vacant lot that is impacted by
government action associated with roadway widening, to a size or
configuration which is below the standards and requirements of the respective
zoning district may be developed, but only in accordance with the
nonconforming lot provisions of the supplemental regulations (Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 11).  Should the remainder of the vacant lot not qualify
for development under the nonconforming provisions, the property will be
considered a total taking and not eligible for development except in
conjunction with an abutting lot.



         g.   Lot Combination.  Lot combinations are encouraged
for the purposes of creating safer, more functional and aesthetically
pleasing developments and attaining a greater degree of compliance with Code
requirements.  This subsection may apply to the combined lots whether or not
they are owned by the same person.  Combined lots may be considered as a
single lot for the purposes of applying property development regulations,
provided either a cross-parking or cross-access agreement is executed.  The
agreement shall be made in the form acceptable to the City Attorney and
recorded in the official records of Palm Beach County.



      4.   Approval Process.  The Director of Planning and Zoning
or designee shall review a complete application for a certificate of
conformity and render a decision to issue or deny, within thirty (30) days of
receipt of such request, based upon the review criteria set forth in this
subsection.



      5.   Expiration.  A certificate of conformity issued in
accordance with this subsection shall automatically expire two (2) years from
the date of issuance, unless redevelopment of the remainder parcel in
accordance with the site plan has been completed within such two (2)-year
period.



      6.   Time Extension.  An application for an extension of time
in letter form may be submitted to the Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee under the following circumstances:  1) substantial completion of
the landscaping per the site plan has been achieved; or 2) the delay in
compliance with the approved site plan has been through no fault of the owner
of the remainder parcel. 



   Under no circumstances shall the extension of time exceed one (1)
year.  The decision of the Director of Planning and Zoning shall be rendered
within thirty (30) days of receipt of the letter requesting an extension of
time.  The decision of the Director of Planning and Zoning or designee may
be appealed to the City Commission.  For purposes of these appeals, no
application fee shall be charged.  The City Commission may reverse the
denial for an extension of time and impose a new completion date upon a
finding that the remainder parcel owner's failure to complete the project is
through no fault of his/her own.  Any subsequent, additional request for an
extension of time shall be submitted directly to the City Commission.  The
City Commission shall determine whether an additional extension of time will
be granted.  The City Commission shall use the criteria above to determine
whether an additional extension of time will be granted.



   B.   Lot Line Modification.



      1.   General.  The purpose and intent of this subsection is
to set forth a uniform procedure for the reviewing of proposed changes to
property boundaries. 



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  The applicant shall submit a
letter describing the proposed change, and include or attach any details of
the affected property, including the site address and legal description.  A
survey, which clearly illustrates the proposed boundaries, dimensions, and
easements, if any, shall be required.



      3.   Review Criteria.  All proposed lot line modifications
and lot splits shall comply with all the regulations of the respective zoning
district, including density, size, and frontage requirements, as described in
Chapter 3 of these Land Development Regulations.  In addition, the following
shall apply:



         a.   The modification to property boundaries do not
result in the creation of more than two (2) lots;



         b.   The proposed modification may require the recording
of additional easements to create access for utility infrastructure;



         c.   All newly created lots shall have no encumbrances
on the subject property that would render the parcel(s) undevelopable;



         d.   The boundary changes shall not cause any structures
on the affected properties to become nonconforming with respect to the
minimum setbacks required by the zoning district or approving plat; and



         e.   Approval of a master plan modification is a
prerequisite to any proposed change in property boundaries within a planned
development.



      4.   Approval Process.  Staff shall review each request for
lot line modification and lot split, and action will be taken by the
appropriate administrative official.



   C.   Mobile Vendor Approval.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of
this subsection is to set forth well-defined application processes, review
criteria, and information to guide in the processing and review of mobile
vending units (MVU) submittals.



         b.   Applicability.  This subsection is applicable to
any MVU proposed within the city in accordance with Chapter 3, Article V,
Section 10 .  It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate an MVU in the city
without first obtaining the necessary approvals as contained herein.



         c.   Exception.  Portable or mobile kitchens necessary
to provide temporary food services in connection with permitted construction
work are not subject to the removal requirement or size restrictions.  Such
temporary units must be removed immediately upon completion of the work.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.  Because of minimum separation
requirements between each MVU, in those instances when more than one (1)
application has been submitted for the same location, the earliest
application shall be processed and forwarded to either the Planning and
Development Board or the Community Redevelopment Agency, whichever is
applicable.



      3.   Review Criteria.  The MVU shall comply with the
regulations and requirements of Chapter 3, Article V, Section 10.  Site
constraints and site plan functionality shall be satisfactorily addressed to
justify the request.



      4.   Approval Process.  Staff shall review the proposed
location and dimensions of each MVU to ensure compliance with the review
criteria contained herein, and provide a recommendation.  Once an individual
or assembly MVU application is approved, a permit fee shall be paid by the
applicant, and business tax receipt or certificate of use received, prior to
the operation of the MVU.



      5.   Expiration.  Each approval for an MVU shall be effective
for one (1) year, from October 1 until September 30, subject to annual
renewal.  Assembly permits are subject to the Special Event Permit
regulations.



      6.   Fees.  The annual renewal fees for an MVU shall be paid
to the Business Tax Division in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted
by the city.



      7.   Suspension.  Approval of an MVU or assembly permit may
be temporarily suspended by the city under the following circumstances:  1)
when necessary to clear sidewalk areas for a "community or special event"
authorized by the city; 2) when street, sidewalk, or utility repairs
necessitate such action; or 3) when the city may cause the immediate removal
or relocation of all or parts of the MVU or assembly in emergency situations.



      8.   Denial or Revocation.  The City Magistrate, for business
tax receipt and certificate of use, shall have the power and authority to
deny or revoke the issuance or renewal of any application for MVU or Assembly
under the provisions of these Regulations.  In such instances, the applicant
shall be notified in writing of the denial of an application or the
suspension or revocation of an existing approval, and  the grounds
thereof.  Upon such notification, the operation shall cease and desist until
final action or outcome of the Magistrate.  An application approved under
these Regulations may be recommended for suspension or revocation by staff,
based on one (1) or more of the following:



         a.   Florida Department of Business and Professional
Regulation.  Cancellation of the vendor's permit issued by the Division of
Hotels and Restaurants of the Florida Department of Business and Professional
Regulation.



         b.   Expiration.  Expiration, suspension, revocation or
cancellation of any other business tax receipt, certificate of use or permit
required by the vendor.



         c.   Fraud.  The permit was procured by fraud or false
representation of fact.



         d.   Consent.  The abutting property owner or tenant
withdraws consent, in writing, for the mobile vending unit.



         e.   Violations.  Violations of this or any other
ordinance, the city's municipal code, conditions of permit, or when
conditions exist that present a threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare.



         f.   Miscellaneous.  If determined to be noncompliant
with the review criteria contained herein or otherwise inconsistent with the
original approval, or changing conditions warrant the removal of the unit
from the site.



      9.   Appeal.  Applicants who have been denied a request for
an MVU or assembly permit or who have had their approval revoked may formally
appeal such denial or revocation to the City Commission in accordance with
Chapter 1, Article VIII.



   D.   Modification to Development Order.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of
this subsection is to set forth a well-defined application process, review
criteria, and uniform procedure for processing requests to amend, modify, or
delete any condition of approval of a previously approved development order.



         b.   Applicability.  This application shall be
applicable to any proposed amendment, modification, or deletion of any
condition of approval of a previously approved development order.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  The applicant shall submit a
letter indicating the condition or conditions requested to be modified, a
detailed explanation for the proposed modification to the condition(s), and
thorough responses to the review criteria of Section 6.D.3. below.



      3.   Review Criteria.  The City Commission must find that the
subject application meets the intent of the original condition, or that there
are substantial mitigating factors, changing conditions, or new evidence that
causes the condition to be unnecessary or burdensome.  The following review
criteria shall be used to justify an application for modification:



         a.   Whether the proposed request would demonstrate
consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.



         b.   Whether the proposed request would not
significantly detract from the livability or appearance of the city, and
would be consistent with the established or desired character of the area or
with the applicable redevelopment plan.



         c.   Whether the proposed request would further the
intent of the city's environmental regulations, including the Tree
Preservation Ordinance.



         d.   Whether the proposed request would have an adverse
impact on property values of abutting or adjacent land.



         e.   Whether the proposed request would seriously reduce
the quality or quantity of light and air available to adjacent properties.



         f.   Whether the proposed request is necessary to
further the objectives of the city to promote sustainability in development,
economic development and business promotion, and/or the provision for
affordable housing.



         g.   Whether the proposed request meets the purpose and
intent of these Regulations but conflicts with another site development
standard or requirement, including sustainable development and green
initiatives.



      4.   Approval Process.  Staff shall review each application
and provide a recommendation to the City Commission.  The City Commission's
options shall include, but not be limited to the following:  1) approve; 2)
approve with conditions; 3) deny; or 4) remand the item to the Advisory Board
for a review and recommendation.  When the targeted condition was originally
recommended by an advisory board, such advisory board shall review the
application first and provide a recommendation to the City Commission.



      5.   Expiration.  The approval of a modification to a
development order shall remain valid as long as the corresponding application
remains in effect.  The approval of a modification does not extend the life
of the corresponding application for whose the of the condition of approval
of whose development order the subject request proposes to modify, amend, or
delete.



   E.   Sidewalk Café Approval.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of
this subsection is to set forth a well-defined application process, review
criteria, and uniform procedure for processing requests for sidewalk café
approval.



         b.   Applicabilty.  This subsection is applicable to
any sidewalk café proposed on any sidewalk (within a public right-of-way)
within the boundaries of the Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA), in
accordance with Chapter 3, Article V, Section 9.  It shall be unlawful for
anyone to operate a sidewalk café without first obtaining the necessary
approval.  Sidewalk cafés shall be located only where permissible as
prescribed herein.



         c.   Rules.  For the purposes of this subsection, a
"site plan" shall be construed to include either a new site plan or a major
site plan modification.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  See Section 1.D. above for the
submittal requirements of this application.



      3.   Review Criteria.  Compliance with the regulations and
limitations of a sidewalk café (see Chapter 3, Article V, Section 9). 
Review shall not continue on an application if it is determined that the
property is the subject of any outstanding fines, monies, fees, taxes, or
other charges owed to the city by the current or past owners or operators of
the property requesting a sidewalk café permit.



      4.   Approval Process.  Staff shall review each request for a
sidewalk café approval for compliance with the regulations of Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 9 and provide a recommendation to the CRA.  The CRA shall
take the following action:  1) approve; 2) approve with conditions; 3) deny;
or 4) table the item until more information is collected.  Site constraints
and site plan functionality shall be satisfactorily addressed to justify the
request.



      5.   Approval Process.  Staff shall review each request for
sidewalk café approval for compliance with the regulations of Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 9, and provide a recommendation.  The application shall
be forwarded to the Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA).  The CRA shall
make a recommendation to the City Commission, and the City Commission shall
take the following action:  1) approve; 2) approve with conditions; 3) table
or defer their decision to a subsequent meeting in order to collect
additional information or conduct further analyses; or 4) deny the request
for sidewalk café approval.  Once a sidewalk café application is approved
by the City Commission, a fee shall be paid by the applicant and business tax
receipt received prior to the operation of the sidewalk café.



      6.   Expiration.  Each approval shall be effective for one
(1) year, from October 1 until September 30, subject to annual renewal.



      7.   Fees.  The annual renewal fees for a sidewalk café
shall be paid to the Business Tax Division in accordance with the fee
schedule as adopted by the city.



      8.   Revocation or Suspension of Approval.  The approval for
a sidewalk café may be temporarily or permanently suspended by the city
under the following circumstances:



         a.   When it is necessary to clear sidewalk areas for a
"community or special event" authorized by the city.



         b.   When street, sidewalk, or utility repairs
necessitate such action or in an emergency situation.



         c.   Any necessary business or health permit, or the
required insurance has been suspended, revoked or cancelled.



         d.   Any current violation of the City Code, County
Code, or State Law on the premises has been found.



         e.   The operator exceeds the approved square footage by
placing any additional tables, chairs, etc., beyond the approved area.



         f.   Changing conditions of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic causes congestion necessitating removal of the sidewalk café.  Such
decisions shall be based upon findings of the city that the minimum required
pedestrian path is insufficient under existing circumstances and represents a
danger to the health, safety or general welfare of pedestrians or vehicular
traffic.



         g.   The operator has failed to correct any violations
of this article or conditions of approval within twenty-four (24) hours of
receipt of the city notice of same, delivered in writing to such operator.



      9.   Revocation or Suspension Process.



         a.   The city shall serve, by certified mail or hand
delivery to the address provided on the application, a written notice to the
operator of the sidewalk café in those instances when the city believes the
operator of the sidewalk café has engaged or is engaged in conduct
warranting suspension or revocation of the sidewalk café.  The written
complaint shall cite the following elements:  1) the regulation and/or any
ordinance that was, or is being violated by the operator; 2) the action the
operator shall take or cease, in order to rectify the violation, if any; and
3) a reasonable time period for which the operator can cure such violation.



         b.   The operator shall be given adequate opportunity to
request a review as provided herein, unless the city finds that an emergency
condition exists, which poses serious danger to the public health, safety,
morals, or welfare of the city; in which case, advance notice and hearing is
not required.  The licensee shall immediately be advised of the action taken
by the city in the instances of an emergency suspension or revocation.



         c.   In non-emergency suspension or revocation
situations, staff shall place the request to suspend or revoke the approval
of the sidewalk café on the CRA agenda within a reasonable timeframe. The
recommendation of the CRA shall be placed on the same City Commission agenda
as the other items from the same meeting.



         d.   In emergency suspension or revocation situations,
where prior approval is immediately suspended or revoked, a review of the
operator's request for re-instatement shall follow as soon as the agenda
schedule allows.



         e.   The decision of the City Commission shall be final.
An applicant shall not be permitted to apply for another sidewalk café
approval for a minimum of one (1) year following revocation by the City
Commission.



         f.   Any person or entity operating a sidewalk café
without approval or any property owner allowing the operation of a sidewalk
café without approval shall be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter
1, Article I, Section 7.A.



      10.   Appeal.  Any aggrieved party may appeal a final
decision of the City Commission under this subsection by writ of certiorari
as provided in Chapter 1, Article VIII.



   F.   Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF).  See Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 13 for the regulations pertaining to the review process of
WCF.



   G.   Zoning Verification.



      1.   General.  The purpose and intent of this subsection is
to set forth a uniform procedure for the processing of formal requests from
the public for written information from the city on zoning and land
development regulations (i.e. zoning verification) or other data associated
with real property or the applicable process for development or redevelopment
thereof.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  The request shall be
represented by a letter describing the desired information and must include
any applicable details on the subject property, such as a legal description,
site address, property owner, and the like.



      3.   Issuance of Zoning Verification Letter.  Staff shall
review each request and provide a written response.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-010, passed 6-19-12; Am. Ord.
12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord. 13-027, § 2, passed 10-1-13; Am. Ord.
15-003, passed 3-17-15)



ARTICLE III.  ENGINEERING DIVISION SERVICES



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this article is to set
forth uniform and well-defined procedures for each application processed by
the Engineering Division.  Each application is intended to ensure that:



      1.   Compliance.  Development and construction-related
activities within the city are consistent with all land development
regulations, the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards
(EDHCS), and all other applicable standards and requirements set forth by the
city or other public entities having jurisdictional responsibility;



      2.   Public Purpose.  Development and supportive facilities
and services further the public health, safety, appearance, and general
welfare; and



      3.   Compatibility.  Development infrastructure and
construction-related activities are compatible and coordinated with existing
and anticipated development in the immediate area surrounding the site.



   B.   Administration.  The City Engineer or designee shall be
responsible for the overall coordination and administration of land
development applications within this article.



   C.   Preapplication Conference.  A preapplication conference with
the Engineering Division is encouraged for each application or
construction-related activity regulated by this article prior to the
preparation and submission of such application.



   D.   Completeness.  An application will be processed by the
Engineering Division when it is deemed complete, including all related
submittal documents.  Please note that the City Engineer or designee may
rule that certain required items may be excluded from the submittal, and the
finding of an application "complete" shall not constitute a determination of
compliance with the substantive requirements of city or state regulations, or
any other applicable codes.



   E.   Fees.  Fees shall be paid when each application is submitted
to the Engineering Division and in the amount as adopted from time to time by
the City Commission.



   F.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the applications and
processes contained herein.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Subdivision and Platting.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of this
subsection is to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the
Comprehensive Plan, by setting forth uniform and well-defined application
processes, and information to guide in the review of the subdivision and
platting of real property.



      2.   Applicability.  The regulations set forth in this
subsection shall apply as follows:



         a.   General Requirements.  No property shall be
platted, recorded, sold, or any land development permit be issued by the city
unless the subdivision or lot-line modification meets all the applicable laws
of the State of Florida and has been approved in accordance with the
requirements of these Land Development Regulations.  These requirements or
regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way,
impair or interfere with private restrictions placed upon property by deed,
covenant, or private agreement, except that where this subsection imposes
higher standards than imposed by such deeds, covenants, or private
agreements, then the provisions of this subsection shall apply.  The city
shall not be responsible for enforcement of such deeds, covenants, or
agreements.  Unless otherwise exempt from this subsection, all subdivision
of land is subject to the platting requirements contained herein. 
Preliminary parcel layout and improvements are shown in the preliminary plat,
while the final plat indicates the legal subdivision of land subject to
Florida Statutes.  To obtain approval for a development in the City of
Boynton Beach, the developer shall submit both a preliminary plat and a final
plat to the City Engineer, and shall notify the Director of Planning and
Zoning of same.  No final plat of any subdivision shall be recorded in the
Office of the Clerk of the Court of Palm Beach County until the subdivision
or other subject change has been duly approved by the city in the manner
prescribed herein.  No division of land through a lot-line modification
shall be recorded in the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser's Office until
after the city has approved the application.  All final plats and
applications for lot-line modifications shall be recorded in the Office of
the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Palm Beach County.



         b.   Unlawful Sale or Transfer of Property.  It shall
be unlawful for a property owner or agent to sell, transfer, or convey
ownership of a subdivision plat if such subdivision plat has not been
formally approved by the city and recorded with the Palm Beach County Clerk
or the Circuit Court.  The owner or agent shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree, punishable as provided by Florida Statutes if such
unlawful use is made of a plat prior to it being formally approved by the
city and properly recorded with the Palm Beach County Clerk or Circuit Court.



         c.   Building Permits Subject to Final Plat or Lot Line
Modification Approval.  Unless otherwise determined by the City Engineer, no
building permit shall be issued and no city service may be rendered until a
final plat or lot line modification has been approved by the city and
properly recorded as contained herein.



         d.   Creation of Subdivision by Joint Owners of Land. 
Where it may subsequently become evident that a subdivision is being created
by the recording of deeds by metes and bounds description of tracts of land,
the city may, at its discretion, require all the owners involved to jointly
file a plat of the subdivision being so created or require all owners of
record to jointly conform to the applicable provisions of this article as are
requisite for the issuance of building permits or the furnishing of any city
service.



         e.   Deeds, Covenants, and Other Private Restrictions. 
These regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way,
impair or interfere with private restrictions placed upon property by deed,
covenant, or private agreement, except that where this article imposes higher
standards than imposed by such deeds, covenants, or private agreements, then
the provisions of this subsection shall apply.  The city shall not be
responsible for enforcement of such deeds, covenants, or agreements.



      3.   Lot Line Modification.  A lot line modification shall be
required when a property owner or agent desires to subdivide real property
and the City Engineer determines that platting and replatting is not
required.  In these instances, approval of a lot line modification is
required from the Planning and Zoning Division in accordance with Chapter 2,
Article II, Section 6.B. in order to ensure compliance with all development
regulations.



   B.   Preliminary Plat.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of a preliminary
plat is to provide adequate and necessary descriptive information regarding
the proposed subdivision, dividing, and platting of real property in order to
facilitate an expeditious final platting process.  The intent is to set
forth uniform and well-defined application processes, and information to
guide in the thorough and timely review of the preliminary plat application.



         b.   Applicability.  No person, firm, corporation or
any other association shall combine lots, tracts, or parcels of land for
development purposes, or to subdivide a tract of land except in conformity
with this chapter.  No development or subdivision shall be platted or
recorded, or any building permit or land development permit be issued, unless
such subdivision or development meets all the provisions of this chapter and
those of any applicable Florida Statutes, unless a waiver of platting has
been issued in accordance with Section 5 below.



         c.   Prerequisite to the Preliminary Plat.  Pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.D.6., master plan approval shall be required
prior to the consideration of any proposed platting or replatting of a
planned zoning district.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  A written request shall be
submitted to the City Engineer and accompanied by four (4) copies of the
preliminary plat, conceptual, or phasing plan.  The conceptual or phasing
plans shall have the same level of detail as that typically shown on a
"master plan" or "site plan" as described in Chapter 2, Article II and the
definitions (Chapter 1, Article II).  In addition, the preliminary plat,
conceptual plan, or phasing plan, whichever is submitted, shall illustrate
ingress-egress locations/easements, landscape easements, limited access
easements, storm drainage easements, utility easements, etc. and all other
applicable conditions of approval (COA) attached to the development order
(DO) that were issued by the City Commission upon master plan and site plan
approval.



      3.   Review Criteria.  The preliminary plat shall meet
requirements of the final plat, except that it shall be submitted without the
required signatures and seals.  It may also be submitted without maintenance
and use covenants, condominium documents, deeds, or other legal documents not
related to the survey or engineering design of the project.



      4.   Approval Process.  The City Engineer or designee shall
review the preliminary plat application to ensure that it complies with the
requirements of Section 2.B.3. above.



   C.   Final Plat.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to provide a procedure for preparing plat documents consistent
with development regulations of the city and to create documentation of
physical characteristics of land proposed for development within the city.



         b.   Applicability.  No person, firm, corporation or
any other association shall combine lots, tracts, or parcels of land for
development purposes, or to subdivide a tract of land except in conformity
with this chapter.  No development or subdivision shall be platted or
recorded, or any land development or building permit be issued, unless such
subdivision or development meets all the provisions of this chapter and those
of any applicable Florida Statutes, unless a waiver of platting has been
issued in accordance with Section 5 below.



   All developments or redevelopments that are subject to the requirements
of this article shall require a plat prepared by a registered land surveyor
and mapper in compliance with this chapter and the requirements of all
provisions of Florida Statutes.  Depending on the characteristics of the
development, the platting requirements would be satisfied by the approval of
one (1) of the following types of plats:



            (1)   Boundary Plat.  "Boundary plat" is
generally used when assembling multiple parcels of land, tracts or lots into
a single parcel for development purposes.  Project types would include
rental apartments, public facilities, shopping centers, and industrial
developments where "unity of title" ownership is required.  A boundary plat
may be submitted when portions of an existing subdivision or parcels of land
being assembled to create a single developable property are of such
simplicity or are surrounded by such development as to justify the waiving of
the requirements for preparing a full replat.  For the sole purpose of
determining application fees, a boundary plat submittal shall be considered a
pre-application submittal.  All provisions of F.S. Ch. 177 and these Land
Development Regulation shall fully apply to every boundary plat including,
but not limited to, those tangible improvements required in Chapter 4,
Article VIII (Roadways, Utilities, and Infrastructure Design Standards) not
already in place.



            (2)   Record Plat.  A "record plat" is generally
used when land assembly or subdivision would ultimately yield multiple
parcels under individual ownership.  Project types would include
single-family subdivisions, townhome developments, condominiums, retail
centers, or office-warehouse and similar developments.



         c.   City Engineer Determination.  Other types of plat
documents may be applicable to a new development.  The City Engineer shall
review those cases to determine which platting process is appropriate. 
However, a new boundary survey for any replat is required when the replat
affects any boundary of the previously platted property or when improvements
which may affect the boundary of the previously platted property have been
made on the lands to be replatted.



         d.   Exemptions to Platting.



            (1)   Eligibility.  A waiver of the platting
requirement may be considered when the land is to be divided into no more
than two (2) contiguous lots and no more than three (3) regularly shaped
areas are to be dedicated to the City of Boynton Beach (easements, tracts,
parks, rights-of-way, etc.) and because:



               (a)   Unusual conditions are created by
ownership or development of adjacent lands;



               (b)   The land concerned is isolated or
remote in its relationship to other platted or improved lands; or



               (c)   The improvements and dedications
existing on the land are substantially in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and if the waiving of the requirements for platting would not
conflict with the purpose and intent of this chapter.



            (2)   Requirements in Lieu of Platting.  If
platting is not required, a certified survey shall be submitted to the City
Engineer, who may require deeded rights-of-way and easements, reservations or
improvements required in connection with platting under this chapter,
including the posting of surety to carry out the intent and purpose of this
chapter.



         e.   Substitutions to Platting.  The submission of a
master plan for a boundary plat may be waived at the option of the City
Engineer.



         f.   Prerequisite to Platting.  Approval of a master
plan shall be required prior to the consideration of any proposed platting or
replatting in instances when rezoning to planned developments (as defined by
Chapter 1, Article II).  See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.D.6. for the
regulations pertaining to the master plan application process.  Master plan
review shall not be required when rezoning lands to conventional residential
zoning districts.



      2.   Submittal Requirements.  Upon filing an application for
final plat approval, the developer shall pay the applicable fee as adopted by
resolution of the City Commission from time to time to help defray the cost
of processing the final plat review.  The final plat shall conform to the
corresponding approved master plan.  Failure to submit the final plat within
six (6) months from the date of application shall require submittal.  The
submittal package for final plat shall include the following:



         a.   Final Plat.  Six (6) copies of the final plat,
drawn or printed on twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch (24" x 36") line and
one (1) chronoflex, mylar, or other approved time stable material.  The
final plat shall be prepared by a professional surveyor and mapper currently
registered in the State of Florida, and is to be clearly and legibly drawn
with black permanent drawing ink or veritype process to a scale of not
smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, or as otherwise
determined by the City Engineer;



         b.   Construction Plans.  Four (4) sets of the
construction plans, which shall be reviewed for technical compliance, along
with approved Health Department permits for sewer and water, in accordance
with city requirements;



         c.   Surety.  Surety guaranteeing that all work
required whether public or private will be completed in full accordance with
the plat and approved construction plans; with all development conditions
attached thereto; and with the Boynton Beach Land Development Regulations. 
Surety for required utility system improvements shall be coordinated directly
with the Utilities Department, whether they will remain private or conveyed
to the city upon completion of their construction.  Surety shall be in
substantially the form and amount delineated in Section 6 below;



   Restoration surety in compliance with Section 6 below in the amount of
one hundred ten percent (110%) of the engineer's certified cost for restoring
the site to its original condition including, but not limited to, repair of
access/haul routes; seed; sod; landscaping; drainage and utilities;



         d.   Maintenance Agreements.  A copy of the property
owner's association documents, if applicable, shall be required.  These
documents shall indicate the maintenance responsibility for street lighting
and shall provide for the formation of a special taxing district to assume
maintenance responsibility for the street lighting system in the event of the
dissolution of the property owners association;



         e.   Legal Documents.  Supplementary material as
required by the office of the City Engineer, i.e. deeds, easements, etc.,
when access, drainage, or utility services cannot be accomplished through
platted rights-of-way deeds or easements to accomplish access, drainage or
utility service;



         f.   Fees.  Upon filing application for final plat
approval, the developer shall pay a processing fee, and an administrative fee
equal to a percentage of the estimated cost of construction of
improvements.  Said fee shall be as adopted by resolution of the City
Commission, and shall be paid in full prior to placing final plat approval on
a City Commission agenda; and



         g.   Miscellaneous.  Failure to submit the final plat
to the City Engineer within six (6) months from the date of application shall
require resubmittal.



      3.   Review Criteria.  The final plat shall be drawn or
printed on linen, chronoflex, mylar, or other approved time stable material
and sized twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches.  The final plat
shall be prepared by a professional surveyor and mapper currently registered
in the State of Florida, and is to be clearly and legibly drawn with black
permanent drawing ink or veritype process to a scale of not smaller than one
(1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, or as otherwise determined by the
City Engineer.  The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with the
provisions of F.S. Chapter 177, as amended, and shall conform to the
following additional requirements:



         a.   Index.  When more than a single sheet must be used
to accurately portray the lands being developed or subdivided, the first
sheet shall contain an index plus a map showing the entire development
delineating the number of the sheet where each portion is shown.  Each sheet
must show the particular number of that sheet, the total number of sheets
included and clearly labeled matchlines to show where other sheets match or
adjoin.



         b.   Name of Development.  The plat shall have a title
or name acceptable to the city.  When the plat is a new development, the
name of the development shall not duplicate nor be phonetically similar to
the name of any existing or approved development.  When the plat is an
addition to a recorded subdivision, it shall carry the same name as the
existing subdivision and labeled as an addition.



         c.   Private Streets and Related Facilities.  All
streets and their related facilities designed to serve more than one (1)
property owner shall be dedicated to public use; however, private streets
shall be permitted within property under single ownership such as a property
owners' association, and shall be constructed in accordance with design
requirements of public streets.  Where private streets are permitted,
ownership and maintenance association documents shall be submitted with the
final plat and the dedication contained on the plat shall clearly dedicate
the roads and maintenance responsibility to the association without recourse
to the city or any other public agency.  The rights-of-way and related
facilities shall be identified as tracts for road purposes under specific
ownership.



         d.   Title.  The plat shall have a title printed in
bold legible letters containing the name of the development; the name of the
city, county and state; the section, township and range as applicable and if
the plat is a replat, amendment or addition to an existing development or
subdivision, it shall include the words "section, unit, replat, amendment,
etc.".  All plats for planned developments shall be identified as to the
type of development being platted.  For example, all planned unit
developments shall contain "P.U.D." within the title; all planned commercial
developments shall contain "P.C.D." within the title; all planned industrial
developments shall contain "P.I.D." within the title; or any combination
thereof shall be identified within the title of the plat.



         e.   Description.  Each plat shall show a full and
detailed boundary description of the land embraced in the plat.  The plat
must be so complete that the starting point can be determined and the
boundaries run without reference to the map.



         f.   Dedications, Certifications, and Approvals.  The
plat shall contain on the face or first page the following certifications and
approvals, acknowledged as required by law, all being in the form set forth
herein.



            (1)   Dedications.  The purpose of all reserved
areas shown on the plat shall be defined in the dedication.  All areas
reserved for use by the residents of the development shall be so dedicated. 
All areas reserved for public use, such as parks, rights-of-way for roads,
streets or alleys, shall be so dedicated; easements for utilities,
rights-of-way and easements for drainage purposes and any other area, however
designated, shall be dedicated by the owner of the land at the time the plat
is recorded.  When the owner is a corporation, the dedication shall be
signed on behalf of the corporation by the president or vice-president and
the secretary or assistant secretary, respectively, as set forth in paragraph
(2) below.



            (2)   Mortgagee's Consent and Approval.  All
mortgages along with the mortgagee's consent and approval of the dedication
are required on all plats where mortgages encumber the land to be platted. 
The signature(s) of the mortgagee(s) must be witnessed and the execution must
be acknowledged in the same manner as mortgages are required to be witnessed
and acknowledged.  In case a mortgagee is a corporation, the consent and
approval shall be signed on behalf of the corporation by the president or
vice-president and the secretary or an assistant secretary, respectively, by
and with the authority of the board of directors.



            (3)   Certification.  The plat shall contain the
signature, registration number and official seal of the surveyor and mapper
certifying that the plat complies with F.S. Chapter 177, as amended, and
these Regulations.  When plats are recorded and improvements are to be
accomplished under surety posted as provided for by these Regulations, the
required improvements and surety shall include P.C.P.'s.



            (4)   City Approval.  The plat shall be reviewed
for conformity to F.S. Ch. 177, as amended, by a professional surveyor and
mapper, either by or under contract to the city, and evidence of this review
shall be shown on the plat.  The plat shall also contain the approval and
signature block and date for the Mayor and the City Engineer with the
acknowledgment and signature of the City Clerk.



            (5)   County Approval.  The plat, when required
by the City Commission, shall also contain the date of approval of the Board
of County Commissioners; the signature block of the Chairman of the Board;
the signature block of the County Engineer; and the acknowledgment and
signature block of the Clerk of the Circuit Court.



            (6)   Certification of Title.  A title
certificate shall be contained on the face of the first page of the plat. 
The title certificate shall state:



               (a)   That the lands as described and shown
on the plat are in the name, and that apparent record title is held by the
person, persons or organizations, executing the dedication;



               (b)   That all taxes have been paid on said
lands as required by F.S. § 197.192, as amended; and,



               (c)   All mortgages on the land and indicate
their official record book and page number.



         The title certification must be an opinion of an
attorney-at-law licensed in Florida, or the certification of an abstractor or
a title insurance company licensed in Florida.



         g.   Survey Data.  The final plat shall show the length
of all arcs together with central angles, radii, and points of curvature
including, but not limited to, block corner radii.  Sufficient survey data
shall be shown to positively describe the boundary of each lot, block,
right-of-way, easement and all other areas shown on the plat and all areas
shall be within the boundary of the plat as shown in the description.  The
survey data contained on the plat shall also include:



            (1)   The scale, both stated and graphically
illustrated, shall be shown on each sheet.



            (2)   A prominent north arrow shall be drawn on
every sheet included showing any portion of the lands subdivided.  The
bearing or azimuth reference shall be clearly stated on the face of the plat
in the notes or legend.



            (3)   The point of beginning shall be boldly shown
together with the letters P.O.B. in bold letters.



            (4)   All intersecting street lines shall be
joined to form required safe sight corners pursuant to city standards, and
all dimensions shall be shown.



            (5)   All adjoining property shall be identified
by a subdivision name, plat book and page or, if unplatted, the land shall be
so designated.



            (6)   Permanent reference monuments shall be shown
in the manner prescribed by F.S. Ch. 177, as amended. All information
pertaining to the location of "P.R.M. s" shall be indicated in note form on
the plat.  Permanent control points and permanent reference monuments shall
be designed and set as prescribed by F.S. Ch. 177, as amended.



            (7)   A space, sized three (3) inches by five (5)
inches, shall be reserved in the upper right corner on each plat sheet for
the purposes of recording information by the Clerk of the Circuit Court.



            (8)   The map shall mathematically close within
one hundredth (.01) of a foot, and shall be accurately tied to all township,
range and section lines occurring within the subdivision by distance and
bearing.  In addition, the initial point in the description shall be
accurately tied to the nearest quarter section corner, section corner or
government corner.



            (9)   The initial point in the description shall
be accurately tied to the nearest quarter-section corner or government
corner.  Each government corner being used shall be identified.  If the
development being platted is a re-subdivision of a previously recorded
subdivision, then a tie to a permanent reference monument from the parent
plat is sufficient.  If the development is a re-subdivision of a part of a
previously recorded subdivision, sufficient ties to controlling lines
appearing on the parent plat must be provided to permit an overlay.  The
position and orientation of the plat shall conform to the Florida State Plan
Coordinate System in the manner established by the City Engineer and
prescribed in the Engineering Division's Design Handbook and associated forms.



            (10)   The cover sheet or first page of the plat
shall show a vicinity sketch, showing the subdivision's location in reference
to other areas of the city.



            (11)   A complete legend of abbreviations shall be
shown.



            (12)   All lettering on the plat shall be at a
minimum one-tenth (0.10) of an inch in height.



            (13)   The plat boundary and all parcels shown on
the development or subdivision plats intended to be conveyed in fee title
shall be delineated by solid lines.



            (14)   Lines intersecting curves shall be noted as
radial or non-radial as the case may be.



            (15)   A note addressing any abandoned underlying
lands or easements, including record information, shall be shown.



            (16)   Tabulation of survey data:



               (a)   The use of tangent tables is not
permitted. However, at the discretion of the City Engineer on a case by case
basis, the use of a tangent table to reflect corner clip (safe sight) chords
may be permitted if deemed necessary to meet requirements of neatness and
clarity of the plat.  Scale factors shall not be considered.  Such tables,
when permitted, must appear on the map sheet to which they refer and tangents
shall be numbered consecutively through the entire presentation.



               (b)   Curve data may be tabulated subject to
the following conditions or exceptions:



                  (i)   External boundary or centerline
curve data may not be tabulated.



                  (ii)   Where data is tabulated, a
minimum of the delta angle, radius and arc length and the curve designation
number or letter will be shown on the plat.



                  (iii)   Curve tables reflecting the
tabulated data will appear on the map sheet on which the curves appear.



         h.   Lot and Block Identification.  Each lot and block
shall be numbered or lettered.  All lots shall be numbered or lettered by
progressive numbers or letters individually throughout the subdivision or
progressively numbered or lettered in each block.  Blocks in each
incremental plat shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout a
subdivision.



         i.   Street Names.  The plat shall contain the name of
each street shown on the plat.  Proposed streets which are in alignment with
other existing and named streets shall bear the same name of the existing
street.  In no case, except as indicated in the preceding sentence, shall
the name of the proposed street, excluding a numerical system, duplicate or
be phonetically similar to existing street names, regardless of the use of
the modifier "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive," "place," "court," etc.



         j.   Excluded Parcels.  Where an excluded parcel is
completely surrounded by areas included within the plat, sufficient easements
or right-of-way to provide necessary access, utilities, and drainage to the
excluded parcel shall be provided.  No strip or parcel of land shall be
reserved by the owner unless the same is sufficient in size and area to be of
some particular use or service.  The intended use of all reserved areas
shall be shown on the plat in note form on the cover sheet.



         k.   Easements.  All plats shall show easements,
including but not limited to landscape easements, limited access easements,
storm drainage easements, utility easements, etc.



   The plat shall contain a statement that no buildings or structures
shall be placed within easements.  Easements for proper drainage shall be
provided where necessary at a width adequate to accommodate the drainage
facilities.  A minimum width of twelve (12) feet shall be provided for
underground storm drainage installations.  Where canals or ditches are
permitted, the width shall be adequate to accommodate drainage facilities
plus twenty (20) feet on one (1) side to permit equipment to enter for
maintenance purposes.



   Easements for supporting utility systems shall also be provided where
necessary at a width adequate to accommodate their depths.  A minimum width
of twelve (12) feet shall be provided for these systems.  Where sanitary
sewer systems are greater than five (5) feet in depth, the minimum utility
easement width shall be twice the greatest depth point on any link segment
plus two (2) feet in order to access the system during any servicing required
task.



         l.   Reservations and Restrictive Covenants. 
Restrictions pertaining to the type and use of water supply; type and use of
sanitary facilities; use and benefits of water areas, canals and other open
spaces; odd-shaped and substandard parcels; restrictions controlling building
lines; establishment and maintenance of buffer strips and walls; and
restrictions of similar nature shall require the establishment of restrictive
covenants and such covenants shall be noted on the plat.  Documents
pertaining to restrictive covenants shall be submitted with the final plat.



         m.   Waterways.  Land which includes any existing or
proposed private waterways shall be included on the original plat together
with formal acceptance of maintenance by the subdivider, his grantees and
assigns, for said waterways including vegetated littoral zones, and, further
the duty, at their expense, of keeping same free of weeds, hyacinths,
cloggage or other debris or noxious material.



         n.   Mobile Home Park Developments.  Mobile home
subdivisions shall be in the proper zone for such development and prior to
the submittal of the final plat and supporting data shall have the approval
of the final zoning authority and shall meet all of the requirements of the
zoning code.  The dedication on the plat of a mobile home subdivision shall
include the following additional provisions or wording equal hereto: "Said
owner(s) hereby dedicate(s) the lots shown on the plat exclusively for mobile
home or trailer parking and use incidental thereto, except as to the lots
indicated for other purposes on the plat.  Mobile home or trailer parking is
allowed only on the indicated lots.  Areas indicated as parks or playgrounds
are dedicated for the use of the owners of the lots shown on this plat."



   Mobile home subdivision plats shall conform to all the requirements of
these Regulations and the requirements of F.S. Chapter 177, as amended.



         o.   Master Plan.  The final plat shall conform to the
corresponding approved master plan, when applicable.



         p.   Miscellaneous.  All plats shall show
ingress-egress locations and all other applicable conditions of approval
(COA) attached to the development order (DO) that were issued by the City
Commission upon master plan or site plan approval.



      4.   Approval Process.  The City Engineer, or his or her
designee, shall examine the final plat as to its compliance with the
constitution and statutes of the State of Florida and the ordinances of the
City of Boynton Beach and shall in writing, within thirty (30) days, report
his finding, recommendations or approval to the plat preparer.  Reference
shall be made to the specific article, section and paragraph with which the
final plat does not comply.  If deficiencies exist, they shall be corrected
by the plat preparer.  If the final plat meets the provisions of these
Regulations, and complies with the statutes of the State of Florida and the
ordinances of the City of Boynton Beach, the City Engineer shall submit the
final plat to the City Commission for approval.  The City Commission may,
after its approval, also require county approval prior to recording.



   The final plat, signed and sealed, reviewed by a professional surveyor
and mapper, signed by the Mayor and the City Engineer, and acknowledged by
the City Clerk, shall be presented to the Palm Beach County Clerk (or county
engineer if county approval is required) to complete the formal recording
process.



      5.   Modification to Plat.  Any proposed modification to an
existing plat of record shall be considered a replat or an amended plat, as
determined by the City Engineer.  Any request to replat a previously platted
subdivision shall be processed in accordance with Section 2.B. above.



      6.   Previously Platted Subdivisions.



         a.   Active Subdivision Development.  A plat and/or
improvement plans for a subdivision that has been approved under the
subdivision regulations adopted by the City Council on March 25, 1959, and
amendments thereto, may be completed as approved under those regulations with
respect to the approved plans and/or plat.  Additions thereto which have not
been approved shall be subject to the requirements of these Land Development
Regulations.



         b.   Reversion of Subdivided Land to Acreage.  The
official records of Palm Beach County contain plats recorded prior to the
adoption of these Land Development Regulations governing development in the
City of Boynton Beach.  Such plats show areas within the city which have
been platted as subdivisions, but which have either been partially improved
or developed or remain unimproved or undeveloped.  These areas, if fully or
partially developed as platted, would not conform to the current needs of
urbanization in the city as established herein.



   The City Commission shall have the power, on its own motion, to order
the vacation and reversion to acreage of all or any part of such subdivision
within the incorporated areas of the city, including the vacation of streets
or other parcels of land dedicated for public purposes or any portion of such
streets or other parcels.  Such order of vacation and reversion of
subdivision plats may only be made by the City Commission if a plat of the
subdivision was recorded as provided by law not less than five (5) years
before the date of proposed reversion to acreage; and the subdivision or part
thereof proposed to be reverted to acreage, not more than thirty-five percent
(35%) of the unimproved portion of the subdivision area has been sold as lots
with sixty-five percent (65%) left under one (1) ownership.



   Prior to ordering such a vacation and reversion to acreage the City
Commission shall hold a public hearing relative to the proposed vacation and
reversion to acreage, with prior notice thereof being given by publishing in
a newspaper of local circulation the date of and the subject matter of the
hearing at least once within the two (2)-week period preceding the date of
such public hearing.  At such public hearing, the vacation and reversion to
acreage of subdivided land must be shown to conform to the comprehensive plan
of the area and that the public health, safety, economy, comfort, order, and
welfare will be promoted thereby.  No owner of any parcel of land in a
subdivision so vacated shall be deprived of reasonable access to or from such
parcel to which such parcel has theretofore had access.  Access after such
vacation and reversion need not be the same as theretofore existing, but
shall be reasonably equivalent thereto.  The owner or owners of a
subdivision subject to vacation and reversion to acreage may at their option
vacate or abandon the subdivision or portion thereof, or may improve
undeveloped rights-of-way or rights-of-way which have been partially improved
at their cost and expense, provided such improvements comply with the
provisions of these Regulations and are acceptable to the City Commission for
maintenance.



         c.   Improvement of Partially Developed Subdivisions. 
The improvement of partially developed subdivisions not subject to vacation
and reversion to acreage shall comply with the requirements of these
Regulations and the following:



            (1)   Rights-of-Way.  The existing right-of-way
for local streets shall be considered sufficient, provided it is at least
fifty (50) feet wide and the improvements comply with the fifty (50)-foot
typical section for road construction contained in city standards.  If the
existing right-of-way is less than fifty (50) feet wide, additional
right-of-way shall be provided to make a total of not less than fifty (50)
feet.



            (2)   Easements.  Easements for proper drainage
shall be provided where necessary at a width adequate to accommodate the
drainage facilities.  A minimum width of twelve (12) feet shall be provided
for underground storm drainage installations.  Where canals or ditches are
permitted, the width shall be adequate to accommodate drainage facilities
plus twenty (20) feet on one (1) side to permit equipment to enter for
maintenance purposes.



            (3)   Platting.  Compliance with platting
sections of these Regulations is not required where the improvements are
contained in existing platted rights-of-way and no additional right-of-way
dedication is needed.  Drainage rights-of-way and easements where a plat is
not required shall be accomplished by separate instrument dedicating the
easement and/or rights-of-way for such purposes.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Land Development Permit (LDP).



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of this
subsection is to set forth a well-defined application process, review
criteria, and uniform procedure for the processing of land development
permits, and to ensure that developments comply with the drainage
requirements of the South Florida Water Management District and other
external agencies, and the respective standards described in the Engineering
Design Handbook and Construction Standards, the city's Code of Ordinances,
and these Land Development Regulations.



      2.   Applicability.  The land development permit (LDP) shall
be required prior to the commencement of any new construction (or
modification) of site improvements, required infrastructure, and activities
listed hereunder.  For the purposes of this subsection, a modification shall
be construed to exclude simple maintenance and repairs of existing site
improvements and infrastructure, as determined by the City Engineer or
designee.  The LDP shall be required for the following:



         a.   Impervious Surfaces.  Any new impervious surfaces
of eight hundred (800) square feet or more;



         b.   Off-Street Parking Areas.  Off-Street parking,
vehicular use area, and loading zones on private property as described in
Chapter 4, Article VI (Parking Lot, Vehicular Use Area, and Loading Zone
Standards);



         c.   Required Improvements.  Any drainage, storm water
and wastewater systems, and the other required improvements (e.g. utilities,
streets, sidewalks, pedestrian and bicycle paths, etc.) as described in
Chapter 4, Article VIII (Roadways, Utilities, and Infrastructure Design
Standards);



         d.   Landscaping and Irrigation.  Landscaping,
including its irrigation, located within rights-of-way or that which is
required on private property pursuant to Chapter 4, Article II (Landscaping
Design and Buffering Standards);



         e.   Clearing and Grubbing Activities.  Any proposal to
cut down, move or remove, destroy, or effectively destroy through damaging
any plant material protected under Chapter 4, Article I (Environmental
Protection Standards);



         f.   Excavation and Fill Activities.  Any excavation,
grading, dredging, or fill activities pursuant to Chapter 4, Article XI
(Excavation and Fill Regulations);



         g.   Exterior Lighting.  Any exterior site lighting
located within public rights-of-way or that which is required in off-street
parking areas or other vehicular use areas pursuant to Chapter 4, Article VII
(Exterior Lighting Standards); and



         h.   Abutting Rights-of-Way.  The application for an
LDP shall generally include any off-site improvements and construction
activity proposed to, or within, an abutting or contiguous right-of-way;
however, the City Engineer shall have the authority to require a right-of-way
permit in those instances when the scope of work is such that it is not
located within close proximity of the subject property or abutting
right-of-way, and is a considerable distance off-site, and is not a direct
component of the subject LDP. 



      3.   Prerequisites to the Land Development Permit.  The City
Engineer or designee shall not commence the review of a land development
permit application in instances when the Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee determines that a site plan or a modification thereof is
necessary.  See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. for the site plan review
process.  In this section, the term "site plan" is also construed to include
the master site plan and technical site plan review processes (see Chapter 2,
Article II, Sections 3.A. and 3.B., respectively). 



   The review of an LDP application may occur concurrently with the review
of a final plat in instances when the City Engineer determines a plat or
replat is required, but in all instances, the LDP shall not be issued until
the final plat is approved.



   B.   Submittal Requirements.  An application form for a land
development permit shall be provided by the Engineering Division.  Unless
the City Engineer or designee determines otherwise, the applicant shall
submit the completed form, pay the fee as adopted by resolution by the City
Commission, and provide all documentation required hereunder:



      1.   Survey.  Seven (7) surveys sized twenty-four inches by
thirty-six inches (24" x 36"), not older than six (6) months, and one (1)
additional copy sized eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"), showing
the subject property and any affected rights-of-way, including alleys, shall
be prepared and sealed by a licensed surveyor.  The surveys shall also
illustrate the following:



         a.   Total gross project acreage and square footage;



         b.   North arrow, scale, and legend;



         c.   Property boundaries, legal description, and
property control number(s);



         d.   Existing natural features, including but not
limited to lakes, trees and other vegetation, soils, and topography;



         e.   Existing buildings and structures, including
dimensions, height, and use;



         f.   Existing utility lines and easements;



         g.   Existing ground elevations (street and finished
floor); and



         h.   Permanent reference monuments and permanent control
points as required by Chapter 4, Article VIII, Section 3.C.4.



      2.   Site Plan.  Seven (7) site plans sized twenty-four
inches by thirty-six inches (24" x 36") and one (1) additional copy sized
eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") shall be prepared and sealed by
a professional architect, engineer, or landscape architect registered in the
State of Florida.  The site plan shall be drawn to scale and indicate the
following:



         a.   Total gross project acreage and square footage;



         b.   North arrow, scale, and legend;



         c.   Future land use map classification (FLUM) and
zoning district (from official zoning map);



         d.   Tabular summary indicating the total building area
expressed in square footage, including non- residential floor area (if
applicable) and intended use of such floor area;



         e.   Tabular summary indicating the total number of
dwelling units (if applicable), including characteristics such as number of
bedrooms, bathrooms, and size of each typical unit;



         f.   Tabular summary indicating square footage and
percentage distribution of the total project site, including areas proposed
for landscaped open space, vehicular use areas and other paved surfaces,
building coverage, and pervious and impervious surfaces;



         g.   Tabular summary indicating number and ratio
(methodology) of required and provided off-street parking spaces and loading
zones;



         h.   Existing buildings and structures which are to
remain, and any proposed buildings and structures, including dimensions,
height, setbacks, and use;



         i.   Proposed off-street parking spaces, loading zones,
and vehicular use areas (i.e. driveways), including dimensions, setbacks,
traffic control markings, and signage;



         j.   Proposed sidewalks and pedestrian areas, including
dimensions and setbacks;



         k.   Proposed fences and walls, including dimensions,
setbacks, height, and material;



         l.   Proposed location of exterior freestanding lighting
fixtures; and



         m.   Proposed dumpster or trash receptacle location(s).



      3.   Civil Engineering Drawings.  Seven (7) civil engineering
drawings sized twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" x 36") and one
(1) additional copy sized eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") shall
be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of
Florida.  The civil engineering drawings shall be drawn to scale and
illustrate the same general information as that shown on the site plan
following (including associated easements and dedications), in addition to
containing the following:



         a.   Paving and grading;



         b.   Potable water and sanitary sewer systems;



         c.   Stormwater management and drainage calculations
that were used in the design of the water management system;



         d.   Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) and/or
erosion and sedimentation control (ESC) plan;



         e.   Typical sections and summary of quantities;



         f.   Street lighting;



         g.   Traffic control markings; and



         h.   Maintenance of traffic plan.



      4.   Landscape Plan.  A detailed landscape plan shall only be
required for those permit applications associated with the required
landscaping as described in Chapter 4, Article II or by the Engineering
Design Handbook and Construction Standards.  The applicant shall be required
to submit seven (7) landscape plans sized twenty-four inches by thirty-six
inches (24" x 36") and one (1) additional copy sized eleven inches by
seventeen inches (11" x 17"), all of which drawn to scale, and prepared and
sealed by a professional landscape architect in the State of Florida.  The
plans shall illustrate the same general information as that shown on the site
plan, in addition to containing the following:



         a.   Existing and proposed vegetation (trees and
shrubs), including species, height, and size, and any which are to remain;



         b.   Locations of protected or specimen trees;



         c.   Tabular summary of plant list indicating type of
plant by common and botanical name, and quantity;



         d.   Proposed berms, watercourses, and other topographic
features;



         e.   A notation on the method of irrigation;



         f.   Locations of required trash receptacles, bicycle
racks, and trash receptacles; and



         g.   Locations of exterior lighting fixtures, utility
structures (at grade and below grade), easements, and proposed civil
engineering improvements.



      5.   Irrigation Plan.  A detailed irrigation plan shall only
be required for those permit applications associated with landscaping and
irrigation lines as regulated under Chapter 4, Article II (Landscape Design
and Buffering Standards) or by the Engineering Design Handbook and
Construction Standards.  The applicant shall be required to submit seven (7)
irrigation plans sized twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" x 36")
and one (1) additional copy sized eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x
17"), all of which drawn to scale, and prepared and sealed by a professional
landscape architect in the State of Florida.  The plans shall illustrate the
same general information as that shown on the site plan, in addition to
containing the following:



         a.   The irrigation system plans and specifications
shall identify the materials to be used, the installation methods, and
estimated monthly water savings as compared to non-microirrigation systems;



         b.   Irrigation system plans and specifications shall
undergo final testing and adjustments to achieve design specifications prior
to completion of the system and acceptance by the owner’s representative
and the city;



         c.   The water use zones shall be shown on the
irrigation plan and labeled as to their usage (e.g., turf zones, shrub zone,
etc.);



         d.   Location and size of public water meter(s)
(domestic and reclaimed) service(s), well or lake water or cistern storage
source, pressure tank and rust chemical treatment;



         e.   Location and size of backflow prevention device,
and automatic controller;



         f.   Static water and design pressure at point of
connection and pressure-regulation valve shall be installed and maintained if
static service pressure exceeds eighty (80) pounds per square inch. The
pressure regulating valve shall be located after the meter;



         g.   Location of power source (single or three (3)
phase);



         h.   Location, type, size, and depth of all irrigation
main and lateral lines, and sleeves;



         i.   Location and type of all irrigation heads, quick
couplers, gate valves, automatic flush valves, air vacuum relief valves, soil
moisture sensors, control switches, pumps, starters, and other related
equipment;



         j.   Installation details and outline specifications for
backflow prevention device, metal caging, controller, control valves, quick
couplers, emitter heads, drip lines and emitters, automatic and/or manual
flush valves, air vacuum, relief valves, main line and later line pipe, wire
connection details, and all other irrigation related operations;



         k.   Irrigation legend with symbol, size, manufacturer,
model number, PSI and GPM shown on each sheet;



         l.   Irrigation general notes and outline specification
and applicable to project;



         m.   Weekly and monthly watering schedule for each
hydrozone;



         n.   Approval of irrigation system plans and
specifications shall also require that the installer provide property owners
and users with the following post-construction documentation, including
as-constructed drawings, recommended maintenance activities and schedules,
operational schedule, design precipitation rates, instructions on adjusting
the system to apply less water after the landscape is established,
maintenance schedule, water source-water shut-off method, and the
manufacturer’s operational guide for their irrigation controller. When
feasible, similar information should be made available for subsequent
property transfers;



         o.   In order to assist the property owner with the most
efficient use of the irrigation system, the contractor shall supply the
following information at the completion of the installation:



            (1)   As-built irrigation plan:



            (2)   Irrigation scheduling information, with
instructions for seasonal timer and sensor changes; and



            (3)   An irrigation valve site map detailing:



               (a)   Gallons per minute demands;



               (b)   Precipitation rates;



               (c)   Operating pressure requirements for
each valve.



      6.   Tree Management Plan.  A detailed tree management plan
shall only be required for those permit applications associated with the
removal of plant material as regulated under Chapter 4, Article I
(Environmental Protection Standards).  The applicant shall be required to
submit seven (7) tree management plans sized twenty-four inches by thirty-six
inches (24" x 36") and one (1) additional copy sized eleven inches by
seventeen inches (11" x 17"), all of which drawn to scale, and prepared and
sealed by a professional landscape architect in the State of Florida.  The
tree management plan shall illustrate the same general information as that
shown on the site plan.  The plan shall illustrate the trees that are to
remain in place, as well as those which are to be relocated elsewhere
on-site, including a notation regarding the reason for relocation.  The
plans shall also indicate the trees that are proposed to be removed and the
reason for such removal.



      7.   Photometric Plan.  A detailed photometric plan shall
only be required for those permit applications associated with exterior
lighting as regulated under Chapter 4, Article VII (Exterior Lighting
Standards) or by the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction
Standards.  The applicant shall be required to submit seven (7) photometric
plans sized twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" x 36") and one (1)
additional copy sized eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"), all of
which drawn to scale, and prepared and sealed by a professional engineer in
the State of Florida.  The plans shall illustrate the same general
information as that shown on the site plan, in addition to containing the
following:



         a.   Detail of each type of exterior freestanding
lighting fixtures, including material, color(s), height, and sizes;



         b.   Illumination levels (in footcandles), including a
summary table indicating the average, minimum, and maximum footcandle levels;



         c.   Certification of compliance with the latest edition
of the Florida Building Code and the capacity to withstand one hundred forty
(140) MPH wind load; and



         d.   Proposed conduit routing.



      8.   Grading Plan.  A detailed grading plan shall only be
required for those permit applications associated with excavation, grading,
dredging, or fill activities as regulated under Chapter 4, Article XI
(Excavation and Fill Regulations).  The applicant shall be required to
submit seven (7) grading plans sized twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches
(24" x 36") and one (1) additional copy sized eleven inches by seventeen
inches (11" x 17"), all of which drawn to scale, and prepared and sealed by a
professional engineer registered in the State of Florida.  The plans shall
illustrate the following:



         a.   A topographical map depicting existing grade, paved
conditions, and vegetation on the referenced property and to a point fifty
(50) feet off the property in all directions;



         b.   A phasing plan, where applicable;



         c.   Soil borings indicating the depth of the various
materials to be dredged or excavated;



         d.   A map indicating the location of soil borings;



         e.   A topographical map with finished land elevations
shown;



         f.   A description of the method(s) involved in the
excavation;



         g.   A listing of the person or persons responsible for
the work proposed;



         h.   Tabulation of the amount of material to be moved;



         i.   Plans for the abatement of nuisances such as the
flowing of dust and sand;



         j.   The steps to be taken to protect the water
resources, if applicable;



         k.   The height and location of proposed stockpiles;



         l.   The duration of stockpiling;



         m.   The duration of the work;



         n.   Traffic plans to include the treatment of internal
roads, private or public street crossings;



         o.   Points of ingress and egress to the site;



         p.   Location of turn lanes, if appropriate; and



         q.   Methods to ensure public safety during and after
the work to be performed.



      9.   Native Florida Ecosystem Survey or Inventory.  A
detailed Native Florida Ecosystem Survey or Inventory shall only be required
for those permit applications associated with the development of
environmentally sensitive lands in accordance with Chapter 4, Article I
(Environmental Protection Standards).  The evaluation of any proposed
alteration of lands which are found to be environmentally sensitive shall be
prepared by a professional biologist.  The applicant shall be required to
submit seven (7) surveys or inventories, sized twenty-four inches by
thirty-six inches (24" x 36") and one (1) additional copy sized eleven inches
by seventeen inches (11" x 17"), all of which drawn to scale.  The surveys
or inventories shall illustrate the following:



         a.   Site location map with the specific property
clearly indicated;



         b.   Aerial photograph with the specific property
clearly indicated (scale: one (1) inch equals six hundred (600) feet or less);



         c.   Detailed map of existing terrestrial and aquatic
vegetation, including exotic species within the jurisdictional limits of
wetland jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Florida
Department of Environmental Regulation;



         d.   Soil types and conditions;



         e.   List of endangered, threatened and rare species and
species of special concern found on the site;



         f.   Areas or sites where colonies of birds are nesting
or roosting or where migratory species are known to concentrate;



         g.   Archaeologically and/or historically significant
features as identified or recognized by state or federal regulations;



         h.   Geologically significant features;



         i.   Areas of previous disturbance or degradation,
including  present and past human uses of site;



         j.   Surrounding land uses;



         k.   Conceptual footprint of site development, including
buildings, roadways, parking areas, utilities, water features, flood control
structures, stormwater systems, wellfield locations, landscaped areas, buffer
areas, preserve areas, and other open space areas, as an overlay to
vegetation mapping;



         l.   Status of development approvals, including permit
applications; and



         m.   Project operation.



            (1)   Description of proposed operations to be
performed on the site including use, storage, handling or production of
substances known to be harmful to humans, plants and/or animals;



            (2)   Identification of any pollutants expected to
be emitted during project operation;



            (3)   Identification of timing and source of noise
and/or vibration impacts on resident and adjacent human and animal life; and



            (4)   Project alternatives.



               (a)   Discussion of project alternatives
should be provided, including options considered and rejected and the
rationale for rejection of each option considered; and



               (b)   Mitigation considerations should be
discussed in detail as they relate to possible loss of habitat or impact on
endangered, threatened or rare animal and plant species, or species of
special concern.



   C.   Review Criteria.  The land development permit shall be
consistent with the corresponding site plan and final plat, and comply with
the standards and requirements pertaining to paving, grading, and drainage as
described in the city's Code of Ordinances, Land Development Regulations,
Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards, and as regulated by
the South Florida Water Management District and other external agencies.



   D.   Approval Process.



      1.   Initial Review.  Within twenty (20) business days
following the submittal of a land development permit application, the City
Engineer or designee shall review the civil engineering drawings to ensure
that the paving, grading, and drainage complies with the review criteria of
Section 3.C. above.  If deficiencies persist on the drawings, the City
Engineer shall provide the applicant's engineer of record with a written
account of all the issues, citing the specific chapter, article, section, and
paragraph.  Upon receipt of such findings, the engineer of record shall make
the necessary corrections or revisions as defined in the written statement,
and resubmit the civil engineering drawings to the Engineering Division. 



      2.   Technical Compliance and Issuance of Permit.  Once the
drawings are found to be acceptable, the City Engineer or designee shall
issue a written statement of technical compliance, and notify the applicant
of any fees, surety (in accordance with Section 6 below based on the cost
estimates provided by a duly licensed professional in the State of Florida),
and permits that are required from any external agencies, such as from the
South Florida Water Management District or Department of Transportation. 
The LDP shall be issued by the Engineering Division once the aforementioned
items, the final plat, and any other documents required by the City Engineer
or designee, are found to be acceptable and meets the provisions of these
Regulations.  The applicant will then be allowed to commence work on the
impervious surface, off-street parking, vehicular use areas and loading
zones, paving, grading, and drainage systems, and other required improvements
as specified in Section 3.A.2. above.



      3.   Construction Activity.  Construction shall be performed
under the surveillance of, and at all times, be subject to review by the City
Engineer or designee; however, this in no way shall relieve the
Florida-registered engineer of record of responsibility for administration,
coordination, and final compliance with the approved plans, specifications,
and all applicable rules, laws, ordinance, and resolutions.  The City
Engineer or designee shall have the authority to enter the property during
the progress of construction.  The applicant's engineer of record shall
submit construction progress reports at points of progress prescribed by the
City Engineer, as well as final certification of completion of required
improvements.  The engineer of record shall coordinate joint reviews of
construction with the City Engineer or designee.  The City Engineer or
designee shall have the authority to stop work upon failure of the developer
or engineer of record to administer and/or coordinate the construction of the
required improvements as prescribed by these Regulations.



      4.   Completion.  In order for final closeout and project
completion of the required improvements, the engineer of record shall certify
in writing that the required improvements were installed under his
responsible direction; that all improvements conform with the approved civil
engineering drawings, and all laws, regulations, codes, and ordinances.  In
addition, the applicant's engineer of record shall submit tests and reports
(concerning the work and materials used during construction of the required
improvements), in addition to as-built drawings on a high quality time stable
reproducible material showing the original design as compared to the actual
finished work.



   E.   Expiration.  All required improvements shall be completed
within one (1) year of the date of issuance of the LDP.  Unless the time
period is otherwise extended, the permit shall become null and void if the
applicant is unable to complete the work within the stated timeframe.



   F.   Extension.  An applicant may petition the City Engineer to
extend the approval of a land development permit for an additional time
period, not to exceed one (1) year, provided that such written request for
extension is filed thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the preceding
one (1) year period.  The fee for the extension shall be in the amount as
adopted from time to time by the City Commission.



   G.   Miscellaneous.  No certificates of occupancy will be issued
for buildings in the platted developments until all required improvements are
completed, approved, and/or accepted by the city, except that it is the
prerogative of the developer to post an additional one hundred ten percent
(110%) surety for work that may be more prudently put in place subsequent to
building construction, such as sidewalks and landscaping.  Certificate of
occupancies will not be issued until such work is approved and/or accepted by
the city as completed.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-019, passed 8-2-11)



Sec. 4.   Right-of-Way Permit.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of this
section is to set forth a well-defined application process, review criteria,
and uniform procedure for the processing of permits to ensure that off-site
improvements proposed within private and public rights-of-way, including
alleys, comply with all applicable standards, regulations, and codes.



      2.   Applicability.  No person shall construct, reconstruct,
repair, alter, or grade in or upon any right-of-way without obtaining a
permit from the Engineering Division, unless otherwise determined by the City
Engineer or designee.  This includes ancillary activities such as digging;
scraping; excavating; depositing and storing construction material or debris;
installing new plant material; or removing, destroying, pruning, or cutting
any existing tree, shrub, or similar plant.  One hundred percent (100%) of a
permit fee shall be assessed if work is started without a valid permit.



      3.   Scope.  The permit shall entitle the applicant to work
in a maximum of one thousand, six hundred (1,600) linear feet of
right-of-way.  A separate permit must be obtained for each additional one
thousand, six hundred (1,600) linear feet of work.  Where work is
continuous, restoration must be completed on the first permit before a third
permit may be issued.  At no time shall more than two (2) permits be issued
for one (1) location.  For projects that consist of directional bore
conduits only, the City Engineer, or designee may approve a permit exceeding
a total length of three thousand, two hundred (3,200) linear feet as one (1)
permit of work.  The permit shall be in the custody of the applicant or
agent at the work site.



   B.   Submittal Requirements.  An application form for a
right-of-way permit shall be provided by the Engineering Division.  Unless
the City Engineer or designee determines otherwise, the applicant shall
submit the completed form, pay the fee as adopted by resolution by the City
Commission, and provide all documentation required hereunder, in the number
of copies specified by the Division.



      1.   Name.  The names and addresses of the contractor
performing the work, and the owner or company for whom the work is being
performed;



      2.   Drawings and Plans.  An application for a permit shall
be accompanied by five (5) copies of the plans and specifications showing the
work to be done, the time required to complete such work and the estimated
cost thereof.  When the permit is issued, one (1) copy of such plans and
specifications shall be returned to the applicant and the others shall be
distributed to applicable divisions of the city and one (1) shall be retained
by the City Engineer;



      3.   Hold Harmless Agreement.  An applicant for a permit
shall agree to save the city, its officers, employees and agents harmless for
any and all costs, damages, liabilities and attorney's fees, which may accrue
or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under such permit.
The acceptance of any permit under this chapter shall constitute such an
agreement by the applicant;



      4.   Insurance.  When conducting work on behalf of the city,
the applicant shall furnish the city with a satisfactory certificate of
insurance or a statement from the administrator of a self-insurance program
showing the required coverages, and containing a limitation that the
insurance coverages may not be revoked except after ten (10) days written
notice delivered to the city.  The applicant's insurance shall provide
coverage against claims for personal injury as well as against claims for
property damage which may arise from or out of the performance of the work,
whether such performance be by himself or herself, his or her subcontractor
or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him or her.  Such insurance
shall cover, inter alia, collapse, explosive hazards and underground work by
equipment on the street, and shall include liability arising from completed
operations.  The amount of the liability insurance for personal injury shall
be not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) per person, five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) per incident, and one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000) for property damage;



      5.   Surety.  The City Engineer shall have the authority to
require an applicant to provide adequate surety, in order to protect, and
save harmless, the city from all claims for damages or injury to other
persons by reason of work under his permit.  Such surety shall be equal to
one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated value of the project and
provided in the manner prescribed in accordance with Section 6 below; and



      6.   Miscellaneous.  Any other information as the City
Engineer shall find reasonably necessary to determine if a permit should be
issued hereunder.



   C.   Review Criteria.  All work performed in public or private
rights-of-way shall conform to either the Florida Department of
Transportation Standards Specifications and Roadway and Traffic Design
Standards (as applicable), the Manual of Uniform Control Devices (MUTCD) as
applicable, or the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards, or
the latest supplements thereof.  Except as provided herein, any person
desiring to perform or have performed any of the acts covered by these Land
Development Regulations wherein a permit is required shall secure such permit
in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth in this section.



   D.   Conditions for Permits.  Unless otherwise determined by the
City Engineer or designee, approval of all permit applications are subject to
the following conditions:



      1.   Access to Streets and Alleys.  No person shall construct
any access across any right-of-way on any improved or unimproved streets
within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City
Engineer.  This permit shall be issued if the following requirements are met:



         a.   That access to the street will not create undue or
unnecessary safety hazards; will not impede the safe and efficient flow of
traffic and will be constructed in compliance with applicable laws,
ordinances and specifications of the city;



         b.   If the street to which access is desired is not
improved with hard surface pavement, storm sewers, and curb and gutters, it
shall be improved as follows by the person seeking access in accordance with
city specifications approved by the City Engineer;



            (1)   Curbs and gutters (if deemed appropriate)
shall be constructed along the side of any street to which access is sought
to the limits of the property.



            (2)   Pavement shall be constructed in accordance
with city standards of material similar or equivalent to the material used
for the nearest paved portion of the street or streets as determined by the
City Engineer, shall be constructed along the side of the street or streets
to which access is sought to the limits of the property and beyond to the
nearest paved portion of that street or streets.



            (3)   Storm drainage (piped or swaled) shall be
constructed along the street or streets to which access is sought to the
limits of the property and connected to the nearest existing storm drainage
in that street or streets.  If the nearest paved portion of the street or
streets is improved with storm sewers, then storm sewers shall be installed.



            (4)   Traffic signals shall be installed along the
street or streets to which access is desired if the property is used for
other than single-family residential uses and if the traffic volume generated
from the development of the property meets the warrants established by the
Palm Beach County Traffic Engineering Division.



         c.   No person shall construct any access to any alley
unless the following requirements are met:



            (1)   Pavement shall be constructed in accordance
with city standards and to the width of any existing improved alley, or if
none of the alley is improved, to the limits of the alley right-of-way, along
the alley to which access is sought from the limits of the property and
beyond to the nearest paved portion of the alley; and



            (2)   Adequate storm drainage shall be constructed
so that storm water runoff from the property from which access to the alley
is sought shall not cause damage to adjoining properties, or the adjacent
alley or roadway, or erosion of the land.  Such storm drainage shall be
constructed in accordance with specifications as determined by the City
Engineer consistent with city standards as amended from time to time, which
shall assure that upstream and downstream drainage problems shall not result
therefrom.



         d.   The City Commission, after a public hearing before
the Planning and Development Board and receipt of the findings and
recommendations of such Board, may waive or vary any requirement of paragraph
b. above for good cause shown upon application by the persons seeking access.



      2.   Work within Right-of-Way.



         a.   A sign shall be displayed at the work site
indicating the name and telephone number of the contractor and the name of
the applicant requesting the work.



         b.   Devices used to safeguard job site and all traffic
control devices and techniques shall conform to the current standards set
forth in either the Florida Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Road & Bridge Construction, Florida Department of
Transportation Standard Index, Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD), and all applicable federal, state and local regulations.  In the
event proper traffic control is lacking or deficient, and is not corrected
within one (1) hour upon notice, the City Engineer may stop work and revoke
the permit.



         c.   If the work to be undertaken by an applicant under
this article is such that it will affect the use of properties abutting or
adjoining the place where the work covered by the permit is to be done, the
City Engineer shall require the applicant to submit a list of the names and
addresses of the affected property owners and tenants, and the applicant
shall notify the affected property owners and tenants of the proposed work. 
If the work to be undertaken by the applicant will affect other subsurface
installations in the vicinity of the proposed opening, the applicant shall
also notify the owners of such facilities of the proposed work.



         d.   Work authorized by a permit shall be performed
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless
the applicant obtains written consent from the inspection officer to do the
work at other times.  Such permission shall be granted only in the following
instances:  1) in case of emergency as determined by the City Engineer; 2)
where safety and traffic control measures in accordance with city and FDOT
standards are not feasible during these hours as determined by the City
Engineer; 3) if the construction area is not within five hundred (500) feet
of any single or multi-family dwelling as determined by the City Engineer; or
4) for city work or activities whereby the City Manager determines that
extended hours of work are necessary to complete the work in a timely fashion
and to protect the public health, welfare and said feasibility of safety or
traffic control measures.  Any permit granted under this section may include
other conditions on the applicant's ability to work after 7:00 p.m.  No such
work will be permitted on Sunday unless authorized by the City Commission as
necessary and convenient for the public health, welfare and safety.



         e.   It shall be the duty of every person making any
improvement in or upon any street, alley, roadway or public land to promptly
remove therefrom all rubbish, debris or material not immediately required for
such improvement.  In addition thereto, such person shall protect the place
so improved or being improved, together with all material, articles or
property used in connection therewith or taken therefrom, in a manner which
the city shall direct and in such a way as to prevent injury or damage to
persons or property.  Every such person making any such improvements or part
thereof shall be liable for all damages or injuries sustained on public
property.



         f.   When it is necessary to cut pavement, the trench
shall be backfilled in accordance with current city standard drawing(s) and
specification(s).  All backfilled areas within eight (8) feet of pavement
shall be compacted/stabilized to meet current city standards.



         g.    Every applicant shall place around the excavation
or project such barriers, barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs
as shall be determined by the City Engineer to be necessary for the
protection of the public.  Additional safety requirements may be prescribed
by the City Engineer where deemed necessary by him or her to protect adjacent
private or public property.  Whenever any person fails to provide or
maintain the safety devices required by the City Engineer, such devices might
be installed and maintained by the city.  The amount of the cost thus
incurred shall be paid by the applicant.



         h.   Access to private driveways and alleys shall be
provided except during working hours when construction operations prohibit
such access.  Free access shall be provided at all times to fire hydrants.



         i.   No more than two hundred fifty (250) feet measured
longitudinally shall be opened in any street at any one (1) time.



         j.   All underground pipes, tiles, cables, etc., shall
be located sufficiently ahead of trench excavation work to avoid damage to
those facilities and to permit relocation if necessary.



         k.   Pipes, drains, tiles, culverts or other underground
facilities encountered shall be protected as directed by the City Engineer.



         l.   Monuments, benchmarks, or datum points of concrete,
iron or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or preserving
the lines of any street or property subdivision, or precise survey reference
point within the city, shall not be removed or disturbed unless permission so
to do is first obtained in writing from the proper government authority. 
Permission may be granted only upon conditions that the applicant shall pay
all expenses incident to the proper replacement thereof, including the cost
of a survey.



         m.   When work performed by the applicant interferes
with the established drainage system of any street or natural water way,
provision shall be made by the applicant for adequate temporary drainage to
the satisfaction of the City Engineer and consistent with the provisions of
this Code.



         n.   Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along
the side of the trench or removed immediately from the site at the discretion
of the City Engineer. Excavated material when piled alongside the excavation
shall be kept trimmed so as to cause a minimum inconvenience to public
travel.  In order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate a dirt or dust
nuisance, the City Engineer may require the applicant to provide and use toe
boards or bins.  If the excavated area or storage area is muddy or causes
inconvenience to pedestrians, temporary wooden plank walks shall be installed
by the applicant as directed by the City Engineer.  If the street is not
wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the adjacent
sidewalk, the applicant shall keep open a passageway at least one-half (1/2)
of the sidewalk width along such sidewalk.



         o.   When any earth, gravel or other excavated material
is caused to roll or flow or is washed or otherwise deposited on any step
and/or sidewalk, the applicant shall cause the same to be removed from the
street or sidewalk before the end of the working day.  In the event the
earth, gravel or other excavated material so deposited is not so removed, the
City Engineer shall cause such removal and the cost incurred thereby shall be
paid by the applicant. Failure on the part of the applicant to make immediate
payment of such cost upon demand shall be cause for revoking such permit.



         p.   Sidewalks, curbs, gutters and driveways, if removed
for construction, shall be replaced in accordance with current city standards
and specifications, and no pavement shall be placed without prior inspection
of forms and excavation by the City Engineer or his or her designee.



         q.   The restoration of any parkway areas shall be at
least equal to the condition of the parkway prior to the construction.  The
restoration shall be completed within ten (10) working days from the time the
area has been backfilled.



         r.   Final restoration shall include removal of all
construction rubble and dirt mounds from the area and removal of all dirt and
dust caused by the construction from pavement.



         s.   All pavement replacement work within rights-of-way
shall be guaranteed by the contractor for one (1) year, and any failure or
problems developing due to the construction or reconstruction of the pavement
will be the responsibility of the contractor, to be repaired by him or her,
as directed by the City Engineer, or designee, at no cost to the city.



   E.   Approval Process.



      1.   General.  Administrative review and action shall be
conducted by the appropriate city departments.  The City Engineer, or his or
her designee, shall issue a permit hereunder when the work complies with the
provisions of this Code and the Land Development Regulations.



      2.   Inspections.  A person doing work under this article, or
his agent, shall call for inspection a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours
prior to starting work.  The City Engineer or designee shall designate the
day and hour that the inspection is to be performed, and an inspector shall
be present at the commencement of the operation so as to review work in
progress.  Upon the completion of streets, sidewalks or other public ways,
approval shall be required prior to release of surety.  In the event it
should be necessary to have the services of a Florida-registered engineer for
any inspection, or technical approvals are deemed necessary by the City
Engineer, such expenses shall be borne by the applicant.  Inspection and
approval of improvements in new subdivisions shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards and
Land Development Regulations. 



      3.   Temporary Approval.  For permits involving excavation
activities, the City Engineer may grant a temporary verbal approval to any
agent (who is not a regular employee) of the city, including the Utilities
Department, for a permit in any street, alley, roadway or public land when
such excavation is necessitated by an emergency.  Such temporary approval
shall be followed within forty-eight (48) hours by a formal application for a
permit as regularly required under the terms of this chapter.



      4.   Trees and Shrubs in Rights-of-Way.  For permits issued
under another section or article or any other permit which affects trees or
shrubs, or will have an affect on trees or shrubs, in rights-of-way or on
city owned property, the Department of Public Works/Forestry and Grounds
Division shall review and approve the permit before it is issued.



   F.   Expiration.  The right-of-way permit shall be valid for a
period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of issuance.  If
construction of the improvement covered by the permit has not commenced
within this time period, the permit shall expire, and be cancelled with
written notice to the applicant.



   G.   Time Extension.  An extension of the permit for a period not
to exceed six (6) months may be requested in writing by the applicant if
received by the Division prior to permit expiration.  The fee for requesting
a permit extension shall be approved by the City Commission and may be
modified from time to time.  The applicant shall provide justification for
the requested time extension, and the City Engineer may grant an extension if
it is determined that such extension is necessary and not contrary to the
public interest.  In addition, the following shall apply:



      1.   All extensions of permit time shall be calculated at
twenty-five percent (25%) of the original total permit fee and shall extend
the life of the permit for an additional six (6) month period.



      2.   No fees shall be refunded when a permit has lapsed after
work is started.  When a permit is revoked at the request of the applicant
prior to lapsing due to time limits, and no work has been done, all but a
basic fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250) to cover the cost incurred by
the City Engineer shall be refunded.



   H.   Miscellaneous.



      1.   Lawful Use.  Every permit issued under this article
shall be granted subject to the right of the city or the applicant to use the
street for any purpose for which such street may lawfully be used, not
inconsistent with the permit.



      2.   Parameters of Permit.  No applicant under this chapter
shall perform work in an amount or quantity greater than that specified in
the permit except upon approval by the City Engineer.  Upon such approval,
additional work may be done under the provisions of the permit an amount not
greater than ten percent (10%) of the amount specified by the permit.  Any
fee or bond posted in connection with the original permit shall be deemed to
and must cover any such additional work as may be approved by the City
Engineer.



      3.   Default and Revocation.  Whenever the City Engineer
shall find that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or
condition of a permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the applicant
and to the commercial bank issuing a letter of credit, if any.  Such notice
shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period
of time deemed by the City Engineer to be necessary for the completion of
such work.  After receipt of such notice, the applicant or the commercial
bank shall within the time specified either cause the required work to be
performed, or failing therein.  If the required work is not performed within
the specified time, the cash bond or letter of credit shall be utilized to
reimburse the city for the cost of doing the work set forth in the notice.



   The City Engineer may revoke any permit after prior written notice to
the applicant for the following:  1) violation of any provision of this
chapter; 2) violation of any other applicable provision of this Code or any
other ordinance or law relating to the work; or 3) existence of any condition
or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance or endangering
the lives or property of others.



   Written notice of any such violation shall be served upon the applicant
or his agent engaged in the work.  The notice shall contain a brief
statement for the reason of the contemplated revocation of the permit. 
Notice shall be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be
notified, by certified or registered United States mail addressed to the
person to be notified, or by telegram addressed to the person to be
notified.  Such notice shall state the period of time which the applicant is
being granted to correct the violation and to proceed with diligent
prosecution of the work, which time shall be no less than twenty-four (24)
hours.



      4.   Restoration.  When any permit has been revoked and the
work authorized by the permit has not been completed, the city may do such
work as is necessary to restore the street or alley to a condition acceptable
to the city. All expenses incurred by the city for such restoration shall be
paid for by the applicant and may be removed from the cash bond or letter of
credit that the applicant has filed with the city, and the bond or letter of
credit shall so provide.



      5.   Abandoned Facilities.  Whenever any facilities existing
in the streets or alleys of the city have been abandoned by the owners, the
owner of such facilities shall be notified of the requirement to remove them,
and if the owners shall fail to so remove them, the city may remove them and
the owners shall reimburse the city for the cost thereof.  Notice of the
city's order to remove abandoned facilities may be given either by personal
delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by certified or registered
United States mail addressed to the person to be notified.  For purposes of
this section, abandoned facilities shall be defined to be facilities, which
have not been utilized by the owner or any other person for a period of at
least six (6) months, or facilities, which are no longer necessary or useful
because they have been replaced in some other location on the property.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 5.   Engineering Division Waivers.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this subsection is
to provide an efficient relief process to allow for deviations from certain
requirements and standards of the Engineering Design Handbook and
Construction Standards, and Chapter 4 of the Land Development Regulations. 
The intent of this application is not to provide a means for circumventing
any such requirement or standard but to allow for a departure from the
regulation upon demonstration that the subject request satisfies the intent
of the review criteria contained herein.



      2.   Applicability.  The City Engineer or designee may waive
or modify any applicable requirement, standard, or regulation pertaining to
the following:



         a.   Off-Street Parking and Vehicular Use Areas.  See
Chapter 4 of the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards
(Volume I), and Chapter 4, Article VI, Section 3.B. of these Land Development
Regulations;



         b.   Driveway Openings and Access.  See Chapter 4 of
the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards (Volume I), and
Chapter 4, Article VI, Section 3.C. of these Land Development Regulations;



         c.   Off-Street Loading Zones.  See Chapter 4, Article
VI, Section 3.D. of these Land Development Regulations;



         d.   Dumpster Enclosures.  See Chapter 4 of the
Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards (Volume I), and
Chapter 4, Article VI, Section 3.E. of these Land Development Regulations;



         e.   Queuing and Stacking Requirements.  See Chapter 4
of the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards (Volume I), and
Chapter 4, Article VI, Section 3.F. of these Land Development Regulations;



         f.   Fire Lanes.  See Chapter 4, Article VI, Section
3.G. of these Land Development Regulations;



         g.   Exterior Lighting.  See Chapter 4 of the
Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards (Volume II), and
Chapter 4, Article VII of these Land Development Regulations;



         h.   Utilities.  See Chapter 5 of the Engineering
Design Handbook and Construction Standards (Volume I), and Chapter 4, Article
VIII, Section 3.B. of these Land Development Regulations;



         i.   Roadways and Streets.  See Chapter 3 of the
Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards (Volume I), and
Chapter 4, Article VIII, Section 3.C. of these Land Development Regulations;



         j.   Sidewalks.  See Chapter 3 of the Engineering
Design Handbook and Construction Standards (Volume I), and Chapter 4, Article
VIII, Section 3.D. of these Land Development Regulations;



         k.   Pedestrian and Bicycle Paths.  See Chapter 3 of
the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards (Volume I), and
Chapter 4, Article VIII, Section 3.E. of these Land Development Regulations;



         l.   Drainage, Stormwater, and Wastewater Systems.  See
Chapter 5 of the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards
(Volume I), and Chapter 4, Article VIII, Section 3.G. of these Land
Development Regulations;



         m.   Canals and Waterways.  See Chapter 4, Article
VIII, Section 3.H. of these Land Development Regulations; and



         n.   Excavation and Fill Activities.  See Chapter 4,
Article XI of these Land Development Regulations.



   B.   Submittal Requirements.  The applicant shall submit a letter
that addresses the review criteria of Section 5.C. below, and pay the fee as
adopted through resolution by the City Commission.  For sidewalk waiver
requests, a fee in lieu of sidewalk construction shall be initially set at
seven dollars ($7.00) for each square foot of sidewalk waived for
construction.  This fee shall be annually adjusted by the City Engineer and
shall be commensurate with prevailing cost for sidewalk construction.  For
all waiver requests, the applicant shall document the nature of the request,
the extent of its departure from the standard regulation, and the basis for
the request.  The City Engineer may request plans and exhibits associated
with the waiver, and any additional information or documentation that further
justifies the request.



   C.   Review Criteria.  In each waiver request, staff shall review
the proposed plans, exhibits, and any other documentation that is provided by
the applicant.  Staff shall consider the following when evaluating each
waiver application:  1) the established character of the vicinity; 2) the
future development pattern and need for capital improvements; 3) the best
engineering practices and principles; 4) innovations in the industry; and 5)
the reasonableness of the subject application to justify the waiver
request.  The City Engineer may use other determining factors when reviewing
the appropriateness of each waiver application.



   D.   Approval Process.  The waiver application shall be reviewed by
staff and action will be taken by the City Engineer or designee.



   E.   Expiration.  If a waiver was granted in connection with a site
plan, then such waiver shall remain valid as long as the corresponding site
plan approval remains in effect, or unless there is any amendment to the
original waiver.  If an amendment to the original waiver and/or approved
site plan is proposed, and the City Engineer determines that such change
would adversely affect the original waiver, then approval of a new (waiver)
application shall be required.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 6.   Surety.



   A.   Purpose.  This section establishes specific criteria and
prerequisites for accepting surety by the city in conjunction with developer
agreements, contracts, development related improvements and any other
contractual obligations. 



   B.   Applicability.  Wherever surety is required within the Boynton
Beach Code of Ordinances (Part II) and/or Land Development Regulations (Part
III), it shall be provided in the form and manner prescribed hereunder.  The
type of surety shall be determined by the administrator of the code section
involved, and shall be acceptable to the Boynton Beach City Attorney. 
Required improvements shall include all those items stipulated in Chapter 4,
Article VIII, including restoration of the lands distributed by such
improvements.  Surety for required utility system improvements shall be
coordinated directly with the Utilities Department, whether they will remain
private or conveyed to the city upon completion of their construction.  It
shall also include any off-site areas disturbed to install any improvements
required by the project.  Surety shall be required for improvements
associated with all planned developments, to wit, PCDs, PIDs, IPUD, PUDs,
etc.  With respect to required landscaping, the applicant may provide surety
to the city in instances when such landscape requirements have not been met
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
completion.



      1.   Amount.  The amount of surety shall be equal to or
greater than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the total obligation whether
it be for restoration, abatement, maintenance, guarantee, fees in lieu of
land dedication, required improvements, landscaping, or any other purpose,
based on the cost estimate of a duly licensed professional in the State of
Florida.



      2.   Reduction.  From time to time during progress of the
work the developer may request a reduction in the dollar amount of the surety
on the basis of work completed, but in every case the remaining funds shall
be sufficient to cover one hundred ten percent (110%) of the cost to complete
the obligation.  In the case of surety for required improvements associated
with subdivision development, five percent (5%) of the engineer's certified
cost of required improvements shall be retained for one (1) year after
acceptance of such improvements by the City Commission as a guarantee against
defects in workmanship and material.  Reduction of surety shall be approved
by the City Manager without the necessity of City Commission approval.  The
final release of surety, when the surety is twenty thousand dollars ($20,000)
or greater shall be approved by motion of the City Commission, with the
written recommendation by the appropriate department and/or the City
Engineer.  Release of surety less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000)
shall be by the City Manager.



      3.   Default.  In the event of default by the developer or
failure of the developer to complete the obligations within prescribed time
limits, the city, after thirty (30) days written notice to the developer,
shall cash the surety to ensure satisfactory completion of the obligations.



   C.   Types of Surety.



      1.   Letters of Credit.



         a.   General.  The face of the letter of credit must
indicate the following:



            (1)   The letter of credit is "clean."



            (2)   The letter of credit is irrevocable and
shall remain enforceable until released by a resolution adopted by the City
Commission.



            (3)   The purpose or project for which the letter
of credit is issued.



            (4)   The specific amount of the letter of credit,
in U.S. dollars.



            (5)   The method of disbursement of draws against
the letter of credit.



            (6)   The street address where draws against the
letter of credit shall be made.



            (7)   The letter of credit is enforceable in a
court of competent jurisdiction in Palm Beach County, Florida, and is to be
interpreted by Florida Law.



            (8)   The name and street address of a designated
agent within the State of Florida for acceptance of process.



         b.   Rating.  At the time of issuance of the letter of
credit, and at all times subsequent thereto and so long as the letter of
credit is enforceable, the issuing financial institution must have a minimum
"peer group" rating of fifty (50) in the latest Sheshunoff Quarterly Listing
or a minimum rating of one hundred twenty-five (125) in the latest IDC Bank
Financial Quarterly Listing.  The city Finance Department shall periodically
verify this information.



   At any time during the life of the letter of credit, should the rating
of the issuing financial institution fall below both of the minimum ratings
indicated above, or should the financial institution merge with another
financial institution or have a conservator or receiver appointed to
supervise or control the operation of its business or become insolvent, the
contractor/developer must, within sixty (60) calendar days after notification
by the city:



            (1)   Replace the existing letter of credit with a
replacement letter of credit from a financial institution with either of the
minimum ratings as specified above; or



            (2)   At the city's option, the letter of credit
may be replaced by other surety acceptable to the city in accordance with the
city's existing surety policies.



         c.   Rating Noncompliance.  Failure to comply with this
provision may result in any or all of the following actions by the city:



            (1)   Suspension of the contractor/developer's
right to pull building permits and schedule inspections;



            (2)   Issuance of a stop work order; and/or
revocation of the land development permit.



         These actions shall be in effect until a satisfactory
replacement surety is accepted by the city.



         d.   Legal Sufficiency.  No letter of credit shall be
deemed accepted by the city until review and approval by the City Attorney's
office for legal sufficiency, and by the Finance Department for the bank's
rating.



         e.   Miscellaneous.  Original letters of credit shall
be maintained by the Finance Department and each shall be clearly identified
as to the project or contract for which it is issued.



   Letters of credit accepted prior to approval of this article shall
continue through the current expiration date of the letter of credit provided
however, renewal of these existing letters of credit shall be in accordance
with this policy for accepting letters of credit.



   The financial institution issuing any letter of credit must be
authorized to do business in the State of Florida and shall show proof of
same upon request of staff.



      2.   Cash, Certified Check, or Cashier's Check.  Completion
of the required improvements may be secured by cash deposited by the
developer with the city or in an account subject to the control of the city
in accordance with an agreement on such deposit or account.  No interest
shall be earned on such deposit or account.  In lieu of a separate cash bond
for each type of right-of-way permit that may be required for a given
project, an applicant anticipating more than one (1) permit application may
furnish one (1) cash bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000) to
cover all right-of-way permits. 



   The applicant shall deposit the cash bond with the Finance Department,
and such bond so deposited shall be kept in a separate account and shall
stand as security for the full and complete performance by the applicant of
the work covered by such permit, subject to the following provisions:



         a.   If any direct cost to the city of any loss, damage,
work, claim or liability arises out of the breach by the applicant, or any
contractor or representative of the applicant, in the performance of the
applicant's obligations in connection with the work covered by such permit
the applicant shall forfeit its bond.



         b.   Upon certification by the City Engineer of
completion of the work covered by such permit, the balance of such cash bond
shall be refunded by the City Clerk to the applicant upon request.



         c.   In the event that the City Engineer shall determine
that additional bond in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000) is required,
the applicant shall furnish surety as noted herein in an amount equal to one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated value of the work.  If a letter
of credit is provided, it shall be dated on or before the date of the permit
application and shall be for a term to expire one (1) year after receipt by
the permittee of a certificate of final inspection.



      3.   Performance or Surety Bond.  Completion of the required
improvements may be secured by a performance or surety bond obtained from a
company acceptable to the city in accordance with the city policy on
performance bonds.  It shall guarantee all work will be completed in full
accordance with the approved land development permit.



      4.   Escrow (Agreement) Deposit.  An executed escrow
agreement between the developer, a bank approved by the city and the city as
the third party beneficiary may be established for this surety.  The escrow
agreement shall require that release of the funds, or any part thereof, shall
be subject to city approval.  The agreement shall be in accordance with the
city policy on such escrow agreements.



   The Finance Department shall maintain an index of all surety,
indicating at a minimum, the project name, the amount of surety, then names
and contact information for all obligees of the surety, the date posted, the
date reduced and the date released. 



   D.   Acceptance and Maintenance of Required Improvements.



      1.   Workmanship.  The developer shall execute and deliver to
the city a cash bond or other acceptable surety in an amount determined by
the City Engineer, guaranteeing the required improvements whether public or
private, against defect in workmanship and material for one (1) year after
acceptance of such improvements by the City Commission.  Surety shall be as
specified in this article and shall be delivered to the city simultaneously
with the satisfactory delivery of the documents required in Section 3.D.
above.



      2.   Dedication and Maintenance.  The dedication of public
space, parks, rights-of-way, easements or the like on the plat shall not
constitute an acceptance of the dedication by the city.  The acceptance of
the dedication shall be indicated by a resolution of the City Commission
adopted when all improvements meet or exceed the standards set forth by these
Regulations.  The City Engineer, upon satisfactory completion of all
improvements, shall notify the City Commission that the developer has
complied with all of the provisions of these Regulations and shall recommend
acceptance of the dedications and, when applicable, the maintenance of the
required improvements.  Upon such recommendations the City Commission, by
resolution, shall approve the development, the dedications on the plat and
the maintenance responsibilities of the required improvements identified
thereon.



      3.   Completion.  When a plat has been recorded and the
developer fails to complete the improvements required by these Regulations,
the City Commission may, at it's option, complete the publicly or privately
owned improvements or restore the site to its original condition under the
guarantees provided by the developer.  In such case, the City Commission
shall direct the City Engineer to call upon the guarantees as outlined within
this article.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE IV.  BUILDING DIVISION SERVICES



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of this article is
to set forth uniform procedures, well-defined application processes, and
information to guide in the processing of complete applications which are
administered by the Building Division.



   B.   Administration.  The Building Official or designee shall be
responsible for the overall coordination and administration of this article.



   C.   Submittal Requirements.  Unless otherwise contained herein,
all application forms described in this article shall be approved by the
Building Official and maintained by the Building Division.  In order for an
application to be considered, it shall be accompanied by all documentation
required by the respective application checklist.



   D.   Completeness.  An application will be processed by the
Building Division when it is deemed complete, including all related submittal
documents.  Please note that the Building Official or designee may rule that
certain required items may be excluded from the submittal, and the finding of
an application "complete" shall not constitute a determination of compliance
with the substantive requirements of city or state regulations, or any other
applicable codes.



   E.   Fees.  Current fee schedules shall be maintained on file in
the Office of the City Clerk and shall be available, without charge, to the
public.  Fees shall be paid at the time each type of application is
submitted, according to the fee schedule approved by the City Commission. 
All construction regulation fees associated with the codes are subject to
amendment by resolution by the City Commission.  Any request to waive the
city building permit fee shall be in accordance with Chapter 8, Economic
Development, Section 8-1 of the City of Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances.



   F.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the applications and
processes contained herein.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Building Permit.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of this
section is to set forth a well-defined application process, review criteria,
and uniform procedure for the processing of permit applications, to ensure
that certain buildings, structures, and systems comply with the respective
requirements and standards described in the Florida Building Code, including
the City Administrative Amendments thereof, and these Land Development
Regulations.



      2.   Applicability.  A building or other structure shall not
be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered (including substantial
improvements as defined by Chapter I, Article II), unless a building permit
is issued by the city.  A building permit shall not be issued by the
Building Official or designee unless the application complies with the
requirements of this article and the Florida Building Code, including the
city's Administrative Amendments.  All permit applications for new
buildings, building expansions, major modifications or certain other
improvements, must be consistent with any applicable and corresponding site
plan, master plan or record plat.



      3.   Scope.  The Florida Building Code is based on national
model building codes and national consensus standards which are amended where
necessary for Florida's specific needs.  The code incorporates all building
construction-related regulations for public and private buildings in the
State of Florida other than those specifically exempted by F.S. § 553.73. 
It has been harmonized with the Florida Fire Prevention Code, which is
developed and maintained by the Department of Financial Services, Office of
the State Fire Marshal, to establish unified and consistent standards.



   B.   Submittal Requirements.  Application forms for building
permits shall be provided by the Building Division.  Unless the Building
Official or designee determines otherwise, the applicant shall submit
completed forms, provide all documentation, including plans and exhibits
required by such applications, and pay all applicable fees as adopted by
resolution by the City Commission.



   In addition to the information required on the applications, the
permittee for any permit for construction in special flood hazard areas,
which upon its completion would result in the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or certificate of completion, shall, prior to the issuance of such
certificate of occupancy/ completion, submit a flood elevation or flood
proofing certification after placement of the lowest floor and prior to
further vertical construction, or in instances where the structure is subject
to the regulations applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after placement
of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor and prior to further
vertical construction.  Within twenty-one (21) calendar days of
establishment of the lowest floor elevation, or flood proofing by whatever
construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of
the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, the permit holder shall submit to
the Development Department a certification of the elevation of the lowest
floor, flood proofing elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of
the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is
applicable, in relation to mean sea level.  Said certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer.  When flood proofing is utilized, certification shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or
architect.  Any work done within the twenty-one (21)-day calendar period and
prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's
risk.  The Development Department shall review the flood elevation survey
data submitted.  Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by
the permit holder immediately and prior to continuation of the work. 
Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections shall cause
issuance of a stop-work order for the project.



   C.   Review Criteria.  The building permit application shall comply
with the following: Florida Building Code, including the city's
Administrative Amendments; requirements of the respective zoning district
regulations of Chapter 3, Article III; and site development standards
described in Chapter 4.  In addition, flood zone elevation certification
shall be required for any type of application that, upon its completion,
would result in the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 



   D.   Approval Process.  The application shall be reviewed by staff
and action will be taken by the appropriate administrative official within
the timeframe in accordance with state statutes.  No building permits shall
be issued prior to the payment of any of the applicable impact fees and/or
land dedications that may be required pursuant to Chapter 2, Article VI,
Impact Fees and Dedications.



   E.   State of Florida Fees.



      1.   Radon.  This fee, when applicable is due prior to the
issuance of the building permit.



      2.   Building Code Administrators and Inspection Fund.  This
fee, when applicable, is due prior to the issuance of the building permit.



   F.   Miscellaneous.



      1.   Revocation of Permits.  The Building Division is
authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued if there has been a
violation of the provisions of this article or a misrepresentation of fact on
the permit application and specified in the latest adopted Florida Building
Code.



      2.   Certificate of Occupancy.  No building or structure
hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be issued a certificate of
occupancy until the Building Official makes a finding that the building or
structure has been erected or structurally altered in conformance with the
provisions of these Regulations, and of all other applicable ordinances. 
Upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, an improved site must be
maintained in compliance with the approved site plan.



      3.   Appeal.  Any appeal of a decision made by a city
official shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 1, Article VIII,
Section 1 (Appeals from an Administrative Official).



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord.
17-029, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 3.   Sign Permit.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of this
subsection is to set forth well-defined application processes, review
criteria, and uniform procedure to guide in the processing and review of sign
permit applications to ensure compliance with the design objectives of
Chapter 4, Article IV, Section 1.B. (i.e. identification, aesthetics, land
values, safety, sustainability, and compatibility).



      2.   Applicability.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
erect, construct, enlarge, move, or convert any sign in the city, or cause
the same to be done, without first obtaining a sign permit for each such
sign.  These directives shall not be construed to require any permit for the
cleaning, maintenance, or repair of a sign or sign structure for which a
permit has previously been issued under this article, provided that such sign
or structure is not modified in any way.  Signs and structures supporting
signs previously erected without a valid permit shall be in violation of this
article and shall be deemed illegal signs.  It shall be mandatory to obtain
a permit for an illegal sign, or to immediately remove such sign and the
structure supporting such sign upon notice that the sign or structure
supporting the sign is illegal.  The notice shall contain a time period for
removal. 



   If the Building Official determines that a sign and support structure,
which are subject to the standards of the sign code pursuant to Chapter 4,
Article IV, are exempt from the Florida Building Code, then such sign and
support structure shall require a sign permit under the authority of the
Director of Planning and Zoning in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II,
Section 5.A.



      3.   Licensing and Contractors.  No person shall install,
alter, or cause to be installed or altered, any temporary or permanent sign
unless the person is licensed as required by the State of Florida or Palm
Beach County contractor licensing regulations.  It shall be unlawful for any
licensed sign contractor to knowingly construct or cause to be constructed, a
sign contrary to the standards and requirements of these Land Development
Regulations, the Florida Building Code, or any other applicable code, whether
or not said contractor installs such sign.  In addition, no person shall
engage in the business of erecting, painting, wiring, or maintaining signs
within the city without first having procured a business tax receipt for such
business from both the city and the county. 



   B.   Submittal Requirements.  Applications for permits required by
this section shall contain the following information:



      1.   Applicant Information.  Name, address and telephone
number of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting or affixing
such sign;



      2.   Owner Consent.  Written consent of the owner of the
building, structure or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected or
affixed;



      3.   Location.  Property location (address of premises upon
which sign is to be located);



      4.   Site Plan.  Two (2) sets of site plans, surveys, or
other such scaled drawings deemed acceptable to the Building Official or
designee, illustrating the proposed location of the sign and sign structure,
including their position and setbacks relative to buildings, structures,
property lines, road rights-of-way, and any pertinent improvements such as
utility lines and other types of infrastructure;



      5.   Sign Detail.  Two (2) sets of illustrations, sketches,
pictures, photographs, or other such scaled drawings deemed acceptable to the
Building Official or designee, detailing the type of sign proposed (as
identified in Chapter 4, Article IV) and including the following information:



         a.   Aggregate sign area (expressed in square feet);



         b.   Overall sign height;



         c.   Height of each letter, digit, character, or logo;



         d.   Text font(s);



         e.   Sign color(s), including color of each letter,
digit, character, or logo; and



         f.   Sign material(s);



      6.   Wind Load.  Stress tests and calculations showing the
sign (and support structure) are designed for the high velocity wind
requirements in the Florid Building Code.  The seal of a Florida registered
engineer or architect shall be affixed to drawings of the sign and/or support
structure that have an area exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet and/or six
(6) feet in height, certifying that such signs are designed to meet the
required loading;



      7.   Electrical.  All electrical details required to
determine code compliance for the sign and the structure supporting the sign;



      8.   Valuation.  Estimated value or cost of the proposed sign;



      9.   Payment.  Each application for a sign permit required
under this section shall be accompanied by the applicable fees pursuant to
Section 1.E. above; and



      10.   Miscellaneous.  Any other information as required by
the Building Official that demonstrates compliance with the Florida Building
Code and other applicable laws and ordinances of the city.



   C.   Approval Criteria.  Each application for a sign permit
required under this section shall comply with the Florida Building Code and
all applicable Land Development Regulations.



   D.   Review Process.  The Building Official or designee shall have
ten (10) days to review an application for a sign permit to ensure that it is
complete.  If the application is found to be incomplete, the Building
Official or designee shall send written notification to the applicant
indicating the specific reasons (with appropriate code references) as to why
the application is deficient.  Once a sign permit application is deemed to
be complete, staff will conduct a review of the application and within
forty-five (45) days, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application for a sign permit. 



   E.   Expiration.  Any permit for a sign may be revoked by the city
upon the determination that the sign is not in full compliance with the
provisions of these Land Development Regulations or other applicable codes. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if no work has commenced within six
(6) months upon the issuance of such permit.



   F.   Miscellaneous.



      1.   Display of Permit Number.  Every sign or structure
supporting a sign hereafter erected shall permanently include in a
conspicuous place thereon, the corresponding permit number.



      2.   Inspection.  The city may inspect at any time each sign
or structure supporting a sign regulated by this article for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the same is unsafe, in need of repair or maintenance,
not in conformance with the permit application or otherwise in violation of
the provisions of this article.



      3.   Revocation of Permits.  The Building Division is
authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued if there has been a
violation of the provisions of this article or a misrepresentation of fact on
the permit application and specified in the latest adopted Florida Building
Code. 



      4.   Appeal.  Any appeal of a decision made by a city
official shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 1, Article VIII,
Section 1 (Appeals from an Administrative Official).



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Variances.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this section is to
provide an efficient relief process to allow for deviations from certain
requirements and standards of the Florida Building Code, including the city's
Administrative Amendments thereof, and the applicable regulations in the
city's Land Development Regulations, in circumstances when the applicant is
able to demonstrate a hardship.  The intent of this application is not to
provide a means for circumventing any such requirement or standard, but to
allow for a departure from the code upon demonstration that the subject
request satisfactorily addresses the review criteria contained herein, and
without the necessity of amending the regulation to accommodate the requested
relief.



      2.   Applicability.



         a.   The owner of a building, structure, or service
system, or duly authorized agent may appeal a decision from the Building
Official whenever any one (1) of the following conditions is claimed to exist:



            (1)   The Building Official rejected or refused to
approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or
materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building,
structure, or service system;



            (2)   The provision of the Florida Building Code,
including the city's Administrative Amendments thereto does not apply to this
specific case;



            (3)   That an equally good or more desirable form
of installation can be employed in a specific case; or



            (4)   The true intent and meaning of the Florida
Building Code, including the city's Administrative Amendments thereto have
been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted; or



         b.   The owner of a building, structure, or service
system, or duly authorized agent may request relief to any of the following: 



            (1)   The Florida Building Code, including the
city's Administrative Amendments and Technical Amendments;



            (2)   Chapter 4, Article IX, Building,
Construction, and Historic Preservation Requirements of the City's Code of
Ordinances; or



            (3)   Chapter 4, Article X, Flood Prevention
Requirements of the City's Code of Ordinances; or



         c.   Notice of appeal shall be filed within thirty (30)
calendar days after the Building Official renders the refuted decision.



   B.   Submittal Requirements.  The application form shall be
approved by the Building Official and maintained by the Building Division. 
In order for an application to be considered, it shall be accompanied by all
documentation required by the application checklist. 



   C.   Review Criteria.  The Building Board of Adjustment and
Appeals, when so petitioned, and after a hearing, may vary the application of
any provision of this Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the
enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the
purpose and intent of this or the technical codes or public interest, and
also finds all of the following general criteria in subsection 1. below:



      1.   General Criteria for All Variance Requests.



         a.   That special circumstances exist that are peculiar
to the building, structure, or service system involved, and which are not
applicable to others;



         b.   That the special conditions and circumstances do
not result form the action or inaction of the applicant;



         c.   That granting the variance requested will not
confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Code to
other buildings, structures, or service systems;



         d.   That the variance granted is the minimum variance
that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or
service system; and



         e.   That the granting of the variance will be in
harmony with the general intent and purpose of this Code and will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare.



      2.   Special Criteria for Variance Applications Involving
Deviations from Flood Prevention Regulations or the Flood Resistant Design
Requirements of the Florida Building Code. An applicant for a variance shall
submit a showing of good and sufficient cause and that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical
characteristics of the land (increased costs to satisfy the requirements or
inconvenience do not constitute hardship). Variances shall only be issued
upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering
the flood hazard, to afford relief.  Variances shall not be issued within
any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.  In passing upon such variance requests, the Board
shall determine that the granting of the variance will not result in
increased flood heights; additional threats to public safety; extraordinary
public expense; create nuisance; cause fraud on or victimization of the
public; or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.  The Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of these Land Development Regulations, and:



         a.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands to the injury of others.



         b.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage.



         c.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.



         d.   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community.



         e.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront
location, where applicable.



         f.   The availability of alternative locations, not
subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.



         g.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
and anticipated development.



         h.   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area.



         i.   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.



         j.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.



         k.   The costs of providing governmental services during
and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems,
and streets and bridges.



      3.   Additional Requirements for Flood Prevention Variances.



         a.   Written Notice. Any applicant to whom a variance
from the flood prevention requirements has been granted to allow construction
of a lowest floor below the required elevation shall be given written notice
specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation
to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage) and stating that construction below the base flood
elevation increases risks to life and property.



         b.   Historic Buildings and Structures. The repair,
improvement, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures
listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of
Historic Places, or the Boynton Beach Register of Historic Places, are
eligible for variances from the flood prevention requirements of the LDR
without regard to the procedures set forth in this section upon evidence by
the applicant that such actions would not adversely impact the historic
designation of the structure. The Director of Development or designee shall
maintain the records of granted variances.



         c.   Functionally Dependent Uses. A variance is
authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement
necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in
Chapter 1, Article II, provided the variance is the minimum necessary
considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use
of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the
base flood.



   D.   Approval Process.  An application for variance approval
requires review by staff to ensure it is eligible to be considered by the
Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals.  Once determined to be eligible
for consideration, staff shall forward the variance application to the
Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals, and such Board will review the
request based on the review criteria listed above, and render its decision. 
See Section 112 of the City's Administrative Amendments to the Florida
Building Code for the rules and regulations regarding the operating
procedures of the Board.



   E.   Expiration.  See Section 112 of the city's Administrative
Amendments to the FBC for the rules and regulations regarding the expiration
of a variance granted by the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



   F.   Miscellaneous.



      1.   Conditions of Approval.  The Building Board of
Adjustment and Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards on
the approval of any variance in accordance with Section 112 of the city's
Administrative Amendments to the FBC.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 13-020, passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord.
17-029, passed 9-19-17)



ARTICLE V.  BUSINESS TAX SERVICES



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this article is to set
forth uniform and well-defined procedures for each application processed by
the Business Tax section of the Planning and Zoning Division.



   B.   Administration.  The Business Tax Manager or designee shall be
responsible for the overall coordination and administration of all
applications contained within this article.



   C.   Completeness.  An application will be processed by the
Business Tax section of the Planning and Zoning Division when it is deemed
complete, including all related submittal documents.  Please note that the
Business Tax Manager or designee may rule that certain required items may be
excluded from the submittal, and the finding of an application "complete"
shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive
requirements of city or state regulations, or any other applicable codes. 



   D.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the applications and
processes contained herein.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Business Tax Receipt.



   A.   Generally.  A business tax receipt is required prior to
engaging in or managing any business, profession, or occupation within the
city.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any non-exempt
business, profession, or occupation without first obtaining a business tax
receipt in accordance with City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 13,
Licenses.



   B.   Dogs in Outdoor Portions of Public Food Service Establishments.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this subsection
is to set forth uniform procedures, a well- defined application process, and
information that shall be included in applications to allow dogs within
outdoor public food service establishments.



         b.   Applicability.  This process shall be required of
any public food service establishment desiring to allow patrons' dogs within
qualified seating areas in accordance with Chapter 3, Article V, Section 13.



      2.   Submittal Requirements. Public food service
establishments must apply for and receive a permit from the Development
Department before patrons' dogs are allowed on the premises. The application
for a permit shall require such information from the applicant as is deemed
reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this section, but shall
require, at a minimum, the following information:



         a.   Information.



            (1)   Name, location, mailing address and division
issued license number of the public food service establishment.



            (2)   Name, mailing address, and telephone contact
information of the permit applicant.



         b.   Diagram. A diagram and description of the outdoor
area which is requested to be designated as available to patrons' dogs,
including dimensions of the designated area; a depiction of the number and
placement of tables, chairs, and restaurant equipment, if any; the entryways
and exits to the designated outdoor area; the boundaries of the designated
area and of the other outdoor dining areas not available for patrons' dogs;
any fences or other barriers; surrounding property lines and public
rights-of-way, including sidewalks and common pathways; and such other
information as is deemed necessary by the city. No more than 30% of the
outdoor food service portion of the food establishment shall be designated as
a service area where dogs are permitted.



   The diagram shall be accurate and to scale but need not be prepared by
a licensed design professional. A copy of the approved diagram shall be
attached to the permit.



         c.   Hours of Operation. A description of the days of
the week and hours of operation that patrons' dogs will be permitted in the
designated outdoor area.



      3.   Review Criteria. The review criteria for this application
shall be in accordance with the standards of Chapter 3, Article V, Section 13.



      4.   Approval Process. Applications shall be reviewed by staff
and action will be taken by the appropriate administrative official within 30
days of the application.



      5.   Expiration. A permit issued pursuant to this section
shall expire automatically upon the sale of the public food service
establishment and cannot be transferred to a subsequent owner. The subsequent
owner may apply for a permit pursuant to this section if the subsequent owner
wishes to continue to allow patrons' dogs in a designated outdoor area of the
public food service establishment.



      6.   Revocation.



         a.   A permit may be revoked by the city if, after
notice and reasonable time in which the grounds for revocation may be
corrected, the public food service establishment fails to comply with any
condition of approval, fails to comply with the approved diagram, fails to
maintain any required state or local license, or is found to be in violation
of any provision of this section. If the ground for revocation is a failure
to maintain any required state or local license, the revocation may take
effect immediately upon giving notice of revocation to the permit holder.



         b.   If a public food service establishment's permit is
revoked, no new permit may be approved for the establishment until the
expiration of 90 days following the date of revocation, providing that all
issues causing the revocation have been satisfied. This includes any
outstanding fines.



      7.   Complaints and Reporting.



         a.   Complaints may be made in writing to the Code
Compliance Division of the Police Department who shall accept, document, and
respond to all complaints and shall timely report to the division all
complaints and the response to such complaints.



         b.   The patron or the designated person in charge of
the public food service establishment, or both, may be issued civil citations
for each violation of this section.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-014, passed 9-4-12)



Sec. 3.   Seasonal Sales Event Approval.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this subsection is
to set forth uniform procedures, a well-defined application process, and
information that shall be included in applications for seasonal sales events,
in order to allow for the safe, orderly, and temporary selling of Christmas
trees, pumpkins, fireworks, and similar items that are principally sold
during the holidays.



      2.   Applicability.  This process shall be required of any
establishment or organization desiring to temporarily sell Christmas trees,
pumpkins, fireworks, or other such items that are principally sold during
holiday periods (outside a principal building), in accordance with Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 7.  The temporary display of retail merchandise not in
connection with a seasonal sales event shall be regulated separately in
accordance with Chapter 3, Article V, Section 5.



   B.   Submittal Requirements.  The application for seasonal sales
event approval shall be approved by resolution and maintained by the Business
Tax section of the Planning and Zoning Division.  All applications shall be
accompanied by all documentation, plans, and exhibits as indicated on the
application checklist.  Fees shall be paid when each application is
submitted to the Business Tax section and in the amount as adopted from time
to time by resolution by the City Commission.



   C.   Review Criteria.  The special temporary sales event shall
comply with the location requirements and time limitations of Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 7, and other site development standards described in
Chapter 4.



   D.   Approval Process.  Applications shall be reviewed by staff and
action will be taken by the appropriate administrative official within thirty
(30) days of the application.



   E.   Expiration.  Event approval shall be valid for a period not to
exceed forty-five (45) days within any one (1) calendar year.



   F.   Miscellaneous.



      1.   Signage.  See banners in Chapter 4, Article IV, Section
4.B.7. for additional standards regarding allowable signage for seasonal
sales events.



      2.   Permanent Exterior Storage.  The permanent exterior
storage of retail merchandise or equipment shall be regulated separately in
accordance with Chapter 3, Article V, Section 8.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Special Sales Event Approval.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this subsection is
to set forth uniform procedures, a well-defined application process, and
information that shall be included in applications for special sales events
in order to allow for the safe and orderly operation of selling of
merchandise.



      2.   Applicability.  This process shall be required of any
establishment or organization desiring to temporarily sell and store
merchandise (outside a principal building) in accordance with Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 6.  The temporary display of retail merchandise not in
connection with a special sales event shall be regulated separately in
accordance with Chapter 3, Article V, Section 5.



   B.   Submittal Requirements.  The application for special sales
event approval shall be approved by resolution and maintained by the Business
Tax section of the Planning and Zoning Division.  All applications shall be
accompanied by all documentation, plans, and exhibits as indicated on the
application checklist.  Fees shall be paid when each application is
submitted to the Business Tax section and in the amount as adopted from time
to time by resolution by the City Commission.



   C.   Review Criteria.  The special temporary sales event shall
comply with the location requirements and time limitations of Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 6, and the other site development standards described in
Chapter 4.



   D.   Approval Process.  Applications shall be reviewed by staff and
action will be taken by the appropriate administrative official within thirty
(30) days of the application.



   E.   Expiration.  Event approval shall be valid for a period not to
exceed fourteen (14) days within any one (1) calendar year; however, the
approval may be valid for up to sixty (60) days within one (1) calendar year
if the subject site is large enough to accommodate, and configured such, that
the merchandise associated with the sales event is setback at least three
hundred (300) feet from any property line abutting a street right-of-way in
accordance with Chapter 3, Article V, Section 6.



   F.   Miscellaneous.



      1.   Signage.  See banners in Chapter 4, Article IV, Section
4.B.6. for additional standards regarding allowable signing for special sales
event approval.



      2.   Permanent Exterior Storage.  The permanent exterior
storage of retail merchandise or equipment shall be regulated separately in
accordance with Chapter 3, Article V, Section 8.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE VI.  IMPACT AND SELECTED FEES



Sec. 1.   General.



   The purpose of this article is to provide an overview of some of the
regulatory fees, excluding application and construction related fees, which
are commonly imposed by the city when an applicant undertakes development,
redevelopment, or improvement of real property in the city.  The intent of
this article is to assist a developer in their due diligence; however, the
following list may not be all inclusive, as additional fees and costs may be
applicable.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   City Parks and Recreation Facilities Impact Fee or Land
Dedication.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  This section is enacted to ensure
that future land development within the city provides land and facilities for
park or recreational purposes in accordance with the Open Space and
Recreation Element of the Comprehensive Plan adopted by the city.  The
imposition of a park and recreation facilities impact fee is to provide a
source of revenue to fund the construction or improvement of the city park
system necessitated by growth, as delineated in the Capital Improvement
Element of the Comprehensive Plan.  The purpose of this section is to ensure
that all future residential land development creating an impact on park and
recreational  facilities within the city shall bear a proportionate share of
the cost of capital expenditure necessary to provide such facilities in
accordance with the Open Space and Recreation Element of the Comprehensive
Plan adopted by the city.



      2.   Applicability.  A park and recreation facilities impact
fee is hereby imposed on the construction of any type of new residential
dwelling unit.  For the purposes of this section, a residential use shall be
construed to be any such use that is listed under the "residential and
lodging" category shown in the use matrix (see Chapter 3, Article IV, Section
3.D.).  A residential use shall include the residential component of
mixed-use developments, or the conversion of any existing non-residential use
to a new residential use.  The provisions of this section however, shall not
apply to accessory dwelling units, bed and breakfast, hotel and motel
establishments, and nursing homes (as defined by the state).



      3.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for
the terms and definitions associated with impact fees.



      4.   Waiver.  Any request to waive a city impact fee shall be
in accordance with City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 8, Economic
Development, Section 8-1.



   B.   Time of Impact Fee Payment.  Payment of park and recreation
facilities impact fees or transfer of title to land conveyed in lieu of a
cash payment, shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit (see
Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 2).



   C.   Impact Fee Calculation.  The formula used to develop park and
recreation facilities impact fee assessment is set forth in accordance with
the following:



      1.   Table 2-3. Costs Per Capita: Methodology.  The cost per
capita is calculated by multiplying the standard quantity of park land and
facility by average cost per facility.  The standard quantity is based on
actual provision.  The land value is the average assessed value per acre of
all vacant parcels within the city of two (2) acres or more.  Average
development cost has been added to the average assessed value to account for
basic civil and site development costs.



 


Component

 

Standard per Capita

 

Average Cost per Facility

 

Cost per Capita





Land Acres
 
0.002456
 
$275,626
 
$676.89


Playgrounds
 
0.000249
 
$192,500
 
$47.84


Basketball Courts
 
0.000219
 
$152,500
 
$33.44


Handball/Racquetball Courts
 
0.000117
 
$225,000
 
$26.31


Baseball/Softball Fields - Youth
 
0.000073
 
$300,000
 
$21.93


Baseball/Softball Fields - Adults
 
0.000029
 
$357,500
 
$10.45


Football/Soccer Fields
 
0.000029
 
$355,000
 
$10.38


Tennis Courts
 
0.000453
 
$120,000
 
$54.38


Shuffleboard Courts
 
0.000234
 
$46,250
 
$10.82


Picnic Areas
 
0.000351
 
$57,200
 
$20.07


Fitness Trails (Stations)
 
0.000029
 
$92,500
 
$2.70


TOTAL COST PER CAPITA
 
 
$915.00


ADJUSTED COST PER
 
Adjustment ($915 x 0.36)*
 
$329.00




 



   *Based on park improvement budgets over the last five (5) fiscal years,
sixty-four percent (64%) of the cost of park development is anticipated to be
paid by the city, with the remaining thirty-six percent (36%) covered by
funds from the trust fund established for deposition of impact fees. In the
calculation of adjusted cost per capita, other revenues that are being used
to pay for new parks and recreation facilities and for improvement of
existing facilities are subtracted from the total per capita cost.



      2.   Table 2-4.  Cost Per Dwelling Unit (Impact Fee)
Methodology.  The cost of parks and recreational facilities per dwelling
unit is the impact fee.  It is calculated by multiplying the park and
recreational facility cost per person (after the credit reduction for other
revenues) by the average number of persons per dwelling unit in a given type
of structure:



 


Type of Dwelling Unit

 

Net Unfunded Cost Per Capita

 

Persons Per Dwelling Unit*

 

Impact Fee Per Dwelling Unit



Single-Family, Detached or Attached*
 
$329.00
 
2.66
 
$875.00


Dwellings in buildings containing two (2) to four (4) units*
 
$329.00
 
2.06
 
$678.00


Multi-Family (dwellings in buildings containing five (5) or more units*)
 
$329.00
 
1.81
 
$595.00


*As per Census definitions. The persons-per-unit numbers are currently based
on the Census Bureau 2008-2010 American Community Survey's estimates.



 



   D.   Table 2-5.  Impact Fee Amount.  The established park and
recreation facilities impact fee per residential unit is as follows:



 

Type of Dwelling Unit
 
Impact Fee per Dwelling Unit


Single-Family, Detached or Attached
 
$875.00


Dwellings in buildings containing two (2) to four (4) units
 
$678.00


Multi-Family (dwellings in buildings containing five (5) or more units)
 
$595.00



 



   E.   Credit Towards Impact Fee Imposition.  Where a building(s)
consisting of one (1) or more dwelling units is demolished for redevelopment
purposes and replaced by another building of one (1) or more dwelling units
the developer of the redevelopment project can request a credit for all or
part of any previous park and recreational impact fees paid to the city for
the building(s). The burden is on the developer to submit proof of previous
payment of park and recreation impact fees. Following application, city staff
shall determine the amount of credit to be given based on a cost per dwelling
unit basis. If the number of units being constructed in redevelopment are
equal to or less than the number of units that previously existed on the
property and impact fees were previously paid, the developer will be assessed
no additional park and recreational impact fees. If the number of units being
constructed in redevelopment is greater than the number of units that
previously existed on the site and impact fees were previously paid, the
developer will be charged additional impact fees only for the number of new
units that exceeds the original number of units.



   F.   Land Donation in Lieu of Impact Fee.  Some or all of the park
and recreation facilities impact fee obligation may be satisfied by
dedication of land to the city for park and recreation facilities.  The
process of donation may be initiated by the applicant or the city upon the
formal filing of a development application and prior to the completion of
staff reviews.  When staff anticipates the need for a land dedication in
lieu of an impact fee, staff shall notify the property owner/applicant at the
pre-application conference.  Staff's notification to the property
owner/applicant shall include a statement that only the City Commission has
the authority to decide when a land dedication will be required in lieu of
the payment of the impact fee.  In either case, the decision to accept land
in lieu of a fee is reserved to the City Commission.



      1.   Master or Site Plan.  When either an applicant or the
city proposes a land dedication in lieu of all or part of the required cash
fee, the applicant shall submit to the Director of Parks and Recreation a
proposed plan for the dedication of land for impact fee satisfaction.  The
proposed plan shall include a legal description of the land and a written
appraisal of the land, along with a proposed date for the donation of the
land.  Upon receipt of the proposed plan, the Director of Recreation and
Parks shall schedule a hearing before the City Commission and provide the
applicant with written notice of the time and place of the hearing.  Such
hearing shall be held in accordance with the City Commission rules for
conducting quasi-judicial hearings.  The City Commission, following a
written recommendation from the Director of Parks and Recreation and the City
Manager, shall, following the public hearing determine whether it shall
require a land dedication in lieu of a fee by consideration of the following:



         a.   Suitability.  The land should be suitable for
future park and recreation facilities based upon the size, shape, topography,
geology, access and location of the proposed development;



         b.   No Defects.  The land must have no known physical
problems such as with drainage or flooding, or on-site safety hazards
associated with it; and



         c.   Consistency.  The location of the land and its
potential for development should be consistent with the city's Recreation and
Parks Strategic Plan.



      2.   Approval.  Nothing contained herein should be construed
to prevent the City Commission from exercising its authority to decline the
donation of land as partial or full satisfaction of the park and recreation
facilities impact fee.



      3.   Fair Market Value.  The fair market value of said land
dedicated in lieu of a cash fee will be credited to the applicant against the
impact fee as set forth in this section.  If the fair market value exceeds
the applicant's impact fee obligation, the reimbursement will be made to the
applicant by direct cash payment from the trust fund.



      4.   Appraisal.  The value of the proposed land to be
dedicated shall be based upon a written appraisal of fair market value by a
qualified and professional appraiser, and based upon comparable sales of
similar property between unrelated parties in a bargaining transaction, if
available.  The appraiser must: be a Member of the Appraisal Institute
(M.A.I.); have his or her principal office for business in Martin, Palm Beach
or Broward County; and have been qualified to testify as an expert on land
valuation in a court proceeding in at least three (3) legal proceedings
involving a governmental entity.  The fee of the appraiser shall be paid by
the applicant when a dedication in lieu of a cash fee is requested by the 
applicant and by the city when the dedication in lieu of a cash fee is
initiated by the city.



   G.   Use of Park Impact Fee Proceeds.



      1.   The funds collected pursuant to the Park and Recreation
Facilities Impact Fee Ordinance shall be paid to the city, and placed in a
trust fund to be known as the reserve for parks and recreational facilities.



         a.   This account shall be used solely for the purpose
of providing growth- necessitated capital improvements to the city park
system including, but not limited to:



            (1)   Land acquisition, including any cost of
acquisition;



            (2)   Cost related to the enhancement or expansion
of existing city owned parks or sites that the city maintains for
recreational purposes;



            (3)   Fees for professional services, including
but not limited to architecture, engineering, surveying, landscaping, soils
and material testing, legal, appraisals, and construction management;



            (4)   Design and construction documents;



            (5)   Site development and on-site and off-site
improvements incidental to the construction thereto;



            (6)   Any permitting or application fees necessary
for the construction;



            (7)   Design and construction of parks and
recreational facilities;



            (8)   Design and construction of drainage
facilities required by the construction of parks and recreational facilities
or improvements thereto;



            (9)   Relocating utilities required by the
construction of parks and recreational facilities or improvements or
additions thereto;



            (10)   Landscaping;



            (11)   Acquisition of capital equipment for the
city park system;



            (12)   Repayment of monies borrowed from any
budgetary fund of the city which were used to fund growth-necessitated
capital improvements to the city park system as provided herein;



            (13)   Payment of principal and interest,
necessary reserves and costs of issuance under any bonds or other
indebtedness issued by the city to fund growth-necessitated improvements and
additions to the city park system subsequent to the effective date of this
section; and



            (14)   Costs related to the administration,
collection, and implementation of the park impact fees.



         b.   Funds shall be used first for the purpose of
providing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the
subdivision by purchasing land or by improving the land for park and
recreational purposes.



         c.   If both adequate land and improvements exist in the
area, funds may be spent to acquire or improve park and recreational
facilities elsewhere in the city.



         d.   The expenditure of these funds shall accommodate
increased utilization at city owned or maintained parks or sites.



      2.   For purposes of this section, "capital improvements to
the city park system" means capital improvements, including land, land
improvements, buildings, and equipment having a useful life of at least five
(5) years and a cost of at least five thousand dollars ($5,000), necessary
for the provision of park and recreation services to new impact-generating
development.



      3.   The moneys deposited into the reserve for parks and
recreational facilities trust account shall be used solely to provide capital
improvements to the city park system as necessitated by growth and shall not
be used for any expenditure that would be classified as a maintenance or
repair expense.



      4.   Any park impact fee funds on deposit which are not
immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested by the city.  All
income derived from such investments shall be deposited in the reserve for
parks and recreational facilities trust account and used as provided herein.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-032, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord.
13-011, passed 6-4-13)



Sec. 3.   Capital Facilities Fee.



   Potable water/sanitary sewer fees are calculated based on the type of
use and anticipated water and sewer demand as detailed in the City's Code of
Ordinances Part II, Chapter 26.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Fire Rescue Assessment.



   This fee is required pursuant to City Code of Ordinances Part II,
Chapter 23, Article III.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 5.   Art in Public Places Fee.



   All development, redevelopment, reconstruction, or remodeling projects,
which are subject to the Arts in Public Places Program, shall pay a public
arts fee in accordance with City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 2,
Article XII.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 6.   Downtown Stormwater Improvement Watershed Fee.



   This fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit for
new construction and/or redevelopment in the downtown watershed in accordance
with City Code of Ordinances Part II, Section 26-406.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 7.   Palm Beach County Fees.



   Palm Beach County ordinances require that certain impact fees be paid
concurrent with development activities, collectible prior to issuance of
certain permitting fees.  Developers in Boynton Beach shall pay such fees in
accordance with Palm Beach County ordinances.



   A.   Road.  This fee is based on the county's schedule, published
01/12/2006 or most recent update.



   B.   School.  This fee is based on the county's schedule, published
01/12/2006 or the most recent update.



   C.   Park.  This fee is based on the county's schedule, published
01/12/2006 or the most recent update.



   D.   Public Building.  This fee is based on the county's schedule,
published 01/12/2006 or the most recent update.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 8.   Green Building Program.



   See Chapter 2, Article I, Section 5 for additional fees associated with
the Green Building Fee, a voluntary program.



(Ord. 11-014, passed 4-27-11)



CHAPTER 3.  ZONING



Article I.   Overview



Article II.   General Provisions



Article III.   Zoning Districts and Overlay Zones



Article IV.   Use Regulations



Article V.   Supplemental Regulations



ARTICLE I.  OVERVIEW



Sec. 1.   Use of Terms.



   All words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; all
words in the singular number shall include the plural number; and all words
in the plural number shall include the singular number unless specifically
indicated otherwise; the words "used for" shall include the meaning "designed
for," the word "structure" shall include the word "building," the word "lot"
shall include the words "plot and tract," and the word "shall" is mandatory.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.    Scope.



   The purpose of these Regulations is to promote the physical and
economic development of the city, and foster the use and enjoyment of
property in a manner consistent with adopted plans, regulations, and
policies.  The intent of these Regulations is to promote public health,
safety, and welfare; to provide for efficient circulation; to improve the
appearance of the community; to assure compatible land uses; and to preserve
the resources and character of the area.  This zoning regulation includes
comprehensive zoning rules for the City of Boynton Beach, dividing the city
into districts and establishing the boundaries thereof; regulating and
restricting the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
or use of buildings, structures or land or water; regulating and restricting
the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures;
regulating and restricting the percentage of lots that may be occupied;
regulating and restricting the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces;
regulating and restricting the density of population; regulating and
restricting the location or use of buildings, structures, and land and water
for trade, industry, residence, and other purposes; specifying the use of
defining certain terms herein; providing for the administration, enforcement
and amendment of this regulation; establishing and defining the powers and
duties of both the Planning and Development Board and the Community
Redevelopment Agency Board; establishing and defining the powers and duties
of the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals; setting penalties for
violation of this zoning regulation and authorizing resort to other remedies
to prevent or abate violation; providing that this zoning regulation shall
supersede any previous zoning ordinance or resolution; and for other purposes.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Authority.



   Pursuant to the provision of the Charter of the City of Boynton Beach,
Florida, the City Commission has adopted and hereby declares the intent to
utilize the "Official Zoning Regulations" (together with the official zoning
map) for the betterment of the city as so entrusted to them.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Official Zoning Map.



   This set of regulations together with the official zoning map with
explanatory matter thereon, shall be known, used and may be cited as the
"Official Zoning Regulations of the City of Boynton Beach, Florida."



   A.   Adoption.  The district boundaries hereinafter set forth and
delineated on the official zoning map, including all explanatory matter
thereon, are hereby adopted.  The official zoning map shall be maintained as
a digital format GIS document.  The most recent version of the official
zoning map shall be kept on file, in printed form, in the office of the City
Clerk.



   B.   Updates.  The City Commission may amend the official zoning
map from time to time by ordinance.  The official zoning map shall be
notated to list all revision dates and ordinance numbers.



   C.   Establishment of Zoning Districts.  The City of Boynton Beach
is hereby divided into zoning districts as follows and as delineated on the
official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is
hereby declared a part of the official zoning regulations:



 



R-1-AAB
 
Single-family residential district


R-1-AA
 
Single-family residential district


R-1-A
 
Single-family residential district


R-1
 
Single-family residential district


R-2
 
Single- and two-family residential district


R-3
 
Multi-family residential district


R-4
 
Multi-family residential district


IPUD
 
Infill planned unit development district


PUD
 
Planned unit development district


MHPD
 
Mobile home planned development district


C-1
 
Office and professional commercial district


C-2
 
Neighborhood commercial district


C-3
 
Community commercial district


C-4
 
General commercial district


CBD
 
Central business district


PCD
 
Planned commercial development district


SMU
 
Suburban mixed use district


MU-1
 
Mixed use 1 district


MU-2
 
Mixed use 2 district


MU-3
 
Mixed use 3 district


MU-4
 
Mixed use 4


MU-C
 
Mixed use Core district


M-1
 
Industrial district


PID
 
Planned industrial development district


PU
 
Public usage district


REC
 
Recreation district




 



   D.   Zoning District Boundaries.



      1.   Changes.  In accordance with the provisions of these
official zoning regulations, and applicable provisions of both the Charter of
the City and applicable provisions of F.S. Chapter 163, changes may be made
in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map
by action of the City Commission.  The official zoning map shall be
maintained in the records of both the Office of the City Clerk and the
Department of Development, and made available for viewing by the general
public.



      2.   Interpretation.



         a.   Extent.  The zoning within any district extends
throughout the entire area of the district unless otherwise specifically
provided.



         b.   Locations.  District boundaries follow lot lines,
centerlines of rights-of-way of streets, alleys, railroads, canals, lakes,
the corporate limits as they exist at the time of this document, or other
geographical or topographical features.



   In unsubdivided property, unless dimensioned, lines shall be determined
by the use of the scale on the map.



         c.   Waterways.  District boundaries will follow
changes in shorelines, except where such interpretation would change the
zoning classification of a lot or parcel, and in each case, the
interpretation shall avoid changing the zoning of any lot or parcel. 
Submerged lands shall assume the regulations of the abutting district as the
district shall be construed to extend into the water area in a straight
projection until met centerwise by other districts.



         d.   Abandonments.  If the boundaries are not changed,
the zoning of the property abutting shall extend into and to the centerline
or to such ownership line as can be determined of the property abandoned.



         e.   Annexation.  Boundaries and zoning of all lands
annexed into the city shall be determined at the time of annexation.



         f.   Variations in Zoning District Boundaries.  Where
the actual location on the ground differs from the mapped location, the
interpretation shall be to avoid changing the zoning of any lot or parcel. 
Necessary interpretation shall be made by the Director of Planning and Zoning
as to the intent and purpose of these official zoning regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 16-023, passed 1-3-17; Am. Ord.
17-023, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 5.   Relationship to Adopted Plans, Guidelines or Other Regulations.



   When the adopted Comprehensive Plan for the city, adopted plans for the
development or redevelopment of particular areas of the city or adopted
design guidelines include policies which impose limitations or requirements
on the use or development of property generally or for specific properties,
which are more restrictive than those set forth in these zoning regulations,
including district regulations and use provisions, including policies which
limit the type or intensity of use of property, residential densities, or the
height, setbacks, bulk, or design of structures, or site design, the more
restrictive limitations or requirements set forth in such adopted guidelines
or plans shall supersede the provisions of these zoning regulations.



   When other use or development regulations are more restrictive than
those set forth in these zoning regulations, or in the case of conflict
between specific provisions contained in these zoning regulations, including
regulations which limit the type or intensity of use of property, residential
densities, the height, setbacks, bulk, or that regulate site design, the more
restrictive regulations shall apply.



   In interpretation and application of these Regulations, the provisions
herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community.  It is
not the intent of these Regulations to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties.  However, in
instances when these Regulations imposes a greater restriction upon the use
of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger
open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules,
regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of these
Regulations shall control; furthermore, these Regulations shall not be
construed to supersede any special act of the legislature relative to the
subject matter of these Regulations.  If, because of error or omission in
the zoning map, any property in the city is not shown as being in a zoning
district, the classification of such property shall be R-1-A single-family,
unless changed by amendment to these Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE II.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   The regulations for each district shall be minimum or maximum
limitations, as appropriate to the case, and shall apply uniformly to each
class or kind of structure, use, or land or water except as provided
otherwise in these Regulations.



Sec. 1.   Use.



   No building or structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied,
and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations
herein specified for the district in which it is located.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Frontage.



   Every principal building shall be located on a lot or a publicly
dedicated, accepted, and maintained street or private street which conforms
to accepted street standards of this city.



   All lots shall have frontage on a street or have permanent private
access to a street which has a minimum right-of-way of fifty (50) feet.  All
lots shall have the area, frontage, width and depth required by the
prevailing or approved use zone wherein said lots are located.  When a
subdivision is proposed under land with existing structures that are proposed
to be retained, lots are to be designed so as not to cause existing
structures to become nonconforming with respect to building area or lot
size.  When lots are platted abutting a collector or arterial street, access
shall be limited to local streets or marginal access roads.  No access from
individual lots shall be permitted directly to collector or arterial
streets.  Double frontage lots or through lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or
orientation.  Where double frontage lots are developed they shall be
buffered as required by these Regulations.



   A.   Corner Lots.  Corner lot lines at intersecting rights-of-way
shall be the long chord of a twenty-five (25)-foot radius or of a greater
radius where deemed necessary.  Corner lots shall be designed to provide a
safe intersection with respect to sight distance.  A restriction shall be
defined on the plat prohibiting construction or plantings over two (2) foot
six (6) inches high on corner lots within a safe sight distance based on the
crown elevation of the street.



   B.   Through-Lots (Double Frontage).  The predominant building
orientation on the block where the through lot is located shall determine
front and rear setbacks.  No accessory structures may be forward of the
front building line, as determined above (example: pools, sheds, swing set,
etc.).  Additionally, fences, walls, and hedges may be placed at the
regulated height for rear yards, as determined above, provided there is a
provision made for a hedge along the street-side of the wall or fence.  Said
wall or fence must be setback a minimum of eighteen (18) inches from the
property line and planted with a continuous hedge at a minimum of one-half
(1/2) the height of the wall or fence.  Said landscape material shall be
appropriately irrigated.



   C.   Cul-de-sac.  The allowed frontage of a lot when shaped by a
cul-de-sac or the frontage of any other irregular shaped lot, shall be
measured at the setback or building line, and shall be not less than
seventy-five percent (75%) of the required lot frontage in the applicable
zoning district.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Principal Buildings.



   Within single-family residential districts, only one (1) principal
building and its accessory buildings shall occupy or be constructed upon any
lot or lots; portions of lots; or lots that have been previously combined to
meet the size required for each district.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Height/Density.



   No building shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or
altered to exceed the height or density limitations of the defined zones.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 5.   Yards/Open Space.



   No part of a yard or other space or the off-street parking or loading
space required for any building for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of these Regulations shall be included as part of the yard or
off-street parking or loading space required for a separate, off-site
building.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 6.   Visual Obstructions.



   No opaque wall, fence, sign, plant material, or other site improvement
shall be erected, created, or maintained in any zoning district in such a
manner that it would violate any cross-visibility and safe-sight standards
required near vehicular use areas, such as within off-street parking areas;
points of ingress and egress, including driveways of single-family and duplex
homes; or along rights-of-way.  It shall be considered safe-sight when
horizontal (unobstructed) cross-visibility is maintained between thirty (30)
inches and eight (8) feet.  It is the responsibility of the City Engineer or
designee to determine the area(s) on properties or within rights-of-way where
cross-visibility is required.  The City Engineer or designee shall have the
authority to order the removal of any opaque wall, fence, plant material,
sign, or improvement, including that which was lawfully permitted by the
city, if it is determined that a visual obstruction is created, and such
obstruction poses a threat or hazard to pedestrians, bicyclists, and
motorists traversing on or between properties, or within abutting
rights-of-way.  Any appeal of a decision made by an administrative official
may be presented to, and decided by, the City Commission in accordance with
Chapter 1, Article VIII, Section 1.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 7.   Accessory Buildings.



   Accessory buildings in residential districts shall be constructed to
conform to the minimum building and site regulations that are generally
applicable in the district where the building is to be located.  All
accessory buildings shall be located only in the side or rear yard.  Rules
regarding detached storage structures and other accessory structures shall be
in compliance with the supplemental regulations pursuant to Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 3.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 8.   Temporary Buildings and Collection Sites.



   A.   In connection with Construction Activity. Temporary buildings
such as models, offices and tool sheds used in conjunction with construction
work only, may be permitted in any district after approval of the Building
Inspection Department and the removal of which is accomplished within thirty
(30) days after construction ceases or is completed.  Mobile and temporary
storage structures shall be regulated in accordance with Chapter 3, Article
V, Section 3.E.2.



   B.   Emergency Housing.



      1.   In the event a housing emergency is declared to exist by
the City Commission following a natural or man-made disaster, and subject to
the conditions contained in this subsection, temporary structures such as
mobile homes, travel trailers, and recreational vehicles may be used as
temporary housing by individuals who have been displaced from their primary
residence due to damage from the disaster.



      2.   The following conditions shall apply to the use and
placement of temporary structures such as mobile homes, travel trailers, and
recreational vehicles placed on properties only after the City Commission
declares a housing emergency following a natural or man-made disaster:



         a.   A maximum of one (1) travel trailer/mobile
home/recreational vehicle for the sole occupancy by the existing residents of
the damaged home, will be allowed on an existing home site providing the
following conditions exist on the site:



            (1)   The home located on the site has been
declared "unsafe" by the Building Official or designee;



            (2)   The sanitary sewer must be properly
connected to the city's sanitary sewer system in accordance with codes in
effect at the time;



            (3)   Electrical service must be available on-site
and have a proper connection for a travel trailer/ mobile home/recreational
vehicle; and



            (4)   Only a licensed mobile home installation
contractor will be allowed to apply for a permit and perform any work related
to the connection of plumbing, electrical, and mechanical service systems to
the site.



         b.   Setback requirements shall be complied with to the
maximum extent possible;



         c.   All other applicable regulations and code
requirements, except parking, shall apply, including but not limited to flood
plan management;



         d.   The use of mobile homes, recreational vehicles, or
travel trailers as temporary residences in a zoning district where such use
is prohibited prior to the declaration of the housing emergency shall cease
either upon the repair or reconstruction of the individual's residence or no
later than eighteen (18) months after the date the City Commission declares a
housing emergency, whichever occurs first;



         e.   Housing sites for multiple temporary dwelling units
established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and approved by the
City Commission, may be established in any zoning district;



         f.   All drainage and stormwater management requirements
shall be met;



         g.   Water and/or sewer connection to previously
unserved locations will require permits and the payment of applicable
connection fees.



      3.   No person shall occupy a temporary dwelling unit prior to
inspection of the unit by the city and the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy, as determined by the
Building Official.



   C.   Emergency Solid Waste Collection Sites. The city hereby
authorizes the establishment of emergency solid waste processing sites that
may be placed into operation only following a declared state of emergency by
the City Commission, Palm Beach County, and/or the State of Florida. Minimal
site preparation and access work may be conducted through other normal agency
permit processes prior to the state of emergency declarations. No more than
one (1) emergency solid waste processing site shall be allowed in the city at
any one time and the location of such site shall be approved by the City
Commission prior to June 1 of each calendar year, a date coinciding with the
declared start of hurricane season. The selected site shall be allowed in any
zoning district provided that it is at least eight (8) acres. City Commission
approval may include any conditions of approval based on the unique character
of the site and surrounding area. The fee shall be $1,000 plus $0.50 per
cubic yard for each yard of material processed at the site as part of an
event cleanup.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-013, passed 4-27-11)



Sec. 9.   Calculating Required Living Area for Residential.



   Residential square footage shall be computed as follows:



 

Description
 
Percentage


Screen rooms
 
10%


Attached carports, roofed over open porches
 
25%


Attached garages, roofed over screened porches and utility rooms
 
50%


All other area under roof
 
100%


Accessory building(s)
 
0%



 



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 10.  Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 11.  Municipal Operations and Emergency Facilities, Essential Services
and Support Infrastructure.



Municipal projects, including emergency facilities, essential services, and
related infrastructure, shall be exempt from certain development and site
standards, which are limited to minimum lot area, minimum lot frontage,
maximum lot coverage, maximum floor-area-ratio (FAR) and building setbacks. 
The purpose of this exemption is to provide for the necessary flexibility in
siting, replacing and maintaining essential public services and
infrastructure, and to ensure an expeditious process when necessary.  Exempt
projects shall be reviewed through the site plan review process for
compliance with all other development standards, including the intent of the
Land Development Regulations. The review of all municipal projects should
ensure that such improvements farther the city's vision and initiatives with
respect to sustainability, capital improvements planning, comprehensive
planning and redevelopment planning. Eligibility also 1 requires the subject
project to be the principal use, and on city-owned property.  Municipal
facilities, essential services and infrastructure are defined within the Land
Development Regulations, Chapter 1, Article II, Definitions.



(Ord. 18-014, § 2, 7-3-18)



ARTICLE III.  ZONING DISTRICTS AND OVERLAY ZONES



Sec. 1.   Overview.



   A.   General.  Pursuant to Chapter 1, Article III, Section 5.B.,
any given parcel of land in the city shall have a zoning district that
corresponds with the future land use map (FLUM) classification of the
Comprehensive Plan.



   B.   Residential Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-1).



 

RESIDENTIAL
 

R-1 AAB

 

R-1 AA

 

R-1 A

 

R-1

 

R-2 Duplex

 

R-3 Multi

 

R-4 Multi

 

IPUD

 

PUD

 

MHPD





Density (dwelling units per acre):
 

5

 

5.5

 

6

 

7.5

 

10

 

11

 

15

 

Flexible

 

Flexible

 

Flexible



Project Area, Minimum (acres)
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

5+

 

10+



Lot Area per unit, Minimum (square feet):
 

9,000

 

8,000

 

7,500

 

6,000

 

4,500

 

4,000

 

4,000

 

Flexible

 

Flexible

 

4,200



Lot Frontage, Minimum (feet):
 

90

 

75

 

60

 

60

 

75

 

100

 

100

 

Flexible

 

Flexible

 

N/A



Living Area, Minimum A/C (square feet):
 

1,800

 

1,600

 

1,400

 

1,200

 

750

 

750

 

650

 

Flexible

 

Flexible

 

N/A



Lot Coverage, Maximum:
 

45%

 

45%

 

45%

 

50%

 

40%

 

40%

 

50%

 

50%

 

N/A

 

N/A



Floor-Area-Ratio (FAR) for Non-Residential, Maximum:
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

0.106

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



Structure Height, Maximum (feet):
 

30

 

30

 

30

 

30

 

25

 

456

 

45

 

457

 

456

 

30



Building Setbacks, Minimum (feet):
 




   Front:
 

25

 

25

 

25

 

25

 

25

 

40

 

20

 

Flexible5

 

Flexible5

 

20



   Interior side:
 

10

 

108

 

7.5

 

7.5

 

10

 

20

 

20

 

Flexible5

 

Flexible5

 

5



   Corner side:
 

254

 

254

 

254

 

254

 

254

 

40

 

20

 

Flexible5

 

Flexible5

 

1011



   Rear:
 

204

 

204

 

204

 

204

 

254

 

40

 

40

 

Flexible5

 

Flexible5

 

1011



   Special rear yard setback reductions for 1-story building additions
abutting:
 

Maximum Percentage of Reduction:



      I-95 or railroad tracks:
 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



      Intracoastal Waterway (ICWW):
 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



      Lake:
 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



      Golf course:
 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



      Canal wider than 150 feet:
 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



      Canal narrower than 150 feet:
 

33%

 

33%

 

33%

 

33%

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



      Commercial/industrial:
 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



      Public/private park:
 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



      Perimeter wall abutting non-residential:
 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



Administrative Adjustment:
 

Maximum Percentage of Reduction (to standard yard setback):



   Front yard:
 

20%

 

20%

 

20%

 

20%

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



   Side yard:
 

20%

 

N/A

 

20%

 

20%

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



   Rear yard:
 

25%

 

25%

 

25%

 

25%

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



General Notes:
 

1, 2

 

1, 2

 

1, 2

 

1, 2

 

3

 

3

 

1, 3

 

9

 


 






 



1.   The setback reduction provisions shall not supersede any setbacks
that are recorded on a plat and shall not be used in conjunction with the
setback reductions allowed by administrative adjustments.



2.   An administrative adjustment to reduce a setback may be granted if
any first floor addition follows the building line of a legally
non-conforming single-family structure, or a building line previously
approved by a variance.



3.   Existing and/or planned single-family homes shall conform to the R-1
district requirements.  Duplex homes shall conform to the R-2 district
requirements.



4.   Where orientation of adjacent lots on both street frontages provides
typical front yard setbacks, the corner lot shall provide for front yard
setbacks along both streets.  When two (2) front yard setbacks are provided
for on a corner lot, no rear yard back setback shall be required, only side
yard setbacks shall be imposed.



5.   Minimum required perimeter setbacks of an IPUD or PUD are flexible
except where adjacent to single-family residential zoning.  Where adjacent
to single-family zoning, required perimeter setbacks shall resemble the
setbacks of the adjacent development based upon the orientation of structures
with said development.  Also, perimeter buildings shall have an increased
setback of one (1) additional foot for every foot of building height in
excess of thirty (30) feet.  Project design along abutting roadway(s),
including setbacks, shall be based on existing development patterns or
applicable recommendation from the respective development plan.



6.   See Note #5 for additional setback requirements relative to building
height.



7.   A lesser building height may be required for compatibility with
adjacent properties.  See Note #5 for more setback requirements relative to
building height.



8.   The minimum lot area shall be seven thousand, five hundred (7,500)
square feet and the minimum side yard shall be seven and one-half (7-1/2)
feet for properties developed and/or platted prior to June 13, 1975.



9.   Total usable open space shall be calculated at two hundred (200)
square feet per dwelling unit (also see Chapter 4, Article III, Section 8.).



10.   The maximum allowable density is determined by the applicable future
land use classification of the Comprehensive Plan.



11.   Perimeter building setbacks of the mobile home park district shall
mirror the building setbacks of adjacent zoning district(s), but with a
minimum of the setback required for a single-family residence.



12.   Multi-family dwellings and group homes require four thousand (4,000)
square feet.  All other uses allowed in R-3 and R-4 require twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet.



   C.   Non-Residential Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-2).



 



NON-RESIDENTIAL
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
C-3
 
C-4
 
CBD
 
PCD
 
M-1
 
PID
 
REC
 
PU


Density (dwelling units per acre):
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
11
 
N/A
 
11
 
Flexible17
 
N/A
 
Flexible15
 
N/A
 
N/A


Project Area, Minimum (acres)
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
314
 
N/A
 
2514
 
N/A
 
N/A


Lot Area per unit, Minimum (square feet):
 
9,000
 
5,000
 
15,000
 
5,000
 
15,000
 
Flexible
 
10,000
 
Flexible
 
43,560
 
8,000


Lot Frontage, Minimum:
 
75
 
50
 
75
 
50
 
75
 
Flexible
 
0
 
Flexible
 
100
 
75


Lot Depth, Minimum:
 
120
 
100
 
N/A
 
100
 
100
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A


Lot Coverage, Maximum:
 
40%
 
40%
 
40%
 
40%
 
75%18
 
40%13
 
60%
 
60%16
 
N/A
 
N/A


Floor-Area-Ratio (FAR), Maximum:
 
0.40
 
0.50
 
0.50
 
0.50
 
N/A
 
0.50
 
0.50
 
0.50
 
N/A
 
N/A


Structure Height, Maximum (feet):
 
3011
 
259
 
4510
 
4510
 
4510,12
 
4510
 
4510
 
4510,19
 
4510
 
4510


Building Setbacks, Minimum (feet)21:
 


   Front
 
30
 
30
 
20
 
25
 
0
 
40
 
15
 
30
 
25
 
2520


   Rear
 
20
 
20
 
202
 
205
 
206
 
40
 
203
 
30
 
25
 
2520


   Interior side
 
10
 
15
 
01
 
155
 
0
 
30
 
154
 
20
 
25
 
1520


   Corner side
 
10
 
20
 
20
 
155
 
87
 
30
 
15
 
30
 
25
 
1520


   Building Setbacks, Minimum if abutting a residential district (feet)21:
 


      Rear
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
30
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
30


      Interior side
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
30
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
30


      Corner side
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A


      Waterfront yard
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
88
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A




 



      1.   Where rear access is not available from a public street
or alley, a side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet shall be provided on
one (1) side.



      2.   Where rear yard access is available from a public street
or alley, rear yard may be decreased by one-half (1/2) the width of such
street or alley, but in no case shall a rear yard be less than ten (10) feet.



      3.   Where rear yard abuts a railroad right-of-way or any
paved alley, the rear yard may be reduced to ten (10) feet.



      4.   Where rear yard abuts a paved alley or street, then no
side setback shall be required.



      5.   Where rear property line abuts a public street or alley,
rear yard setback may be reduced to ten (10) feet and no side yard shall be
required, except on corner lots.



      6.   Where rear property line abuts a public street or alley,
rear yard setback may be reduced to eight (8) feet at first floor level, in
which case, no setback shall be required at all other floor levels.



      7.   Eight (8) feet is required at first floor level.  No
setback shall be required at all other floor levels.



      8.   Waterfront setbacks shall be measured from the property
where the body of water is under different ownership than the subject
property line.  However, setbacks are measured from the mean high water line
if the body of water is under the same ownership as the subject property.



      9.   Not to exceed two (2) stories.



      10.   Not to exceed four (4) stories.



      11.   Buildings designed with under-story parking shall be
allowed a maximum building height of thirty-five (35) feet but only with
conditional use approval.



      12.   The maximum building height shall be forty-five (45)
feet, except for buildings which contain a mix of uses (residential in
combination with non- residential uses).  In these instances, the maximum
building height may be increased to one hundred (100) feet, but contingent
upon conditional use approval.  Mechanical equipment which exclusively
serves the structure shall not be included in the calculations of height.



      13.   The total ground floor area of all buildings and
accessory structures shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the plot on
which they are constructed.



      14.   Contiguous acres.



      15.   Residential uses are only allowed within a mixed use pod
of a PID that has a DRI future land use classification.  Maximum residential
densities shall be in accordance with the thresholds established for the
respective DRI.



      16.   The gross floor area of the building and accessory
structures shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the plot on which it is
constructed.



      17.   The maximum allowable density is determined by the
applicable future land use classification of the Comprehensive Plan.



      18.   The maximum lot coverage is eighty-five percent (85%)
for parking garages.



      19.   No more than four (4) stories, with the exception of
buildings in a mixed use pod of a PID, pursuant to Section 6.B.8. below.



      20.   For hospital buildings, additional setbacks in excess of
thirty (30) feet shall be required for any height over forty-five (45)
feet.  The additional setback shall be measured by calculating three (3)
additional feet of setback for each foot in height above forty-five (45)
feet, not including minimal rooftop equipment that are eligible for height
exception pursuant to Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.



      21.   May be subject to the Martin Luther King Jr. Blvd
Overlay Zone (MLKBOZ) or Urban Commercial District Overlay Zone (UCDOZ),
where applicable.  See Section 8 for regulations pertaining to both the
MLKBOZ and UCDOZ.



   D.   Mixed-Use Suburban Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-3).



 



SUBURBAN MIXED-USE (SMU) DISTRICT
 
Types of Uses


Building/Site Regulations
 
Residential Single-Family (Attached or Detached)
 
Multi-Family
 
Other Uses (includes Mixed Use)


Density (dwelling units per acre)
 
20
 
20
 
N/A


Project Area, Minimum:
 
SMU district - 10 acres1


Lot Area per unit, Minimum (square feet):
 
Flexible14
 
Flexible14
 
10,0002


Lot Frontage, Minimum (feet):
 
Flexible14
 
100
 
100


Living Area, Minimum A/C (square feet):
 
1,20015
 
75015
 
75015


Floor Area Ratio (FAR), Maximum:
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
1.08


Structure Height, Minimum (feet):
 
359
 
359
 
359


Structure Height, Maximum (feet):
 
35
 
556, 10
 
556, 10


Build-to-line (feet):
 


   Front:
 
103
 
104, 5, 6
 
105, 6, 7


Building Setbacks, Minimum (feet):
 


   Side:
 
15 corner
 
10 end
 
106
 
06, 14


   Rear:
 
Flexible14
 
156
 
Flexible6, 14


Usable Open Space, Minimum (square feet):
 
30%11, 12
 
20%11, 13
 
20%11, 13




 



      1.   Minimum project size.  A minimum of ten (10) acres shall
be required for any project developed under the provisions of the SMU
regulations.



      2.   Hotels must be part of a mixed use project of at least
three (3) acres in size.



      3.   Porches may be placed forward of the build-to line and
shall maintain a minimum two (2)-foot setback from any public sidewalk. 
Porches shall be placed outside of clear sight triangle.  Minimum setback
for a garage facing or accessing the street is twenty (20) feet.  Where less
than twenty (20) feet, garage access required from side or rear.



      4.   Projecting feature(s) such as awnings, balconies, porches
and/or stoops may be placed forward of the build-to line and shall maintain a
minimum two (2)-foot setback from any public sidewalk.



      5.   Front yard build-to line along major arterial roads, a
maximum of ninety (90) feet inclusive of a twenty-five (25)-foot landscape
buffer.



      6.   The height setback envelope in accordance with Section
5.C. below shall apply where adjacent to developed single-family residential
zoning districts.



      7.   One (1) or more projecting feature(s) such as awnings,
balconies, colonnades, porches and/or stoops required forward of the build-to
line and shall maintain a minimum five (5)-foot clearance from any vehicle
use area.  Elements projecting over a pedestrian walkway shall allow a
minimum nine (9)-foot vertical clearance and five (5)-foot horizontal
pedestrian clearance.



      8.   Excluding residential uses and parking structures.



      9.   Applies to any façade with arterial roadway frontage. 
Multiple-story buildings are encouraged along arterial roadways.  The intent
of this provision is to create the appearance, or simulate the intensity of,
a minimum two (2)-story building.  Conditional use approval required if less
than the thirty- five (35) foot minimum.



      10.   Building heights between fifty-five (55) feet and
seventy-five (75) feet to the peak of the structure or any architectural
details may be allowed only for interior buildings (those buildings separated
from the property line by another project building or use), if approved as a
conditional use.  The building/structure height measurement shall be
conducted in accordance with Section 5.C. below.  Exceptions to the maximum
height shall not be allowed. 



      11.   Usable open space shall provide active or passive
recreational space and shall not be occupied by water bodies, streets,
drives, parking areas, or structures other than recreational structures.



      12.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the required usable open
space for single-family residential uses shall be contained in one (1) or
more common pooled areas and a rectangle inscribed within each common pooled
area shall have no dimension less than seventy-five (75) feet.



      13.   Up to fifty percent (50%) of the usable open space
required for "multi-family" and "other uses" may be hardscaped plazas and
public gathering places.



      14.   To be determined on a case by case basis, depending on
the overall project design.



      15.   Accessory apartments must be at least seven hundred
fifty (750) square feet in area (air-conditioned space).



   E.   Mixed Use Urban Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-4).



 

MIXED USE, URBAN
 

MU-1

 

MU-2

 

MU-3

 

MU-4

 

MU-C





Lot Area, Minimum (acres):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Public park
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



All other uses
 

0.50

 

0.75

 

1

 

1

 

1



Lot Frontage, Minimum (ft.)1
 

100

 

100

 

1502

 

200

 

200



Structure Ht., Minimum (ft.)
 

30

 

30

 

30

 

45

 

45



Maximum Height (ft.)3
 

45

 

65

 

75

 

100

 

150/1254



Maximum Density (DUs/Acre)10, 12
 

20

 

40

 

50

 

60

 

80



Maximum F.A.R.11
 

1.0

 

2.0

 

3.0

 

4.0

 

4.0



Build-to-line (ft.)8
 


All sides abutting a collector or arterial road
 

Factor of Pedestrian Zone Requirement7



Abutting a Local street
 

07

 

07

 

07

 

07

 

07



Interior side
 

07

 

07

 

07

 

07

 

07



Building Setback, Minimum (ft.)8
 


 


 


 


 





Rear abutting:



   Residential single-family
 

255/05, 6

 

255

 

255

 

255

 

255



   Intracoastal waterway
 

255

 

255

 

255

 

255

 

255



Side abutting
 


 


 


 


 




   Residential single-family
 

255/05, 6

 

255

 

255

 

255

 

255



Usable Open Space, Minimum (sq. ft.)9
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

1%

 

2%





 



1.   May be reduced if frontage extends from right-of-way to right-of-way.



2.   Minimum of fifty (50) feet, if frontage is on a collector/local
collector roadway.



3.   Maximum height on any street frontage is forty-five (45) feet. 
Maximum height on Intracoastal Waterway is thirty-five (35) feet.  Heights
may require reduction where adjacent to a single-family zoning district where
necessary to achieve the compatibility requirements of these regulations.



4.   Maximum height reduced to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet for the
entire project where property abuts any other MU or residential zoning
district not separated by a right-of-way.



5.   Plus one (1) additional foot for each foot of height over thirty-five
(35) feet.



6.   Where there is an intervening right-of-way of at least forty (40)
feet.



7.   Buildings and structures shall be located no farther than zero (0)
feet from the property line, except in conjunction with providing required
visibility at intersections, driveways; open spaces and public plazas; or
when additional setback is necessary to provide for required “Pedestrian
Zone (PZ). Building placement is a factor of roadway type and CRA district,
which determines the min. width and design of the PZ. Except for the Downtown
District, where the minimum PZ width is 18', the minimum PZ in all other
districts if 16 ft. See Section 5.C.2. below for additional relief provisions
from build-to line requirements.



8.   Listed eligible historic structures are not required to meet these
standards.



9.   Usable open space shall be required for all developments two (2)
acres in size or larger which shall be devoted to plazas or other public open
space, excluding private recreation.  See Chapter 4, Article III, Section 8
for additional regulations.



10.   Projects within the transit core shall have minimum densities as
follows: MU-1 - eleven (11), MU-2 - twenty (20), MU-3 - thirty (30), MU-4 -
thirty-five (35)  and MU-C - forty (40) dwellings per acre (except that
minimum density for the MU-C district applies to projects located within the
entire station area).



11.   Projects within the transit core shall have a minimum FAR as
follows: MU-3 - one and three-quarters (1.75), MU-4 (2.0) and MU-C - two
(2.0) (except that minimum FAR for the MU-C district applies to projects to
be located within the entire station area).



12.   The maximum density for projects within the Downtown
Transit-Oriented Development District (the Station Area) may be increased up
to twenty-five percent (25%) over the maximum density allowed in the
underlying zoning district through participation in the City’s Workforce
Housing Program.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord.
14-009, passed 7-1-14; Am. Ord. 15-006, passed 3-2-15; Am. Ord. 16-023,
passed 1-3-17; Am. Ord. 17-023, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 2.   Residential Districts.



   A.   R-1-AAB Single-family Residential District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the R-1-AAB zoning district is
to implement the low density residential (LDR) future land use map (FLUM)
classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this conventional
district is to promote the suburban character of the city by preserving and
encouraging single-family dwellings and structures on large lots at densities
no greater than five (5) dwelling units per acre, and allowing limited types
of non-residential uses.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-5).



         a.   The following lot and building setback requirements
shall be observed:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   R-1-AAB District


Minimum lot area:
 
9,000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
90 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 


   Front:
 
25 feet


   Rear:
 
20 feet


   Special rear yard setback reduction for single-story building
additions:1
 


      Abutting: I-95 or railroad tracks:
 
50%


      Abutting: Intracoastal:
 
50%


      Abutting: Lakes:
 
50%


      Abutting: Golf Course:
 
50%


      Abutting: Canals wider than 150 ft
 
50%


      Abutting: Canals narrower than 150 ft
 
33%


      Abutting: Perimeter walls of community that abut other than
residential:
 
50%


      Abutting: Commercial or Industrial
 
50%


      Abutting: Public or private park:
 


   Interior side:
 
10 feet


   Corner side:
 
25 feet2


Minimum living area:
 
1,800 s.f.


Maximum lot coverage:
 
45%


Maximum structure height:
 
30 feet




 



1   These special rear yard setback reduction provisions shall not
supersede any setbacks that are recorded on a plat.



2   On corner lots, the side yard setback adjacent to the street shall be
not less than one-half (1/2) the front yard setback.  However, where
orientation of adjacent lots on both street frontages provides typical front
yard setbacks, the corner lot shall provide for front yard setbacks along
both streets.  When two (2) front yard setbacks are provided for on a corner
lot, no rear yard setback shall be required, only side yard setbacks shall be
imposed.









 



      4.   Administrative Adjustments.



         a.   For lots platted prior to August 19, 2008, the
following administrative adjustments to the minimum yard setbacks may be
allowed:



         Front and side yard   20% reduction



         Rear yard         25% reduction



   These setback reduction provisions shall not supersede any setbacks
that are recorded on a plat.



         b.   An administrative adjustment may be granted if any
first floor addition follows the building line of a legally nonconforming
single-family structure, or a building line previously approved by a variance.



         c.   See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.A. for the
administrative adjustment process.



      5.   Accessory Structures.  Walls, fences, pools, sheds,
screen-roof enclosures, and other structures are regulated in accordance with
Chapter 3, Article V, Supplemental Regulations.



      6.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   Single-family and duplex dwellings and accessory
uses thereto shall be allowed upon application to and approval by the
Building Official for structures that require a building permit pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 2.



         b.   Community and common areas, such as recreational
areas, landscape buffers and tracts, and project signage may be subject to
site plan review.



         c.   Non-residential uses shall require site plan
approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to
application for building permit.



      7.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



   B.   R-1-AA  Single-family Residential District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the R-1-AA zoning district is
to implement the moderate density residential (MoDR) future land use map
(FLUM) classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this
conventional district is to promote the suburban character of the city by
preserving and encouraging single-family dwellings and structures at
densities no greater than five and one-half (5.5) dwelling units per acre,
and allowing limited types of non-residential uses.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-6).  The
following lot and building requirements shall be observed:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   R-1-AA District


Minimum lot area:
 
8,000 s.f.1


Minimum lot frontage:
 
75 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 


   Front:
 
25 feet


   Rear:
 
20 feet


   Special rear yard setback reduction for single-story building
additions:2
 


      Abutting: I-95 or railroad tracks:
 
50%


      Abutting: Intracoastal:
 
50%


   Special rear yard setback reduction for single-story building
additions:2
 


      Abutting: Lakes:
 
50%


      Abutting: Golf Course:
 
50%


      Abutting: Canals wider than 150 ft
 
50%


      Abutting: Canals narrower than 150 ft
 
33%


      Abutting: Perimeter walls of community that abut other than
residential:
 
50%


      Abutting: Commercial or Industrial
 
50%


      Abutting: Public or private park:
 
50%


   Interior side:
 
10 feet1


   Corner side:
 
25 feet3


Minimum living area:
 
1,600 s.f.


Maximum lot coverage:
 
45%


Maximum structure height:
 
30 feet




 



1   In areas developed and/or platted prior to June 13, 1975, the minimum
lot area shall be seven thousand, five hundred (7,500) square feet and the
minimum side yard shall be seven and one-half (7-1/2) feet.



2   These special rear yard setback reduction provisions shall not
supersede any setbacks that are recorded on a plat.



3   On corner lots, the side setback adjacent to the street shall be not
less than one-half (1/2) the front yard setback. However, where orientation
of adjacent lots on both street frontages provide typical front yard
setbacks, the corner lot shall provide for front yard setbacks along both
streets.  When two (2) front yard setbacks are provided for on a corner lot,
no rear yard setback shall be required, only side yard setbacks shall be
imposed.









 



      4.   Administrative Adjustments.



         a.   For lots platted prior to August 19, 2008, the
following administrative adjustments to the minimum yard setbacks may be
allowed:



   Front and side yard   20% reduction*



   *   Side yard reduction shall only be eligible for lots platted on
or after June 13, 1975 and prior to August 19, 2008.



   Rear yard         25% reduction



   These setback reduction provisions shall not supersede any setbacks
that are recorded on a plat.



         b.   An administrative adjustment may be granted if any
first floor addition follows the building line of a legally nonconforming
single-family structure, or a building line previously approved by a variance.



         c.   See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.A. for the
administrative adjustment process.



      5.   Accessory Structures.  Walls, fences, pools, sheds,
screen-roof enclosures, and other structures are regulated in accordance with
Chapter 3, Article V, Supplemental Regulations.



      6.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   Single-family and duplex dwellings and accessory
uses thereto shall be allowed upon application to and approval by the
Building Official for structures that require a building permit pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 2.



         b.   Community and common areas, such as recreational
areas, landscape buffers and tracts, and project signage may be subject to
site plan review.



         c.   Non-residential uses shall require site plan
approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to
application for building permit.



      7.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



   C.   R-1-A  Single-family Residential District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the R-1-A zoning district is to
implement the moderate density residential (MoDR) future land use map (FLUM)
classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this conventional
district is to promote the suburban character of the city by preserving and
encouraging single-family dwellings and structures at densities no greater
than six (6) dwelling units per acre, and allowing limited types of
non-residential uses.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-7).  The
following lot and building requirements shall be observed:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   R-1-A District


Minimum lot area:
 
7,500 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
60 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 


   Front:
 
25 feet


   Rear:
 
20 feet


   Special rear yard setback reduction for single-story building
additions:1
 


      Abutting: I-95 or railroad tracks:
 
50%


      Abutting: Intracoastal:
 
50%


      Abutting: Lakes:
 
50%


      Abutting: Golf Course:
 
50%


      Abutting: Canals wider than 150 ft
 
50%


      Abutting: Canals narrower than 150 ft
 
33%


      Abutting: Perimeter walls of community that abut other than
residential:
 


      Abutting: Commercial or Industrial
 
50%


      Abutting: Public or private park:
 
50%


   Interior side:
 
7.5 feet


   Corner side:
 
25 feet2


Minimum living area:
 
1,400 s.f.


Maximum lot coverage:
 
45%


Maximum structure height:
 
30 feet




 



1   These special rear yard setback reduction provisions shall not
supersede any setbacks that are recorded on a plat.



2   On corner lots, the side setback adjacent to the street shall be not
less than one-half (1/2) the front yard setback.  However, where orientation
of adjacent lots on both street frontages provides typical front yard
setbacks, the corner lot shall provide for front yard setbacks along both
streets.  When two (2) front yard setbacks are provided for on a corner lot,
no rear yard setback shall be required, only side yard setbacks shall be
imposed.









 



      4.   Administrative Adjustments.



         a.   For lots platted prior to August 19, 2008, the
following administrative adjustments to the minimum yard setbacks may be
allowed:



   Front and side yard   20% reduction



   Rear yard         25% reduction



   These setback reduction provisions shall not supersede any setbacks
that are recorded on a plat.



         b.   An administrative adjustment may be granted if any
first floor addition follows the building line of a legally nonconforming
single-family structure, or a building line previously approved by a variance.



         c.   See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.A. for the
administrative adjustment process.



      5.   Accessory Structures.  Walls, fences, pools, sheds,
screen-roof enclosures, and other structures are regulated in accordance with
Chapter 3, Article V, Supplemental Regulations.



      6.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   Single-family and duplex dwellings and accessory
uses thereto shall be allowed upon application to and approval by the
Building Official for structures that require a building permit pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 2.



         b.   Community and common areas, such as recreational
areas, landscape buffers and tracts, and project signage may be subject to
site plan review.



         c.   Non-residential uses shall require site plan
approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to
application for building permit.



      7.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



   D.   R-1  Single-family Residential District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the R-1 zoning district is to
implement the moderate density residential (MoDR) future land use map (FLUM)
classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this conventional
district is to encourage single-family dwellings and structures at densities
no greater than seven and one-half (7.5) dwelling units per acre, and
allowing limited types of non-residential uses.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-8).  The
following lot and setback requirements shall be observed:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   R-1 District


Minimum lot area:
 
6,000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
60 feet


   Front:
 
25 feet


   Rear:
 
20 feet


   Special rear yard setback reduction for single-story building
additions:1
 


      Abutting: I-95 or railroad tracks:
 
50%


      Abutting: Intracoastal:
 
50%


      Abutting: Lakes:
 
50%


      Abutting: Golf Course:
 
50%


      Abutting: Canals wider than 150 ft
 
50%


      Abutting: Canals narrower than 150 ft
 
33%


      Abutting: Perimeter walls of community that abut other than
residential:
 


      Abutting: Commercial or Industrial
 
50%


      Abutting: Public or private park:
 
50%


   Interior side:
 
7.5 feet


   Corner side:
 
25 feet2


Minimum living area:
 
1,200 s.f.


Maximum lot coverage:
 
50%


Maximum structure height:
 
30 feet




 



1   These special rear yard setback reduction provisions shall not
supersede any setbacks that are recorded on a plat.



2   On corner lots, the side setback adjacent to the street shall be not
less than one-half (1/2) the front yard setback.  However, where orientation
of adjacent lots on both street frontages provide typical front yard
setbacks, the corner lot shall provide for front yard setbacks along both
streets.  When two (2) front yard setbacks are provided for on a corner lot,
no rear yard setback shall be required, only side yard setbacks shall be
imposed.









 



      4.   Administrative Adjustments.



         a.   For lots platted prior to August 19, 2008, the
following administrative adjustments to the minimum yard setbacks may be
allowed:



   Front and side yard   20% reduction



   Rear yard         25% reduction



   These setback reduction provisions shall not supersede any setbacks
that are recorded on a plat.



         b.   An administrative adjustment may be granted if any
first floor addition follows the building line of a legally nonconforming
single-family structure, or a building line previously approved by a variance.



         c.   See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.A. for the
administrative adjustment process.



      5.   Accessory Structures.  Walls, fences, pools, sheds,
screen-roof enclosures, and other structures are regulated in accordance with
Chapter 3, Article V, Supplemental Regulations.



      6.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   Single-family and duplex dwellings and accessory
uses thereto shall be allowed upon application to and approval by the
Building Official for structures that require a building permit pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 2.



         b.   Community and common areas, such as recreational
areas, landscape buffers and tracts, and project signage may be subject to
site plan review.



         c.   Non-residential uses shall require site plan
approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to
application for building permit.



      7.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



   E.   R-2  Single and Two-family Residential District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the R-2 zoning district is to
implement the medium density residential (MeDR) future land use map (FLUM)
classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this conventional
district is to stabilize and protect existing residential neighborhoods with
densities no greater than ten (10) dwelling units per acre, and allowing
limited types of non-residential uses.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-9).  Existing
and/or planned single-family homes shall conform to the R-1 district
requirements; however, for duplex homes, the following lot and building
requirements shall be observed:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   R-2 District


Minimum lot area (per unit):
 
4,500 s.f.1


Minimum lot frontage:
 
75 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 


   Front:
 
25 feet2


   Rear:
 
25 feet3


   Interior side:
 
10 feet2


   Corner side:
 
25 feet2,3


Minimum living area:
 
750 s.f.


Maximum lot coverage:
 
40%


Maximum Floor Ratio Area (FAR)
 
0.104


Maximum structure height:
 
25 feet5




 



1   Single-family dwellings shall be constructed on lots that are no less
than six thousand (6,000) square feet.



2   Pursuant to Section 8.B. below, parcels that have frontage on Martin
Luther King Jr. Boulevard and are located within the Martin Luther King
Boulevard Overlay Zone shall have front, side interior, and side corner
setbacks in accordance with the mixed use-low intensity 1 zoning district
(see Section 6.H. below).



3   On corner lots, the side setback adjacent to the street shall be not
less than one-half (1/2) the front yard setback.  However, where orientation
of adjacent lots on both street frontages provide typical front yard
setbacks, the corner lot shall provide for front yard setbacks along both
streets.  When two (2) front yard setbacks are provided for on a corner lot,
no rear yard setback shall be required, only side yard setbacks shall be
imposed.



4   A floor area ratio (FAR) up to 0.10 may be considered for
non-residential uses allowed within the R-2 district (see "Use Matrix" –
Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3), pursuant to the medium density residential
land use category of the Comprehensive Plan.



5   Not to exceed two (2) stories.









 



      4.   Accessory Structures.  Walls, fences, pools, sheds,
screen-roof enclosures, and other structures are regulated in accordance with
Chapter 3, Article V, Supplemental Regulations.



      5.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   Single-family and duplex dwellings and accessory
uses thereto shall be allowed upon application to and approval by the
Building Official for structures that require a building permit pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 2.



         b.   Community and common areas, such as recreational
areas, landscape buffers and tracts, and project signage may be subject to
site plan review.



         c.   Non-residential uses shall require site plan
approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to
application for building permit.



      6.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



   F.   R-3  Multi-family Residential District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the R-3 zoning district is to
implement the high density residential (HDR) and special high density
residential (SHDR) future land use map (FLUM) classifications of the
Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this conventional district is to provide
for higher residential densities that encourage vertical structures and
viable multiple-family living environments.  The preferred development
pattern shall be designed such that it would provide adequate buffering,
graduation of uses, and a layout that considers and complements adjacent uses
and districts.  Ideally, the R-3 district should be in close proximity to
large concentrations of business and employment activities, as well as near
sufficient roadways and public transportation routes.  Site design should
encourage safe traffic patterns, ingress and egress, adequate light,
drainage, off-street parking, open space, on-site recreation areas, and
community meeting provisions for the inhabitants.  Densities of such
developments shall correspond with the respective FLUM classification.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-10).



         a.   Existing and/or future single-family dwellings
shall conform to the building and site regulations of the R-1 district (see
Table 3-8 in Section 2.D.3. above).



         b.   Duplex dwellings shall conform to the building and
site regulations of the R-2 district (see Table 3-9 in Section 2.E.3. above).



         c.   Multiple-family and group homes shall conform to
the lot and building requirements of that portion of Table 3-10 below
pertaining to "residential uses".



         d.   All uses, excluding single-family, duplex,
multi-family, and group homes, shall conform to the lot and building
requirements of that portion of Table 3-10 below pertaining to
"non-residential uses".



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   R-3 District


   (Residential Uses)


Minimum lot area (per unit):
 
4,000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
100 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 


   Front:
 
40 feet


   Rear:
 
40 feet


   Interior side:
 
20 feet


   Corner side:
 
40 feet


Minimum living area:
 
750 s.f.


Maximum lot coverage:
 
40%


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet1


Maximum separation:

(for Group Homes)
 
1,000

(radius)


   (Non-Residential Uses)


Minimum lot area:
 
20,000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
100 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 


   Front:
 
40 feet


   Rear:
 
40 feet


   Interior side:
 
20 feet


   Corner side:
 
40 feet


Minimum living area:
 
N/A2


Maximum lot coverage:
 
40%


Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 
0.103


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet1




 



1   Not to exceed four (4) stories.



2   As governed by the applicable regulatory agency.



3   A floor area ratio (FAR) up to 0.10 may be considered for
non-residential uses allowed within the R-3 district (see "Use Matrix" –
Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3.D.), pursuant to the high density
residential land use category of the Comprehensive Plan.









 



      4.   Accessory Structures.  Walls, fences, pools, sheds,
screen-roof enclosures, and other structures are regulated in accordance with
Chapter 3, Article V, Supplemental Regulations.



      5.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   Single-family and duplex dwellings and accessory
uses thereto shall be allowed upon application to and approval by the
Building Official for structures that require a building permit pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 2.



         b.   Community and common areas, such as recreational
areas, landscape buffers and tracts, and project signage may be subject to
site plan review.  In these instances, site plan approval shall be required
prior to application for building permit.



         c.   Multiple-family dwellings and non-residential uses
shall require site plan approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II,
Section 2.F. prior to application for building permit.



      6.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



   G.   R-4 Multi-family Residential District.



      1.   General. The purpose of the R-4 zoning district is to
implement the High Density Residential (HDR) future land use map
classification of the Comprehensive Plan. The intent of this conventional
district is to provide for higher residential densities that support infill
development opportunities. At the allowed maximum density, intended
development can provide a graduated transition to densities and intensities
of mixed use redevelopment projects in a compact form. Although this district
is not a planned zoning district, development attributes should similarly
emphasize design that is sensitive to its context within the urban
redevelopment area, including interconnectivity and pedestrian
accommodations, sustainable and/or smart growth building and landscaping
design, building placement and orientation of project to the local street
network and on-street parking.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed. See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter 3,
Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-10).



         a.   Existing and/or future single-family dwellings
shall conform to the building and site regulations of the R-l district (see
Table 3-8 in Section 2.D.3. above).



         b.   Duplex dwellings shall conform to the building and
site regulations of the R-2 district (see Table 3-9 in Section 2.E.3. above).



         c.   Multiple-family and group homes shall conform to
the lot and building requirements of that portion of Table 3-10 below
pertaining to "residential uses".



         d.   All uses, excluding single-family, duplex,
multi-family, and group homes, shall conform to the lot and building
requirements of that portion of Table 3-10 below pertaining to
"non-residential uses".



 



BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS
R-4 District


(Residential Uses)


Minimum lot area (per unit):
 
4.000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
100 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 
 


   Front:
 
40 feet


   Rear:
 
40 feet


   Interior side:
 
20 feet


   Corner side:
 
40 feet


Minimum living area:
 
650 s.f.


Maximum lot coverage:
 
50%


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet


(Non-Residential Uses)


Minimum lot area:
 
20,000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
100 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 
 


   Front:
 
40 feet


   Rear:
 
40 feet


   Interior side:
 
20 feet


   Corner side:
 
40 feet


Minimum living area:
 
N/A


Maximum lot coverage:
 
40%


Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 
N/A


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet




 



      4.   Accessory Structures. Walls, fences, pools, sheds,
screen-roof enclosures, and other structures are regulated in accordance with
Chapter 3, Article V, Supplemental Regulations.



      5.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   Single-family and duplex dwellings and accessory
uses thereto shall be allowed upon application to and approval by the
Building Official for structures that require a building permit pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 2.



         b.   Community and common areas, such as recreational
areas, landscape buffers and tracts, and project signage may be subject to
site plan review. In these instances, site plan approval shall be required
prior to application for building permit.



         c.   Multiple-family dwellings and non-residential uses
shall require site plan approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II,
Section 2.F. prior to application for building permit.



      6.   Parking. Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4. Article V. Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



   H.   IPUD  Infill Planned Unit Development District.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of the IPUD
zoning district is to implement the special high density residential (SHDR)
future land use map (FLUM) classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  This
district is intended for infill purposes, promoting new development and
redevelopment within the Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA) area consistent
with land use recommendations from the Community Redevelopment Plan at
densities no greater than twenty (20) dwelling units per acre.  This
district is also intended to promote water access and recreational
opportunities with accommodations of uses, including marine-oriented and
water dependent uses in both mixed use developments and limited single-use
projects.  The IPUD district will include design standards that exceed the
standards of the basic development standards in terms of site design,
building architecture and construction materials, amenities and landscape
design.  The extent of variance or exception to basic design standards,
including but not limited to requirements for parking spaces, parking lot and
circulation design, and setbacks, will be dependent on how well the
proposed  project otherwise exceeds the other applicable standards.



   The IPUD shall minimize adverse impacts on surrounding property.  The
city is not obligated to automatically approve the level of development
intensity requested for the IPUD.  Instead, it is expected to approve only
such level of intensity that is appropriate for a particular location in
terms of land use compatibilities.  The city may require, as a condition of
approval any limitation, condition, or design factor that will provide a
reasonable transition to adjacent development.



   In order to be approved, an IPUD project must be compatible with and
preserve the character of adjacent residential neighborhoods.  Factors to
consider in determining compatibility may include, but not necessarily be
limited to proposed use, massing, and layout.  Further, it must be an
enhancement to the local area and the city in general.  Projects that fail
to do so will be denied.



   Each IPUD project is independent and will be evaluated solely on its
own merits.  The inclusion of certain features in a previously approved IPUD
project will not automatically be entertained as a valid argument for the
inclusion of that same feature in any other IPUD project if the city
determines to reject those features.



         b.   Prerequisite Location Standards.  The IPUD
district is optimum when there is an opportunity to promote sustainability
with respect to land use, energy conservation, resource management, and
social equity.  Rezoning to the IPUD district is encouraged for proposed
development or redevelopment on lands that are in close proximity to existing
infrastructure, public and alternative transportation routes and modes,
employment centers, community areas, or have sustained or are complicated by
environmental contamination.  In reaching recommendations and decision as to
zoning land to IPUD, the Advisory Board and City Commission shall apply the
following location standards, in addition to the standards applicable to the
rezoning of land generally:



            (1)   Any IPUD district that contains
non-residential uses must principally front on streets classified as
"Arterial" on the "Functional Classification of Roadways" map in the city
Comprehensive Plan;



            (2)   Any non-residential component must front on
the arterial roadway or on an access road wholly contained within the project
with neither entrances nor exit on or visible from or disruptive to adjacent
properties, local streets, and rights-of-way.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3.C.
for specific regulations pertaining to the IPUD district and Chapter 3,
Article IV, Section 3.D. ("Use Matrix Table 3-28") for a list of allowable
uses.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-11).  The
following building/site regulations apply to the entire IPUD development.



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   IPUD District


Minimum project area:
 
N/A


Maximum project area:
 
Flexible


Minimum lot frontage:
 
Flexible1


Minimum perimeter yard setbacks:
 
 


   Front:
 
Flexible2


   Rear:
 
Flexible2


   Interior side:
 
Flexible2


   Corner side:
 
Flexible2


Maximum lot coverage:
 
50%


Minimum usable open space (per dwelling unit):
 
200 feet


Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 
0.203


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet4




 



1   Individual lots within an IPUD development contain flexible standards
relative to minimum required lot frontage and lot area for each unit.  Lot
frontage shall be determined on a case by case basis, depending on the
overall project design.  Pursuant to Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3.D., a
marina use shall require a minimum lot frontage of one hundred fifty (150)
feet and a minimum average width of two hundred (200) feet.



2   The minimum required perimeter building setbacks of an IPUD are
flexible except where adjacent to single-family residential zoning.  Where
adjacent to single-family residential zoning, the required perimeter building
setbacks of the IPUD shall resemble the setbacks of the adjacent development
based upon the orientation of structures with said development.  Also,
perimeter buildings shall have an increased setback of one (1) additional
foot for every foot of building height in excess of thirty (30) feet.  If
vegetation, screening, or other barriers and/or creative design on the
perimeter of an IPUD achieve compatibility with adjacent uses, the city may
grant some relief from the aforementioned requirement.  A structure shall be
considered to be on the perimeter if there is no intervening building between
it and the property line.  Project design along abutting roadway(s),
including setbacks, shall be based on existing development patterns or
applicable recommendation from the respective development plan.



3   A maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.20 may be allowed for
non-residential uses within the IPUD district (see "Use Matrix" – Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.C.), pursuant to the special high density
residential land use category of the Comprehensive Plan.



4   A lesser building height may be required for compatibility with
adjacent development.  See Note #2 above for additional setback requirements
relative to building height.



      4.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   All development and redevelopment within the IPUD
district shall be governed by a master plan with approval granted by the City
Commission in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.D.6. 



         b.   Site plan approval shall be required in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to application for building
permit.



      5.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



      6.   Modifications.  Any modification proposed within the
IPUD shall be in conformance with Master Plan modifications pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.D.6.



      7.   Miscellaneous.



         a.   See Chapter 4, Article II, Section 4.B.5 for
additional standards pertaining to the required landscaping along
rights-of-way.



         b.   See Chapter 4, Article III, Section 4. for
community design standards regarding required site design in instances where
the subject IPUD project is adjacent to single-family residential zoning
districts.



         c.   See Chapter 4, Article VIII, Section 3.C.4.b.(2)
for additional standards pertaining to the minimum width of rights-of-way and
vehicular circulation.



         d.   If an IPUD is located with frontage on the
Intracoastal Waterway, conditions of approval shall include a deed
restriction requiring that any marina or dockage build will not exceed in
width the boundaries of the project's actual frontage on the water,
regardless of what any other governing or permitting entity may allow or
permit.



         e.   Exterior lighting of the exterior, parking areas
and watercraft docking facilities of the planned development shall be of the
lowest height, intensity, and energy use adequate for its purpose, and shall
not create conditions of glare that extend onto abutting properties.



         f.   The physical attributes of the site shall be
respected with particular concern for preservation of natural features, tree
growth, and open space.



         g.   Special emphasis shall be placed on trash
collection points.



         h.   Trash containers or dumpsters must be screened and
designed such that they are not visible from or disruptive to adjacent
properties, streets, and rights-of-way while still being conveniently
accessible to their users and collectors.



   I.   PUD  Planned Unit Development District.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of the PUD zoning
district is to implement any of the residential future land use map (FLUM)
classifications of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this planned
district is to promote efficient and economical land use, improved amenities,
appropriate and harmonious physical development, creative design, improved
living environment, orderly and economical development in the city, and the
protection of adjacent and existing and future city development.  The
district is suitable for development, redevelopment and conservation of land,
water and other resources of the city.



   Regulations for planned unit developments are intended to accomplish
the purposes of zoning, subdivision regulations and other applicable city
regulations to the same degree that they are intended to control development
on a lot-by-lot basis.  In view of the substantial public advantages of
planned unit development, it is the intent of PUD regulations to promote and
encourage development in this form where tracts suitable in size, location,
and character for the uses and structures proposed are to be planned and
developed as unified and coordinated units.  Densities of such developments
shall correspond with the respective FLUM classification.



         b.   Prerequisite Location Standards.  The PUD district
is optimum when there is an opportunity to promote sustainability with
respect to land use, energy conservation, resource management, and social
equity.  Rezoning to the PUD district is encouraged for proposed development
or redevelopment on lands that are in close proximity to existing
infrastructure, public and alternative transportation routes and modes,
employment centers, community areas, or have sustained or are complicated by
environmental contamination.



   In reaching recommendations and decisions as to zoning land to PUD, the
advisory board(s) and City Commission shall apply the following location
standards, in addition to the standards applicable to the rezoning of land
generally:



            (1)   Major Transportation Facility.  A PUD shall
be so located as to major roadways or other transportation facilities as to
provide direct access to it without creating or generating traffic along
streets in residential areas or districts outside it.



            (2)   Public Facilities and Services.  A PUD
shall be located in relation to sanitary sewers, water lines, storm and
surface drainage systems, and other utilities systems and installations so
that neither extension nor enlargement of such systems will be required in
manner, form, character, location, degree, scale or timing resulting in
higher net public cost or earlier incursion of public cost than would
development in forms permitted under existing zoning in the area.



      Such PUD's shall be so located with respect to necessary public
facilities (e.g., schools, parks, playgrounds) as to have access to those
facilities in the same degree as under existing zoning, and shall be so
located, designed and scaled so that access for public services is equivalent
to, and net cost for the services under existing zoning.



            (3)   Topography.  The site shall be suitable for
development in the manner proposed without hazards to persons or property, on
or off the tract, from probability of flooding, erosion, or other dangers,
annoyances, or inconveniences.  Condition of the soil, groundwater level,
drainage, and topography shall all be appropriate to both kind and pattern of
use intended.



            (4)   Access.  Every dwelling unit, or other use
permitted in the PUD, shall have access to a public street directly or via an
approved private road, pedestrian way, court, or other area dedicated to
public or private use, or common element guaranteeing access.  Permitted
uses shall not be required to front on a dedicated public road.



            (5)   Utilities.  Direct residential and/or
consumer service should be by underground installation to the maximum extent
practicable; however, primary service to a general geographic area may be
served with overhead installation.  Appurtenances to these systems which
require above ground installation shall be effectively screened, and,
thereby, may be exempted from this requirement.  Primary facilities
providing service to the site of the PUD may be exempted.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.  The PUD district allows principal and accessory
uses and structures substantially related to the character of the development
itself and the surrounding area of which it is a part.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-12).  The
following building/site regulations apply to the entire PUD development.



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   PUD District


Minimum project area:
 
5 acres


Minimum lot area:
 
Flexible1


Minimum lot frontage:
 
Flexible1


Minimum perimeter yard setbacks:
 
 


   Front:
 
Flexible2


   Rear:
 
Flexible2


   Interior side:
 
Flexible2


   Corner side:
 
Flexible2


Maximum lot coverage:
 
N/A


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet3




 



1   Individual lots within a PUD development contain flexible standards
relative to minimum required lot frontage and lot area for each unit.  To be
determined on a case by case basis, depending on the overall project design. 



2   The minimum required perimeter building setbacks of a PUD are flexible
except where adjacent to single-family residential zoning.  Where adjacent
to single-family residential zoning, the required perimeter building setbacks
of the PUD shall resemble the setbacks of the adjacent development based upon
the orientation of structures with said development.  Also, perimeter
buildings shall have an increased setback of one (1) additional foot for
every foot of building height in excess of thirty (30) feet.  Project design
along abutting roadway(s), including setbacks, shall be based on existing
development patterns or applicable recommendation from the respective
development plan.



3   No more than four (4) stories.



      4.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   All development and redevelopment within the IPUD
district shall be governed by a master plan with approval granted by the City
Commission in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.D.6. 



         b.   Site plan approval shall be required in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to application for building
permit.



      5.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



      6.   Modifications.  Any modification proposed within the PUD
shall be in conformance with Master Plan modifications pursuant to Chapter 2,
Article II, Section 2.D.6.



      7.   Miscellaneous.  The boundaries of land zoned to PUD
classification shall be indicated on the official zoning map with the symbol
"PUD."



   The PUD district contains additional standards relative to building
design and compatibility with adjacent single-family residential zoning. 
Refer to Chapter 4, Article III, Section 3.J. for these additional
development standards.



   J.   MHPD Mobile Home Planned Development District.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of the MHPD
zoning district is to implement the low density residential (LDR) and
moderate density residential (MoDR) future land use map (FLUM)
classifications of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this planned
district is to provide efficient and imaginative design approaches to
community planning, and to accommodate the housing needs of those residents
who prefer mobile home living and/or desire a more affordable solution to
conventional dwellings.  Densities of such developments shall correspond
with the respective FLUM classification.



   The MHPD district is optimum when there is an opportunity to promote
sustainability with respect to land use, energy conservation, resource
management, and social equity.  Rezoning to the MHPD district is encouraged
for proposed development or redevelopment on lands that are in close
proximity to existing infrastructure, public and alternative transportation
routes and modes, employment centers, community areas, or have sustained or
away from high hazard areas.



         b.   Existing Developments.  For those mobile home
parks in existence prior to the adoption of these Regulations, or annexed to
the city subsequent to the adoption of these Regulations, the site
regulations under which the park was developed shall continue in force. 
General maintenance and minor modifications to existing improvements shall be
allowed, if such maintenance and improvements do not worsen the extent of
nonconformity.  Should the park be damaged in excess of seventy-five percent
(75%), redevelopment shall require submittal of a site plan for review and
processing as a major site plan modification, to indicate how redevelopment
will provide maximum compliance with development regulations, with particular
emphasis on perimeter setbacks and buffering, and internal roadway design and
access for service and emergency vehicles.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-13).



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   MHPD District


Minimum project area:
 
10 acres


Minimum lot size:
 
4,200 s.f.


Minimum perimeter setbacks:
 
25 feet


   Special perimeter setback reduction for principal and accessory
structures:
 
 


      Abutting: I-95 or railroad tracks:
 
50%


      Abutting: Intracoastal:
 
50%


      Abutting: Lakes:
 
50%


      Abutting: Golf Course:
 
50%


      Abutting: Canals wider than 150 ft
 
50%


      Abutting: Canals narrower than 150 ft
 
33%


      Abutting: Perimeter walls of community that abut other than
residential:
 
50%


      Abutting: Commercial or Industrial
 
50%


      Abutting: Public or private park:
 
50%


Minimum yard setbacks (per lot):
 
 


   Front:
 
20 feet


   Rear:
 
10 feet


   Interior side:
 
5 feet


   Corner side:
 
10 feet


Maximum lot coverage:
 
N/A


Maximum structure height:
 
30 feet




 









 



      4.   Accessory Structures.



         a.   Structures of a permanent nature shall not be added
or attached to a mobile home, unless such mobile home is placed upon a site
conforming to the minimum requirements for a mobile home.



         b.   The combined area of all additions or attachments
shall not exceed the gross area of the mobile home itself.  Carports are not
included in the above limitation provided that the width of the individual
lot is adequate for separation requirements.



      5.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   All development and redevelopment within the IPUD
district shall be governed by a master plan with approval granted by the City
Commission in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.D.6. 



         b.   Site plan approval shall be required in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to application for building
permit.



      6.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



      7.   Modifications.  Any modification proposed within the
MHPD shall be in conformance with Master Plan modifications pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.D.6.



      8.   Miscellaneous.



         a.   No part of any mobile home, or any addition or
appurtenances thereto shall be located within ten (10) feet of any accessory
or service building or structure used in connection with a mobile home park.



         b.   Additional perimeter buffering and landscape
material may be required as recommended by the Director of Planning and
Zoning to ensure compatibility with adjacent properties.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-010, passed 6-19-12; Am. Ord.
12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord. 16-024, passed 1-3-17; Am. Ord. 17-023,
passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 3.   Commercial Districts.



   A.   C-1 Office and Professional Commercial District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the C-1 zoning district is to
implement the office commercial (OC) future land use map (FLUM)
classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this conventional
district is to provide appropriate space for office and professional uses,
while also serving as a transitional area between residential and higher
intensity commercial areas.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-14).  No building
or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established,
altered, enlarged or used unless the premises and buildings shall comply with
the following regulations:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   C-1 District


Minimum lot area:
 
9,000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
75 feet


Minimum lot depth:
 
120 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 
 


   Front:
 
30 feet


   Rear:
 
20 feet


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet


   Interior side:
 
10 feet


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet


   Corner side:
 
10 feet


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet


Maximum lot coverage:
 
40%


Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 
0.41


Maximum structure height:

(For hospitals only)
 
30 feet2

45 feet




 



1   A floor area ratio (FAR) up to 0.40 may be considered for office
commercial and related uses allowed within the C-1 district (see "Use Matrix"
– Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3.D.), pursuant to the office commercial
future land use classification of the Comprehensive Plan.



2   Buildings designed with under-story parking shall be allowed a maximum
building height of thirty-five (35) feet but only with conditional use
approval.



      4.   Review and Approval Process.  Pursuant to Chapter 2,
Article II, Section 2.F., site plan approval shall be required for the
construction or modification of a non-residential building, structure, or
improvement, including any area allocated to an accessory residential unit.



      5.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



   B.   C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the C-2 zoning district is to
implement the local retail commercial (LRC) future land use map (FLUM)
classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this conventional
district is to allow low-intensity commercial uses of a retail convenience
that are intended to serve and which are in close proximity to individual
residential neighborhoods.  Generally, the desired locations of these
commercial areas would be at the periphery of one (1) or more neighborhoods
along roadway classifications that are able to support the additional traffic.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-15).  No building
or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established,
altered, enlarged or used unless the premises and buildings shall comply with
the following regulations:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   C-2 District


Minimum lot area:
 
5,000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
50 feet


Minimum lot depth:
 
100 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 
 


   Front:
 
30 feet1,2


   Rear:
 
20 feet


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet


   Interior side:
 
15 feet1,2


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet1


   Corner side:
 
20 feet1,2


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet1


Maximum lot coverage:
 
40%


Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 
0.503


Maximum structure height:
 
25 feet4




 



1   Reduced setbacks will be applied to property located within the Urban
Commercial District Overlay Zone, Section 8.C. below.



2   Pursuant to Section 8.B. below, parcels that have frontage on Martin
Luther King Jr. Boulevard and are located within the Martin Luther King
Boulevard Overlay Zone shall have front, side interior, and side corner
setbacks in accordance with the mixed use-low intensity 1 zoning district
(see Section 5.C. below).



3   A floor area ratio (FAR) up to 0.50 may be considered for local retail
commercial uses allowed within the C-2 district (see "Use Matrix" – Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.), pursuant to the local retail commercial future
land use classification of the Comprehensive Plan.



4   Not to exceed two (2) stories.



      4.   Review and Approval Process.  Pursuant to Chapter 2,
Article II, Section 2.F., site plan approval shall be required for the
construction or modification of a non-residential building, structure, or
improvement, including any area allocated to an accessory residential unit.



      5.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



   C.   C-3 Community Commercial District.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of the C-3 zoning
district is to implement the local retail commercial (LRC) future land use
map (FLUM) classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this
conventional district is to encourage the development or use of property for
appropriate intensive retail commercial uses providing for a wide range of
goods and services, located along major thoroughfares.  The C-3 district
allows a maximum density of eleven (11) dwelling units per acre; however, all
residential developments must adhere to the R-3 district building and site
regulation in accordance with Section 2.F. above. 



         b.   Prerequisite Location Standard.  In reaching
recommendations and decisions as to zoning land to C-3, the advisory board
and City Commission shall apply the following location standards, in
addition, to the standards applicable to the rezoning of land generally:



            (1)   Centrally and accommodating multiple
neighborhoods; and



            (2)   Abutting to at least one (1) major
thoroughfare.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-16).  No building
or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established,
altered, enlarged or used unless the premises and buildings shall comply with
the following regulations:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   C-3 District


Minimum lot area:
 
15,000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
75 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 
 


   Front:
 
20 feet1


   Rear:
 
20 feet2


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet


   Interior side:
 
0 feet1,3


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet1


   Corner side:
 
20 feet1


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet1


Maximum lot coverage:
 
40%


Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 
0.504


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet5




 



1   Reduced setbacks will be applied to property located within the Urban
Commercial District Overlay Zone, Section 8.C. below.



2   Where rear yard access is available from a public street or alley,
rear yard may be decreased by one-half (1/2) the width of such street or
alley, but in no case shall a rear yard be less than ten (10) feet.



3   Where rear access is not available from a public street or alley, a
side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet shall be provided on one (1)
side.



4   A floor area ratio (FAR) up to 0.50 may be considered for local retail
commercial uses allowed within the C-3 district (see "Use Matrix" – Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.), pursuant to the local retail commercial future
land use classification of the Comprehensive Plan.



5   Not to exceed four (4) stories.



      4.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   Single-family and duplex dwellings and accessory
uses thereto shall be allowed upon application to and approval by the
Building Official for structures that require a building permit pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 2.



         b.   Community and common areas, such as recreational
areas, landscape buffers and tracts, and project signage may be subject to
site plan review.



         c.   Non-residential uses shall require site plan
approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to
application for building permit.



      5.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



      6.   Exterior Storage of Merchandise and Equipment.  See
Chapter 3, Article V, Section 8 for the regulations pertaining to the
permanent exterior storage of merchandise and equipment.



   D.   C-4  General Commercial District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the C-4 zoning district is to
implement the general commercial (GC) future land use map (FLUM)
classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this conventional
district is to accommodate service and intensive commercial establishments
and limited light industrial uses, and to serve as a transitional area
between lighter commercial areas and general industrial uses or operations.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-17).  No building
or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established,
altered, enlarged or used unless the premises and buildings shall comply with
the following regulations:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   C-4 District


Minimum lot area:
 
5,000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
50 feet


Minimum lot depth:
 
100 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 
 


   Front:
 
25 feet1,2


   Rear:
 
20 feet3


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet


   Interior side:
 
15 feet1,2,3


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet


   Corner side:
 
15 feet1,2


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet


Maximum lot coverage:
 
40%


Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 
0.504


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet5




 



1   Reduced setbacks will be applied to property located within the Urban
Commercial District Overlay Zone, Section 8.C. below.



2   Pursuant to Section 8.B. below, parcels that have frontage on Martin
Luther King Jr. Boulevard and are located within the Martin Luther King
Boulevard Overlay Zone shall have front, side interior, and side corner
setbacks in accordance with the mixed use-low intensity 1 zoning district
(see Section 5.C. below).



3   Where rear property line abuts a public street or alley, rear yard
setback may be reduced to ten (10) feet and no side yard shall be required,
except on corner lots or where abutting single-family uses.



4   A floor area ratio (FAR) up to 0.50 may be considered for general
commercial uses allowed within the C-4 district (see "Use Matrix" – Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.), pursuant to the general commercial future land
use classification of the Comprehensive Plan.



5   Not to exceed four (4) stories; however, those parcels located within
the Martin Luther King Boulevard Overlay Zone (Section 8.B. below) shall be
limited to thirty (30) feet in height.



      4.   Review and Approval Process.  Non-residential uses shall
require site plan approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section
2.F. prior to application for building permit.



      5.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



      6.   Exterior Storage of Merchandise and Equipment.  See
Chapter 3, Article V, Section 8 for the regulations pertaining to the
permanent exterior storage of merchandise and equipment.



   E.   CBD Central Business District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the CBD zoning district is to
implement the mixed use (MX) and mixed use core (MX-C) future land use map
(FLUM) classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this
conventional district is to provide a highly visible community focal point
integrating office, retail, and residential uses concentrated in the historic
downtown and marina district.  In addition, this district is considered the
predecessor to the urban mixed use zoning districts, particularly, the mixed
use-high intensity district.  The uses allowed in the central business
district are intended to serve the entire community, create a high volume of
pedestrian activity, provide business, recreation, and residential
opportunities, and maximize the potential of the waterfront.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-18).  No building
or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established,
altered, enlarged, or used unless the premises and buildings shall comply
with the following regulations:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   CBD District


Minimum lot area:
 
15,000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
75 feet


Minimum lot depth:
 
100 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 
 


   Front:
 
0 feet


   Rear:
 
20 feet1


   Interior side:
 
0 feet


   Corner side:
 
8 feet2


   Waterfront yard (from navigable water):
 
8 feet3


Minimum living area:
 
750 s.f.


Maximum lot coverage:

Parking garages:
 
75%

85%


Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 
N/A


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet4




 



1   Where rear property line abuts a public street or alley, rear yard
setback may be reduced to eight (8) feet at first floor level, in which case,
no setback shall be required at all other floor levels.



2   Eight (8) feet is require at first floor level.  No setback shall be
required at all other floor levels.



3   Waterfront setbacks shall be measured from the property where the body
of water is under different ownership than the subject property line;
however, setbacks are measured from the mean high water line if the body of
water is under the same ownership as the subject property.



4   Forty-five (45) feet, not to exceed four (4) stories.  The maximum
building height shall be forty-five (45) feet, except for buildings which
contain a mix of uses (residential in combination with non-residential
uses).  In these instances, the maximum building height may be increased to
one hundred (100) feet, but contingent upon conditional use approval. 
Mechanical equipment which exclusively serves the structure shall not be
included in the calculations of height.



      4.   Review and Approval Process.  All development and
redevelopment shall require site plan approval in accordance with Chapter 2,
Article II, Section 2.F. prior to application for building permit.



      5.   Parking.



         a.   General Requirements.  Required off-street parking
is regulated in accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street
Parking Requirements.



         b.   Specific for CBD District.  As required by Chapter
4, Article V, Section 3.E.  The CBD district contains additional standards
relative to location and appearance of off-street parking facilities.  Refer
to Chapter 4, Article III, Section 3.C. for these additional development
standards.



      6.   Miscellaneous.



         a.   Building Location and Massing.  See Chapter 4,
Article III, Section 3.H. for additional regulations pertaining to mixed use
developments.



         b.   Shade and Shelter.  See Chapter 4, Article III,
Section 3.H. for additional regulations pertaining to mixed use developments.



   F.   PCD  Planned Commercial Development District.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of the PCD zoning
district is to implement the office commercial (OC), local retail commercial
(LRC), and general commercial (GC) future land use map (FLUM) classifications
of the Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this planned district is to
provide a place for commercial developments that will better satisfy current
demands for commercially zoned lands by encouraging development which will
reflect changes in the concepts and the technology of land development and
relate the development of land to the specific site, to conserve natural
amenities and to allow for the mitigation of negative impacts which result
from land development.  In addition, this district is considered the
predecessor to the suburban mixed use (SMU) zoning district.  With respect
to residential uses, the PCD district allows a maximum density of eleven (11)
dwelling units per acre; however, all residential developments must adhere to
the R-3 district building and site regulation in accordance with Section 2.F.
above.



         b.   Prerequisite Location Standards.  The PCD district
is optimum when there is an opportunity to promote sustainability with
respect to land use, energy conservation, resource management, and social
equity.  Rezoning to the PCD district is encouraged for proposed development
or redevelopment on lands that are in close proximity to existing
infrastructure, public and alternative transportation routes and modes,
employment centers, community areas, or have sustained or are complicated by
environmental contamination.



   In reaching recommendations and decision as to zoning land to PCD, the
advisory board and City Commission shall apply the following location
standards, in addition to the standards applicable to the rezoning of land
generally:



            (1)   Along major roadways or other transportation
facilities as to provide direct access without creating or generating an
unacceptable level of traffic along streets in residential areas or districts
outside it.



            (2)   Extensions of publicly owned and maintained
utilities and storm sewers, etc. shall be constructed by the applicant at no
expense to the city and said utilities, etc. shall be deeded to the city
clear of any encumbrances.  Construction standards employed in the
installation of publicly maintained utilities and storm sewers shall be those
promulgated by the Engineering and Utility Departments as amended
periodically.  Concerning streets, consistent with the intent of these
Regulations, any required roadway improvements shall be constructed at the
applicant's expense including the dedication of additional rights-of-way as
noted in the traffic and circulation element of the Comprehensive Plan and
the replacement of roadway capacity when applicable.



            (3)   The site shall be suitable for development
in the manner proposed without hazards to persons or property, on or off the
tract, from probability of flooding, erosion, or other dangers, annoyances,
or inconveniences.  Condition of the soil, groundwater level, drainage, and
topography shall all be appropriate to both kind and pattern of use intended.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-19).  In addition
to the design and construction criteria established in other chapters or
sections of the Boynton Beach Land Development Regulations, the following
design criteria shall be applicable to the zoning, design, and construction
of planned commercial developments:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   PCD District


Minimum lot area:
 
3 acres1


Minimum lot frontage:
 
Flexible


Minimum perimeter yard setbacks:
 
 


   Front:
 
40 feet


   Rear:
 
40 feet


   Interior side:
 
30 feet


   Corner side:
 
30 feet


Maximum lot coverage:
 
40%2


Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 
0.53


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet4




 



1   Three (3) contiguous acres.



2   The total ground floor area of all buildings and accessory structures
shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the plot on which they are
constructed.



3   A floor area ratio (FAR) of up to 0.50 may be considered for local
retail commercial uses allowed in the PCD zoning district (see "Use Matrix"
– Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3.D.), pursuant to the local retail
commercial future land use classification of the Comprehensive Plan.



4    No more than four (4) stories.



      4.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   All development and redevelopment within the PCD
district shall be governed by a master plan with approval granted by the City
Commission in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.D.6. 



         b.   Site plan approval shall be required in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to application for building
permit.



      5.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



      6.   Modifications.  Any modification proposed within the PCD
shall be in conformance with Master Plan modifications pursuant to Chapter 2,
Article II, Section 2.D.6.



      7.   Miscellaneous.



         a.   Perimeter Landscape Buffer.  See Chapter 4,
Article II, Section 4.C.3.



         b.   Off-street Loading.  See Chapter 4, Article VI,
Section 3.D.



         c.   Platting.  All planned commercial developments are
subject to and shall be developed consistent with the requirements of Chapter
2, Article III, Section 2 and Chapter 4 of the Boynton Beach Land Development
Regulations.



         d.   Site plan.  All plans for lots or parcels proposed
to be developed within planned commercial developments are subject to and
shall be developed consistent with the requirements of Chapter 2, Article II,
Section 2.F., Land Development Regulations.



         e.   Building Permit.  No building permits shall be
issued unless and until platting procedures and the requirements outlined in
Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 2 of the Land Development Regulations are
completed in every respect.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   SMU  Mixed-Use Suburban District.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of the SMU zoning
district is to implement the mixed use suburban (MXS), development of
regional impact (DRI), and other subsequently established future land use map
(FLUM) classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  In order to guide the
redevelopment and envisioned growth of the suburban area, the SMU zoning
district requires a diversity of land uses, accommodating a mixture of
residential, office, retail, recreational, and other miscellaneous uses. 
Ideally, the SMU district is intended to supplant the PCD district for new
developments and projects to encourage the inclusion of residential uses and
well-planned mixed use projects designed in accordance with smart growth
principles and best planning practices.  Densities of such developments
shall correspond with the respective FLUM classification, but in no case be
greater than twenty (20) dwelling units per acre.  This mix of uses may be
arranged either vertically or horizontally within low-to-mid-rise
developments.  The review of SMU applications will emphasize aesthetics and
design quality, and physical compatibility with adjacent land uses.  The
specific objectives of the SMU district are as follows:



         a.   Support and enhance development and redevelopment
efforts in suburban areas outside of the downtown redevelopment area;



         b.   Create major new mixed use areas in planned
locations with appropriate densities, heights, and mixture of uses;



         c.   Create attractive pedestrian environments through
appropriate separation from and design of vehicular circulation areas;



         d.   Provide public plazas and gathering places that are
both well-designed and integrated into the overall design of the development;



         e.   Allow flexibility in architectural design and
building bulk, while maximizing compatibility and harmony with adjoining
development;



         f.   Create higher quality environments for residents,
businesses, employees, and visitors; and



         g.   Encourage innovative design that achieves vertical
and horizontal integration of uses.



      2.   Prerequisite Location Standards.  The SMU district is
optimum when there is an opportunity to promote sustainability with respect
to land use, energy conservation, resource management, and social equity. 
Rezoning to the IPUD district is encouraged for proposed development or
redevelopment on lands that are in close proximity to existing
infrastructure, public and alternative transportation routes and modes,
employment centers, community areas, or have sustained or are complicated by
environmental contamination.



   The SMU district shall only be applicable to lands located west of I-95
on assembled parcels along major arterials outside of the downtown
redevelopment district.



   B.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter 3,
Article IV, Section 3.D.



   C.   Additional Use Regulations.



      1.   Mixed Uses.  Buildings containing residential and
non-residential uses are required within the SMU zoning district and shall be
subject to the development standards indicated in Section 4.D. below.  With
the exception of designated live/work units, no residential uses are allowed
on the ground floor of mixed use buildings fronting on arterial streets. 
The ground floor of mixed use buildings shall be reserved for non-residential
uses.



      2.   Design.  Mixed use projects containing residential
components shall include appropriate design, materials, and site layout in
order to maximize compatibility with residential uses located on upper floors.



      3.   Live-Work Units.  The city contains special regulations
regarding required parking and allowable signage for live/work units (see
Chapter 4, Article V, Section 2 and Chapter 4, Article IV, Section 3.C.13.,
respectively).



   D.   Building and Site Regulations.



      1.   Building and Site Regulation (Table 3-20).



 



SUBURBAN MIXED-USE (SMU) DISTRICT
 
Types of Uses


Building/Site Regulations
 
Residential Single-Family (Attached or Detached)
 
Multi-Family
 
Other Uses (includes Mixed-Use)


Density (dwelling units per acre)
 
20
 
20
 
N/A


Project Area, Minimum:
 
SMU district - 10 acres1


Lot Area per unit, Minimum (square feet):
 
Flexible14
 
Flexible14
 
10,0002


Lot Frontage, Minimum (feet):
 
Flexible14
 
100
 
100


Living Area, Minimum A/C (square feet):
 
1,20015
 
75015
 
75015


Floor Area Ratio (FAR), Maximum:
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
1.08


Structure Height, Minimum (feet):
 
359
 
359
 
359


Structure Height, Maximum (feet):
 
35
 
556, 10
 
556, 10


Build-to-line (feet):
 


   Front:
 
103
 
104, 5, 6
 
105, 6, 7


Building Setbacks, Minimum (feet):
 


   Side:
 
15 corner
 
10 end
 
106
 
06, 14


   Rear:
 
Flexible14
 
156
 
Flexible6, 14


Usable Open Space, Minimum (square feet):
 
30%11, 12
 
20%11, 13
 
20%11, 13




 



   1.   Minimum project size.  A minimum of ten (10) acres shall be
required for any project developed under the provisions of the SMU
regulations.



   2.   Hotels must be part of a mixed use project of at least three
(3) acres in size.



   3.   Porches may be placed forward of the build-to line and shall
maintain a minimum two (2)-foot setback from any public sidewalk.  Porches
shall be placed outside of clear sight triangle.  Minimum setback for a
garage facing or accessing the street is twenty (20) feet.  Where less than
twenty (20) feet, garage access required from side or rear.



   4.   Projecting feature(s) such as awnings, balconies, porches
and/or stoops may be placed forward of the build-to line and shall maintain a
minimum two (2)-foot setback from any public sidewalk.



   5.   Front yard build-to line along major arterial roads, a maximum
of ninety (90) feet inclusive of a twenty-five (25)-foot landscape buffer.



   6.   The height setback envelope in accordance with Section 4.D.3.
below shall apply where adjacent to developed single-family residential
zoning districts.



   7.   One (1) or more projecting feature(s) such as awnings,
balconies, colonnades, porches and/or stoops required forward of the build-to
line and shall maintain a minimum five (5)-foot clearance from any vehicle
use area.  Elements projecting over a pedestrian walkway shall allow a
minimum nine (9)-foot vertical clearance and five (5)-foot horizontal
pedestrian clearance.



   8.   Excluding residential uses and parking structures.



   9.   Applies to any façade with arterial roadway frontage. 
Multiple-story buildings are encouraged along arterial roadways.  The intent
of this provision is to create the appearance, or simulate the intensity of,
a minimum two (2)-story building.  Conditional use approval required if less
than the thirty-five (35) foot minimum.



   10.   Building heights between fifty-five (55) feet and seventy-five
(75) feet to the peak of the structure or any architectural details may be
allowed only for interior buildings (those buildings separated from the
property line by another project building or use), if approved as a
conditional use.  The building/structure height measurement shall be
conducted in accordance with Section 4.D.2. below.  Exceptions to the
maximum height shall not be allowed.



   11.   Usable open space shall provide active or passive recreational
space and shall not be occupied by water bodies, streets, drives, parking
areas, or structures other than recreational structures.



   12.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the required usable open space
for single-family residential uses shall be contained in one (1) or more
common pooled areas and a rectangle inscribed within each common pooled area
shall have no dimension less than seventy-five (75) feet.



   13.   Up to fifty percent (50%) of the usable open space required
for "multi-family" and "other uses" may be hardscaped plazas and public
gathering places.



   14.   To be determined on a case by case basis, depending on the
overall project design.



   15.   Accessory apartments must be at least seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet in area (air-conditioned space).



      2.   Building Height Measurement.  Building heights shall be
measured to the peak of structures, in order to more accurately predict and
regulate the overall heights of buildings proposed within the SMU district to
ensure compatibility with the adjacent, potentially less intense and dense
suburban areas.



      3.   Height Setback Envelope.  Minimum building setbacks
shall be based on building heights. The height setback envelope is applicable
where the SMU development is adjacent to a developed single- family
residential zoning district.  This minimum setback shall be three (3) times
the building height for any multi-family or non-residential structure.  The
setback shall be measured from the common boundary of the SMU and the
single-family residential zoning district or the midpoint of any intervening
right-of-way.









 



   E.   Review and Approval Process.



      1.   All development and redevelopment within the SMU district
shall be governed by a master plan with approval granted by the City
Commission in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.D.6. 



      2.   Site plan approval shall be required in accordance with
Chapter 2, Article II, Section .F. prior to application for building permit.



   F.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking
Requirements.  See Chapter 4, Article III, Section 6.F.4 for additional
community design standards pertaining to off-street parking.



   G.   Modifications.  Any modification proposed within the SMU
district shall be in conformance with Master Plan modifications pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article II, Section .D.6.



   H.   Miscellaneous.



      1.   Common Areas.  Prior to approval of the final plat by
the City Commission, the developer shall file association documents or
alternative agreements that assign responsibility for and ensure the
perpetual operation and maintenance of all common facilities of the
development.  The common facilities addressed within this agreement shall
include but not be limited to the following:  private streets, drive aisles,
parking areas, plazas, open space, landscaping, and recreation facilities. 
All documents are subject to the review of the City Attorney.



      2.   Landscaping.



         a.   Trees.  See Chapter 4, Article II, Section 4.A.3.a.



         b.   Irrigation.  See Chapter 4, Article II, Section
4.A.6.



         c.   Perimeter Buffer.  See Chapter 4, Article II,
Section 4.C.3.



      3.   Dumpster Location.  See Chapter 4, Article VI, Section
5.A.



      4.   Sidewalks.  See Chapter 4, Article VIII, Section 3.D.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 5.   Mixed-Use (Urban) Districts.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent. The mixed-use zoning districts are
mostly intended to implement the CRA Community Redevelopment Plans, in part,
by providing for a mixture of land uses, accommodating varying densities and
intensities appropriate for each CRA district, and by establishing quality
streetscapes and pedestrian environments as part of a compact urban setting.
The mixed use districts also support transit ridership, in particular through
higher density and intensity development within the designated Downtown
Transit-Oriented Development District (DTODD). Additional standards and
requirements of this section are based on the proximity to the planned train
station, and location within the transit core, which is defined as the area
extending one-quarter (1/4) mile from the train station. To ensure compliance
with these Regulations, an application for site plan approval shall be
required and reviewed concurrently with any request to rezone lands to a
mixed-use (urban) district, except as provided in Section 2.D.1.e. Also see
Chapter 4, Article III, Section 6.H. for design and compatibility standards.
The objectives of the mixed-use (urban) districts are as follows:



         a.   Support and enhance revitalization efforts in the
city's traditional commercial core area through the provision of compact,
transit-supportive, high density and intensity development;



         b.   Allow for commercial services to be provided to new
residential developments in planned locations with appropriate densities,
heights, and mixtures of uses;



         c.   Create optimal pedestrian environments and spaces
through well located public plazas, expanded public sidewalks, maximized
internal and external interconnectivity and design of pedestrian-friendly
vehicular circulation areas;



         d.   Allow flexibility in architectural design and
building bulk while maximizing compatibility and harmony with adjoining
development;



         e.   Create surrounding areas that complement rather
than compete with the downtown; and



         f.   Create higher quality environments for residents,
businesses, employees, and visitors as determined by how well the urban
centers function seamlessly with respect to interconnectivity between the
principal uses, activity centers, and transportations systems, forming a
cohesive and desirable sense of place.



      2.   Description of Districts.



         a.   Mixed Use 1 (MU-1). The MU-1 district implements
the Mixed Use Low (MXL) future land use map (FLUM) classification of the
Comprehensive Plan and has a maximum residential density of twenty (20)
dwelling units per acre, except within the Downtown Transit-Oriented
Development District (DTODD) (the Station Area), where the maximum density
may be twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre through participation in the
City's Workforce Housing Program. In addition, projects located within the
transit core of the Station Area shall have a minimum density of eleven (11)
dwelling units per acre. This minimum density requirement shall be applicable
to any such project regardless of whether the site is partially or entirely
located within the transit core.



         b.   Mixed Use 2 (MU-2). The MU-2 district implements
the Mixed Use Medium (MXM) future land use map (FLUM) classification of the
Comprehensive Plan and has a maximum residential density of thirty (30)
dwelling units per acre, except within the Downtown Transit-Oriented
Development District (DTODD) (the Station Area), where the maximum density
may be thirty-seven and one-half (37.5) dwelling units per acre through
participation in the City's Workforce Housing Program. In addition, projects
located within the transit core of the Station Area shall have a minimum
density of twenty (20) dwelling units per acre. This minimum density
requirement shall be applicable to any such project regardless of whether the
site is partially or entirely located within the transit core.



         c.   Mixed Use 3 (MU-3). The MU-3 district implements
the Mixed Use Medium (MXM) future land use map (FLUM) classification of the
Comprehensive Plan and has a maximum residential density of forty (40)
dwelling units per acre, except within the Downtown Transit-Oriented
Development District (DTODD) (the Station Area), where the maximum density
may be fifty (50) dwelling units per acre through participation in the City's
Workforce Housing Program. In addition, projects located within the transit
core of the Station Area shall have a minimum density of thirty (30) dwelling
units per acre. This minimum density requirement shall be applicable to any
such project regardless of whether the site is partially or entirely located
within the transit core.



         d.   Mixed Use-4 (MU-4). The MU-4 district implements
the Mixed Use High (MX-H) future land use map (FLUM) classification of the
Comprehensive Plan and has a maximum residential density of sixty (60)
dwelling units per acre, except within the Downtown Transit-Oriented
Development District (DTODD) (the Station Area), where the maximum density
may be seventy-five (75) dwelling units per acre through participation in the
City's Workforce Housing Program. In addition, projects located within the
transit core of the Station Area shall have a minimum density of thirty five
(35) dwelling units per acre. This minimum density requirement shall be
applicable to any such project regardless of whether the site is partially or
entirely located within the transit core. The intent of this new district is
to facilitate the establishment of high density and intensity development
nodes at strategic locations that support downtown redevelopment, while in
certain location also providing a proper continuum of, or transition in scale
between the Mixed Use Core (MU- C) and Mixed Use 3 (MU-3) Districts.



         e.   Mixed Use Core (MU-C). The MU-C district implements
the Mixed Use Core (MX-C) future land use map (FLUM) classification of the
Comprehensive Plan and has a maximum residential density of eighty (80)
dwelling units per acre, except within the Downtown Transit-Oriented
Development District (DTODD) (the Station Area), where the maximum density
may be one hundred (100) dwelling units per acre through participation in the
City's Workforce Housing Program. In addition, projects located within the
Station Area shall have a minimum density of thirty (30) dwelling units per
acre. This minimum density requirement shall be applicable to any such
project regardless of whether the site is partially or entirely located
within the transit core.  The intent of this district is to supplant the
Central Business District (CBD) in the historic downtown and marina district.



      3.   Location and General Use Requirements.



         a.   General.  The mixed use (urban) districts are
intended for projects that promote sustainable design with respect to land
use, energy conservation, resource management, and social equity.  Rezoning
to any of these districts is encouraged for proposed development or
redevelopment on lands that are in close proximity to existing
infrastructure, public and alternative transportation routes and modes,
employment centers, community areas, or have sustained or are complicated by
environmental contamination.



         The mixed use (urban) zoning districts shall be applied to
selected geographic areas east of I-95, where a mixture of uses and building
intensities is intended to implement the city's Comprehensive Plan, CRA
Community Redevelopment Plan, and urban design guidelines including goals
involving compact design, transit-oriented development, employment,
population, transportation, housing, public facilities, and environmental
quality.  Permitted uses and associated standards for development vary
between the zoning districts each reflecting the importance of the district's
location and relationship to the downtown.  Maximum heights, densities, and
intensities of development are regulated to achieve, in part, the intended
vision as established within the Redevelopment Plan for each of the six
planning districts, while ensuring land use compatibility.  A master plan as
a whole, comprised of individual buildings and parcels, would be reviewed for
compliance with the requirements below pertaining to a residential component
to the project, and commercial use on the first floor of a project. 
Projects not meeting the requirement for a residential component shall be
reviewed for contribution to employment targets in accordance with FDOT
standards for a community center TOD.



         b.   Mixed Use 1 (MU-1), Mixed use 2 (MU-2), and Mixed
Use 3 (MU-3).



            (1)   In order to complement the revitalization
efforts in the downtown area, the MU-L zoning districts shall be applied to
lands consistent with the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map and CRA
Community Redevelopment Plan. Such areas are generally described as
Woolbright Road between 1-95 and the FLC Railroad, Boynton Beach Boulevard
between 1-95 and Northwest 1st Street, Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard,
Southeast 4th Street south to Southeast 5th Avenue, and Ocean Avenue between
Southeast 4th Street and Southeast 1st Street. See the Community
Redevelopment Plan for specific recommendations on locations and boundaries.



            (2)   These MU districts are appropriate for low-
to mid-rise developments that provide for medium density residential and low
to medium intensity commercial and office uses.



            (3)   The review of these applications will
emphasize compactness, aesthetics and design quality, and physical
compatibility with adjacent land uses.



            (4)   Except where limited by Table 3-21 in
Chapter 3, Article III, Section 5.C., all new developments within the MU-1
and MU-2 districts that contain a non-residential use shall front on streets
designated as "arterial", or "collector", roadways on the Functional
Classification of Roadways Map.  All projects within the MU-3 district and
proposed within the transit core must contain a residential component, and
all projects proposed within these Mixed Use intensity districts that front
on an arterial road must have space on the first floor devoted to commercial
use.



            (5)   Maximum height may be further limited in
certain geographic areas to further applicable redevelopment plans and
maintain compatibility with an abutting single-family district.



         c.   Mixed Use-4 (MU-4).



            (1)   The Mixed Use 4 (MU-4) district shall only
be applied to land classified as mixed use-core (MX-C) on the future land use
map as recommended by the Community Redevelopment Plan.



            (2)   The MU-4 district is appropriate for high
density/intensity development intended for designated nodes such as
properties at the intersection of US-1 and Woolbright Road, and the downtown
area, which is generally located east of the FEC Railroad, including the
marina district, and which extends out from the planned train station by
approximately three (3) to four (4) blocks. Such developments shall include a
mix of uses designed in a compact vertical style. Developments proposed
within the Downtown Transit-Oriented Development District (the Station Area)
must contain a residential component and have space on the first floor which
shall be devoted to commercial uses for those portions of the project having
frontage along Ocean Avenue or an arterial road.



            (3)   All new developments within this district
shall front on streets designated as “arterial” roadways on the
Functional Classification of Roadways Map.



         d.   Rezoning of Single-family Districts. All requests
to rezone any single-family residential district to a mixed use zoning
district shall be subject to the following additional requirements:



            (1)   Height, density and intensity of development
shall be consistent with the Redevelopment Plan for the Redevelopment
District;



            (2)   Ratio of lot frontage to depth that is no
more than one (1) foot (frontage) to one and one-quarter (1.25) foot (depth);



            (3)   Vehicular access to the property located to
minimize impacts on adjacent single-family developments and meet safety
standards; and



            (4)   Landscape barriers provided, in accordance
with the landscape regulations of this Code, where the rezoned property abuts
single-family residential zoning.



         e.   Mixed Use Core (MU-C).



            (1)   The Mixed Use C (MU-C) district shall only
be applied to lands classified as mixed use-high (MX-H) on the future land
use map.



            (2)   The MU-C district is appropriate for high
density/intensity development intended for the downtown area, which is
generally located east of the FEC Railroad, including the marina district,
and which extends out from the planned train station by approximately three
(3) to four (4) blocks.  Such developments shall include a mix of uses
designed in a compact vertical style.  Developments proposed within the
Downtown Transit-Oriented Development District (the Station Area) must
contain a residential component and have space on the first floor which shall
be devoted to commercial uses for those portions of the project having
frontage along Ocean Avenue or an arterial road.



            (3)   All new developments within this district
shall front on streets designated as "arterial" roadways on the Functional
Classification of Roadways Map.



         f.   Rezoning of Single-family Districts.  All requests
to rezone any single-family residential district to a mixed use zoning
district shall be subject to the following additional requirements:



            (1)   Height, density and intensity of development
based on the standards indicated in Table 3-21;



            (2)   Ratio of lot frontage to depth that is no
more than one (1) foot (frontage) to one and one-quarter (1.25) foot (depth);



            (3)   Vehicular access to the property located to
minimize impacts on adjacent single-family developments and meet safety
standards; and



            (4)   Landscape barriers provided, in accordance
with the landscape regulations of this Code, where the rezoned property abuts
single-family residential zoning.



   B.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix, Table 3-28" in Chapter 3,
Article IV, Section 3.D. 



   C.   Building and Site Regulations.



      1.   Building and Site Regulation (Table 3-21).



 


MIXED USE, URBAN

 

MU-1

 

MU-2

 

MU-3

 

MU-4

 

MU-C





Lot Area, Minimum (acres):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Public park:
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



   All other uses:
 

0.50

 

0.75

 

1

 

1

 

1



Lot Frontage, Minimum (ft.)1
 

100

 

100

 

1502

 

200

 

200



Structure Ht., Minimum (ft.)
 

30

 

30

 

30

 

45

 

45



Maximum Height (ft.)3
 

45

 

65

 

75

 

100

 

150/1254



Maximum Density (DUs/Acre)10, 12
 

20

 

40

 

50

 

60

 

80



Maximum F.A.R.11
 

1.0

 

2.0

 

3.0

 

4.0

 

4.0



Build-to-line (ft.)8:
 




All sides abutting a collector or arterial road
 

Factor of Pedestrian Zone Requirement7



Abutting a Local street
 

07

 

07

 

07

 

07

 

07



Interior side
 

07

 

07

 

07

 

07

 

07



Building Setbacks, Minimum (ft.)8:
 


 


 


 


 





Rear abutting



   Residential single-family
 

255/05, 6

 

255

 

255

 

255

 

255



   Intracoastal waterway
 

255

 

255

 

255

 

255

 

255



Side abutting
 


 


 


 


 




   Residential single-family:
 

255/05, 6

 

255

 

255

 

255

 

255



Usable Open Space, Minimum (sq. ft.)9
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

1%

 

2%





 



1.   May be reduced if frontage extends from right-of-way to right-of-way.



2.   Minimum of fifty (50) feet, if frontage is on a collector/local
collector roadway.



3.   Maximum height on any street frontage is forty-five (45) feet. 
Maximum height on Intracoastal Waterway is thirty-five (35) feet.  Heights
may require reduction where adjacent to a single-family zoning district where
necessary to achieve the compatibility requirements of these regulations.



4.   Maximum height reduced to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet for the
entire project where property abuts any other MU or residential zoning
district not separated by a right-of-way.



5.   Plus one (1) additional foot for each foot of height over thirty-five
(35) feet.



6.   Where there is an intervening right-of-way of at least forty (40)
feet.



7.   Buildings and structures shall be located no farther than zero (0)
feet from the property line, except in conjunction with providing required
visibility at intersections, driveways; open spaces and public plazas; or
when additional setback is necessary to provide for required “Pedestrian
Zone” (PZ). Building placement is a factor of roadway type and CRA
district, which determines the min. width and design of the PZ. Except for
the Downtown District, where the minimum PZ width is 18', the minimum PZ in
all other districts is 16 ft. See Section 5.C.2. below for additional relief
provisions from build-to line requirements.



8.   Listed eligible historic structures are not required to meet these
standards.



9.   Usable open space shall be required for all developments two (2)
acres in size or larger which shall be devoted to plazas or other public open
space, excluding private recreation. See Chapter 4, Article III, Section 8
for additional regulations.



10.   Projects within the transit core shall have minimum densities as
follows: MU-1 - eleven (11), MU-2 - twenty (20), MU-3 - thirty (30), MU-4 -
thirty-five (35) and MU-C - forty (40) dwellings per acre (except that
minimum density for the MU-C district applies to projects located within the
entire station area).



11.   Projects within the transit core shall have a minimum FAR as
follows: MU-3 - one and three-quarters (1.75), MU-4 (2.0) and MU-C - two
(2.0) (except that minimum FAR for the MU-C district applies to projects to
be located within the entire station area).



12.   The maximum density for projects within the Downtown
Transit-Oriented Development District (the Station Area) may be increased up
to twenty-five percent (25%) over the maximum density allowed in the
underlying zoning district through participation in the City’s Workforce
Housing Program.



      2.   Minor and Major Variations to Build-to Line
Requirements.  Notwithstanding the required build-to line requirement of
Note #10 above, portions of buildings and structures may be constructed in
excess of the distance specified in the above table, but not to exceed
fifteen (15) feet in order to 1) optimize landscape design; 2) maximize
on-site drainage solutions; 3) accommodate architectural features and
building enhancements; or 4) to otherwise enhance public spaces such as
sidewalks, plazas, fountains, or outdoor seating areas in order to farther
the purpose and intent of the Overlay Zone.  Major deviations from the
build-to line requirement above (in excess of fifteen (15) feet) may be
allowed, but only with sufficient justification and contingent upon the
approval of a Community Design Appeal application (see Chapter 2, Article II,
Section 4.B.).



      3.   Additional Standards.  See Chapter 4, Article III,
Section 6.H. for additional standards related to urban design and building
location for properties located in within the transit core of the Downtown
Transit-Oriented District Overlay Zone (the Station Area).



   D.   Review and Approval Process.



      1.   All development and redevelopment within the urban mixed
use districts shall be governed by a master plan with approval granted by the
City Commission in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.D.6. 



      2.   Site plan approval shall be required in accordance with
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to application for building permit.



   E.   Parking.



      1.   General Requirements.  Required off-street parking is
regulated in accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking
Requirements.



      2.   Reduced Parking Requirements in MU-H District.  See
reduced parking requirements for specific uses within the MU-H district in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Section 2.B.



      3.   Off-Street Parking Facilities.  The mixed use (urban)
districts contain additional standards relative to location and appearance of
off-street parking facilities.  Refer to Chapter 4, Article III, Section
6.F. for these additional development standards.



   F.   Miscellaneous.



      1.   Access.  See Chapter 4, Article VI, Section 3.C.8.



      2.   Building Location.  See Chapter 4, Article III, Section
6.



      3.   Location of Dumpsters and Trash Receptacles.  See
Chapter 4, Article VI, Section 4.C.



      4.   Shade and Shelter.  See Chapter 4, Article III, Section
6.



      5.   Sidewalks in MU-H District.  See Chapter 4, Article III,
Section 6 for community design standards related to sidewalks.



      6.   Landscape and Streetscape Design.  See Chapter 4,
Article II, Section 4.B.5.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord.
13-013, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord. 14-009, passed 7-1-14; Am. Ord. 15-006,
passed 3-2-15; Ord. 15-023, passed 10-6-15; Am. Ord. 16-023, passed 1-3-17;
Am. Ord. 17-023, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 6.   Industrial Districts.



   A.   M-1  Industrial District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the M-1 zoning district is to
implement the industrial (I) future land use map (FLUM) classification of the
Comprehensive Plan.  The intent of this conventional district is to allow
industrial uses that provide opportunities for the retention and expansion of
economic activities associated with manufacturing, processing, or assembly
plants, including their support enterprises for warehouse, storage,
distribution, research, and development.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-22).



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   M-1 District


Minimum lot area:
 
10,000 s.f.1


Minimum lot frontage:
 
0 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 


   Front:
 
15 feet


   Rear:
 
20 feet2


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet


   Interior side:
 
15 feet3


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet


   Corner side:
 
15 feet


Maximum lot coverage:
 
60%


Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 
0.504


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet5




 



   1   A property that does not meet this minimum size shall be
considered conforming only if it contains a whole platted lot and was not in
combination with other lots under the same ownership at the time of the
effective date of this ordinance (October 2, 2012), in which the cumulative
size would have met the minimum required by code.  Any such undersized lots
that are further subdivided and reduced in size shall be considered
non-conforming pursuant to Chapter 3, Article V, Section 11.



   2   Where rear yard abuts a railroad right-of-way or any paved
alley, the rear yard may be reduced to ten (10) feet.



   3   Where rear yard abuts a paved alley or street, then no side
setback shall be required.



   4   A floor area ratio (FAR) up to 0.50 may be considered for
industrial uses allowed within the M-1 district (see "Use Matrix" – Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.), pursuant to the industrial future land use
classification of the Comprehensive Plan.



   5   Not to exceed four (4) stories.



      4.   Review and Approval Process.  Non-residential uses shall
require site plan approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section
2.F. prior to application for building permit.



      5.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



      6.   Exterior Storage of Merchandise and Equipment.  See
Chapter 3, Article V, Section 8 for the regulations pertaining to the
permanent exterior storage of merchandise and equipment.



   B.   PID   Planned Industrial Development District.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of the M-1 zoning
district is to implement the industrial (I) and development of regional
impact (DRI) future land use map (FLUM) classifications of the Comprehensive
Plan.  The intent of this planned district is to: 



            (1)   Provide for current demands for light
industrial and other compatible uses in a planned setting.  This district is
intended for development that reflects changes in technology and is capable
of being designed sensitive to the environment;



            (2)   Create a desirable environment for
employees, customers and others traversing the PID as well as with respect to
current and future adjacent residential development; require economies of
scale in providing public services; require placement within close proximity
to other employment centers; and provide internal and external connectivity
through optimal design and access to available modes of transportation.



         b.   Prerequisite Location Standards.  The PID district
is optimum when there is an opportunity to promote sustainability with
respect to land use, energy conservation, resource management, and social
equity.  Rezoning to the PID district is encouraged for proposed development
or redevelopment on lands that are in close proximity to existing
infrastructure, public and alternative transportation routes and modes,
employment centers, community areas, or have sustained or are complicated by
environmental contamination.



   In reaching recommendations and decisions as to zoning land to PID, the
advisory board and City Commission shall apply the following location
standards, in addition to the standards applicable to the rezoning of land
generally:



            (1)   Relation to major transportation
facilities.  A PID shall be so located with respect to major roadways or
other transportation facilities as to provide direct access to it without
creating or generating traffic along streets in residential areas or
districts outside it.



            (2)   Extensions of city-maintained waterlines,
sewer lines, pumping stations, streets and storm sewers, etc., shall be
constructed at no expense to the city and all such construction shall be in
accordance with city ordinances and specifications.



            (3)   The site shall be suitable for development
in the manner proposed without hazards to persons or property, on or off the
tract, from probability of flooding, erosion, or other dangers, annoyances,
or inconveniences. Condition of the soil, groundwater level, drainage and
topography shall all be appropriate to both kind and pattern of use intended.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed and Use Approval.  See "Use Matrix Table
3-28" in Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-23).



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   PID District


Minimum project area:
 
25 acres1


Minimum lot frontage:
 
Flexible


Minimum yard setbacks:
 


   Front:
 
30 feet


   Rear:
 
30 feet


   Interior side:
 
20 feet


   Corner side:
 
30 feet


Maximum lot coverage:
 
60%2


Building Separation:
 
25 feet


Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
 
0.53


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet4




 



   1   Twenty-five (25) contiguous acres.



   2   The gross floor area of the building and accessory structures
shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the lot on which it is constructed.



   3   A floor area ratio (FAR) of up to 0.50 may be considered for
industrial land uses allowed in the PID zoning district (see "Use Matrix" –
Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3.D.), pursuant to the industrial future land
use classification of the Comprehensive Plan.



   4    No more than four (4) stories, with the exception of buildings
in mixed use pod of the PID pursuant to Section 6.B.8. below.



      4.   Review and Approval Process.



         a.   All development and redevelopment within the PID
district shall be governed by a master plan with approval granted by the City
Commission in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.D.6. 



         b.   Site plan approval shall be required in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to application for building
permit.



      5.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



      6.   Modifications.  Any modification proposed within the PID
shall be in conformance with Master Plan modifications pursuant to Chapter 2,
Article II, Section 2.D.6.



      7.   Miscellaneous.



         a.   Perimeter Landscape (Greenbelt) Buffer.  See
Chapter 4, Article II, Section 4.C.3.



         b.   Off-street Loading.  See Chapter 4, Article VI,
Section 3.B.



         c.   Building Permit.  No building permits shall be
issued unless and until platting procedures and the requirements outlined in
Chapter 2, Article III, Section 2 of the Land Development Regulations are
completed in every respect.



         d.   Exterior Storage of Merchandise and Equipment. 
See Chapter 3, Article V, Section 8 for the regulations pertaining to the
permanent exterior storage of merchandise and equipment.



      8.   Mixed Use Pods.



         a.   Intent.  The purpose of these provisions is to
establish small mixed use nodes containing a combination of residential,
commercial and office uses in close proximity to employment centers and
available modes of transportation, while also meeting the intent of the PID
district described above.  The mixed use pod is intended for a master
planned setting that provides optimal internal and external connectivity for
residents, employees, and other visitors, and generally follows the
livability and connectivity standards promoted in the smart growth
initiative.  For the purpose of this subsection, a mixed use pod is defined
as a development project located within a previously approved PID.  The
following criteria shall apply to mixed use pods proposed for development
within an approved PID.



         b.   Establishment of a Mixed Use Pod.  To ensure
attainment of these design objectives, as well as to accommodate adequate
buffering to ensure compatibility among varying uses, a PID district eligible
for a mixed use pod must contain a minimum of five hundred (500) consolidated
acres.  The establishment of a mixed use pod shall also conform to the
requirements of this section, and be in accordance with the process
requirements of Master Site Plan within a mixed use pod (Chapter 2, Article
II, Section 3.A.).



         c.   Density.  The PID district corresponds with the
industrial (I) and development of regional impact (DRI) FLUM classifications;
however, residential uses are only allowed within a mixed use pod of a PID
that has a DRI FLUM classification.  Maximum residential densities shall be
in accordance with the thresholds established for the respective DRI.



         d.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in
Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



         e.   Building and Site Regulations.



            (1)   The maximum building height within a mixed
use pod shall not be greater than seventy-five (75) feet.  Any building
exceeding forty-five (45) feet in height shall be processed as a conditional
use.



            (2)   Building height measurement.  Building
height shall be measured from the lowest finish floor slab elevation of the
proposed building to the peak of the structure, including any architectural
details, stairwells, elevator shafts, etc.



            (3)   Height setback envelope.  Minimum building
setbacks shall be based on building heights for buildings greater than
forty-five (45) feet in height.  The height setback envelope is applicable
where the mixed use development is adjacent to an existing developed
single-family residential zoning district outside the PID.  This minimum
setback shall be three (3) times the building height for any multi-family or
non-residential structure.  The setback shall be measured from the common
boundary of the PID and the existing single-family residential zoning
district of the midpoint of any intervening right-of-way.



         f.   Parking.  As required by Chapter 4, Article V.



         g.   Modifications.



            (1)   Any modification proposed to a Master Site
Plan for a mixed use pod within a PID shall be in conformance Chapter 2,
Article II, Section 3.A.6.



            (2)   Any modification proposed to a technical
site plan within a master site plan of a mixed use pod within a PID shall be
in conformance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.H.



         h.   Miscellaneous.  Any request to waive a standard
zoning regulation within the mixed use pod shall be in accordance with
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 3.D.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-010, passed 6-19-12; Am. Ord.
12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 7.   Miscellaneous Districts.



   A.   REC  Recreation District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the REC zoning district is to
implement the recreation (R) future land use map (FLUM) classification of the
Comprehensive Plan.  It is the intent of this conventional district to
accommodate and preserve recreational areas for current and future uses
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.  This district shall apply to those
existing and proposed recreational areas not located in planned unit
developments.  Included in these areas are both public and privately-owned
recreational tracts and the Intracoastal Waterway (ICWW).



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-24).  No building
or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established,
altered, enlarged or used unless the premises and buildings shall comply with
the following regulations:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   REC Recreation District


Minimum lot area:
 
1 acre


Minimum lot frontage:
 
100 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 


   Front:
 
25 feet


   Rear:
 
25 feet


   Interior side:
 
25 feet


   Corner side:
 
25 feet


Maximum lot coverage:
 
50%


Maximum structure height:
 
45 feet1




 



1   Not to exceed four (4) stories.



      4.   Review and Approval Process.  Non-residential uses shall
require site plan approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section
2.F. prior to application for building permit.



      5.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



   B.   PU Public Usage District.



      1.   General.  The purpose of the PU zoning district is to
implement the public and private governmental/institutional (PPGI) future
land use map (FLUM) classification of the Comprehensive Plan.  This district
shall apply to those areas within the city whose ownership and/or operation
is public, or whose use is primarily public or institutionally-oriented,
exclusive of those areas whose use is primarily recreational.



      2.   Use(s) Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter
3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      3.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-25).  No building
or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established,
altered, enlarged or used unless the premises and building comply with the
following regulations:



 



   BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS

   PU District


Minimum lot area:
 
8,000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
75 feet


Minimum yard setbacks:
 


   Front:
 
25 feet1


   Rear:
 
25 feet1


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet


   Interior side:
 
15 feet1


      Abutting: Residential district(s)
 
30 feet


   Corner side:
 
15 feet


Maximum lot coverage:
 
50%


Maximum structure height:

Hospitals only:
 
45 feet2

   60 feet2




 



1   For hospital buildings, additional setback in excess of thirty (30)
feet shall be required for any height over forty-five (45) feet.  The
additional setback shall be measured by calculating three (3) additional feet
of setback for each foot in height above forty-five (45) feet, not including
minimal roof top equipment that are eligible for height exception in
accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.C



2   Not to exceed four (4) stories.



      4.   Review and Approval Process.  Non-residential uses shall
require site plan approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section
2.F. prior to application for building permit.



      5.   Parking.  Required off-street parking is regulated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 8.   Overlay Zones.



   A.   Urban Central Business District Overlay Zone.  In compliance
with Florida Administrative Code, the city has established a single urban
core area to attract high intensity, high density, multi-use development in
the downtown through the redesignation of the central business district to an
urban central business district, which will permit additional development
density opportunities suitable to attract mixed use business, while ensuring
the scale, design, function and character of any new development is
compatible with, and complements, the city's redevelopment plans.  The land
that shall comprise the Urban Central Business District Overlay Zone is
bordered on the east by the Intracoastal Waterway (ICWW), excluding all lands
designated with a conservation overlay on the city's future land use map, and
city lands utilized for stormwater retention; on the west by the Florida East
Coast Railroad right-of-way, on the north by northeast 6th Avenue, and on the
south by S.E. 2nd Avenue and consists of approximately eighty-three (83)
acres. These boundaries shall be utilized for increased
development-of-regional-impact guidelines and standards, consistent with the
criteria of this section.  The area is further delineated in map format on
Ordinance No. 03-054, Exhibit "A."



   The Urban Central Business District Overlay Zone is consistent with the
City of Boynton Beach Comprehensive Plan and future land use map intensities.



   The Urban Central Business District Overlay Zone is wholly within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Boynton Beach.



   The future land use classification and zoning district allow for high
intensity multi-use development within the proposed overlay zone.  The uses
and intensity are regulated by the respective future land use classification
and zoning district.



   Within the Urban Central Business District Overlay Zone, the DRI
guidelines and standards set forth in Florida Administrative Code Rule
28-24.014(10), as they may be amended from time to time shall apply to the
development approved by the city.



   B.   Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard Overlay Zone.



      1.   Intent.  This overlay zone has been established to
implement recommendations from the Vision 20/20 Redevelopment Plan, which
identified a segment of the Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard as an
opportunity for redevelopment and revitalization.  The ultimate design and
site standards of this section are intended to create a traditional street
corridor with pedestrian improvements, storefronts along the sidewalk, and a
mixture of uses.  The corridor is to contain an ambience supported by
pleasant signage and building appearance, potted landscaping, store windows
and public open spaces.  This overlay zone is also appropriate for
development of small properties to allow for consistency with the vision
represented by the respective mixed use zoning district, and/or as an interim
redevelopment mechanism until greater redevelopment occurs using the
respective mixed use zoning district. All development within the Martin
Luther King Jr. Boulevard corridor shall occur according to the provisions of
the adopted plan as stated below.



      2.   Defined.  The Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard Overlay
Zone (MLKBOZ) is hereby established as the area defined by the parcels
fronting on that portion of the Boulevard located east of Seacrest Boulevard
and west of Federal Highway right-of-way, along with those parcels adjacent
to the north and south of these parcels that front on the Boulevard if
assembled and development as a unified project.



      3.   Use(s) Allowed.  (See "Use Matrix" - Chapter 3, Article
IV, Section 3.D.).



      4.   Building and Site Regulations.  Development within this
Overlay Zone shall be in accordance with building and site regulations
applicable to the underlying zoning district except as follows:



         a.   Parcels that have frontage along Martin Luther King
Jr. Boulevard shall have the same front setback in accordance with the Mixed
Use 1 zoning district (see Section 5.C. above).



         b.   Minimum interior and corner side setbacks shall be
in accordance with the Mixed Use 1 zoning district (see Section 5.C. above).



         c.   Maximum building height shall be thirty (30) feet.



      5.   Parking.  As required by Chapter 4, Article V, Section
3.D.



      6.   Landscape and Streetscape Design.  See Chapter 4,
Article II, Section 4.B.5.



   C.   Urban Commercial District Overlay Zone.



      1.   Intent.  The purpose of this zone is to encourage the
development and redevelopment of commercially-zoned parcels in a manner
consistent with the pattern of development of parcels with mixed use zoning
classifications.



      2.   Objectives.  The objectives of this overlay zone are as
follows:



         a.   Support and enhance revitalization efforts along
the city's commercial corridors within the redevelopment areas.



         b.   Improve aesthetic and pedestrian streetscape
environments by preventing the placement of off-street parking between the
front of the building(s) and the rights-of-way.



         c.   Allow flexibility in architectural design and
building bulk; while maximizing compatibility and harmony with adjoining
development within the defined area.



      3.   Defined.  The Urban Commercial District Overlay Zone
(UCDOZ) is established in the city redevelopment plans as the geographical
area defined by the following boundaries:



         a.   Federal Highway Corridor Community Redevelopment
Plan.  The boundary is the city limits to the north, the Intracoastal
Waterway to the east, the city boundary to the south, and the Florida East
Coast Railroad (F.E.C.) and Palm Boulevard (Northeast 4th Street) to the
west.  The legal description is more particularly described in Exhibit 1.1,
Appendix of the Federal Highway Corridor Community Redevelopment Plan.



         b.   The Ocean District Community Redevelopment Plan. 
The boundary is Northeast 3rd Avenue to the north, Seacrest Boulevard to the
west, F.E.C. Railroad to the east, and Southeast 2nd Avenue to the south.



         c.   Boynton Beach Boulevard Corridor.  The boundary is
the commercially-zoned parcels located along west Boynton Beach Boulevard,
east of Interstate 95, and west of Seacrest Boulevard.



      4.   Conflict.  In the event of any conflict between the
provisions of the Urban Commercial District Overlay Zone (UCDOZ) and any
other sections of the Land Development Regulations, the provisions of this
section shall prevail.  These provisions shall not be construed to supersede
any federal, state, or county laws; and/or any rezoning of lands to a mixed
use zoning district.



      5.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-26).  Development
within this Overlay Zone shall be in accordance with building and site
regulations applicable to the underlying zoning district except as follows:



 



BUILDING SITE REGULATIONS
Urban Commercial District Overlay Zone


Build-to line:
 


   Front (abutting any public right-of-way):
 
0 ft.1


   Rear:
 
0 ft.1


   Interior side:
 
0 ft.1


Minimum yard setbacks:
 


   Rear (abutting residential district):
 
30 feet


   Interior side (abutting residential district):
 
15 feet


Maximum structure height:
 
Zoning2




 



   1   Buildings and structures shall be located no farther than zero
(0) feet from the property line, excluding those instances where strict
adherence hereto would cause visual obstructions to vehicular traffic,
particularly within the triangular-shaped area of property formed by the
intersection of two (2) rights-of-way.  Notwithstanding the required
build-to line requirement, portions of buildings and structures may be
constructed in excess of the distance specified above, but not to exceed 15
feet when necessary to 1) optimize landscape design; 2) maximize on-site
drainage solutions; 3) accommodate architectural features and building
enhancements; and/or 4) to otherwise enhance public spaces such as sidewalks,
plazas, fountains, or outdoor seating areas in order to further the purpose
and intent of the Overlay Zone.  Major deviations from the build-to line
requirement above (in excess of 15 feet) may be allowed, but only with
sufficient justification and contingent upon the approval of a Community
Design Appeal application (see Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.B).



   2   Shall be defined by the applicable zoning district.



      6.   Parking.  As required by Chapter 4, Article V.



      7.   Miscellaneous.



         a.   Landscape and Streetscape Design.  See Chapter 4,
Article II, Section 4.B.5.



         b.   Building Location.  See Chapter 4, Article III,
Section 6.



         c.   Shade and Shelter.  See Chapter 4, Article III,
Section 6.



   D.   Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone (OAOZ).



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone
(OAOZ) is comprised of multiple properties containing varying future land use
map (FLUM) classifications and zoning districts.  As such, the densities of
developments shall correspond with the respective FLUM classifications. For
new developments however, the maximum allowable density shall be eleven (11)
dwelling units per acre for projects on properties with single lot depth. Up
to twenty (20) dwelling units per acre may be allowed for when reclassifying
lots with double depth to mixed use (MX), and where such project creates a
through lot between two (2) or more streets.  The purpose and intent of the
OAOZ are as follows:



         a.   Provide for a mix of selected commercial,
residential, office, and entertainment activities, with an emphasis on arts
and cultural ventures that will encourage the adaptive re-use of existing
buildings, restoration of historic structures, and maintain and further
enhance the pedestrian and historic scale of the area;



         b.   Encourage the location of specialty retail, artist
related uses and entertainment establishments in concentrations that will
enable and encourage pedestrian movements between businesses, and between the
marina / waterfront attractions to the cast and the cultural / civic
activities to the west;



         c.   Initiate implementation of various recommendations
contained within approved redevelopment plans;



         d.   Stimulate greater awareness and pride in the City's
architectural, historical, and cultural heritage; and



         e.   Improve overall livability of the general area and
stabilize and improve property values.



      2.   Defined. The Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone (OAOZ) shall be
bounded on the east by the Florida East Coast Railroad (F.E.C.), on the west
by Seacrest Boulevard, on the south by Southeast 1st Avenue, and on the north
by Northeast 1st Avenue, except between Northeast 1st Street and Northeast
3rd Street, the north boundary shall be the alley between Northeast 1st
Avenue and Boynton Beach Boulevard.



      3.   Conflict.  In the event of any conflict between the
provisions of the Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone and any other sections of the
Land Development Regulations, the provisions of this section shall prevail.
These provisions shall not be construed to supersede any federal, state, or
county laws; and/or any rezoning of lands to a mixed-use zoning district.



      4.   Uses Allowed.  See "Use Matrix Table 3-28" in Chapter 3,
Article IV, Section 3.D. Additionally, no existing use shall be deemed
non-conforming.



      5.   Building and Site Regulations (Table 3-27).  Development
within this Overlay Zone, including proposed expansions and additions to
existing structures shall be in accordance with the building and site
regulations as follows:



 




BUILDING/SITE REGULATIONS
Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone1




(Single Lot Depth)



Minimum lot area:
 
5,000 s.f.


Minimum lot frontage:
 
50 feet


Build-to line:
 
 



   Front:

 
5 ft – 15 ft2



   Corner side:

 
5 ft – 15 ft2


Minimum yard setbacks:
 
 



   Rear:

 

10 feet




      Abutting:   Residential district:

 

20 feet3




   Interior side:

 

7.5 feet4




      Abutting:   Historic structures:

 

10 feet



Maximum lot coverage:
 
65%


Maximum structure height:
 
35 feet5



(Double Lot Depth)



All new developments with double lot depth shall be constructed in accordance
with the mixed-use low intensity (MU-L1) zoning district building and site
regulation Table 3-21 in Section 5.C. above, except as contained herein.

See "Single-Lot Depth" above for all proposed expansions or additions to
existing structures.


Maximum structure height:
 
35 feet5




 



1   No existing building or structure shall be deemed non-conforming with
respect to setbacks, lot coverage, or building height.



2   A paver plaza or "streetscape" design shall be required within the
reduced building setback area where buildings are constructed in excess of
five (5) feet from the property line.



3   Excluding property boundaries that abut rights-of-way. In these
instances, the required setback shall be 10 feet.



4   The minimum side interior setback shall be five (5) feet for lots with
50 feet of frontage (but less than 75 feet).



5   Not to exceed three (3) stories.



      6.   Accessory Structures.



         a.   Fences along the front of the property are
discouraged. Any fence that is proposed however, shall be decorative in
nature, opaque, and not exceed three (3) feet in height. Walls, chain link,
board on board, shadowbox, and similar types of fences are expressly
prohibited.



         b.   All parking, mechanical equipment, trash
containers, and miscellaneous equipment shall be landscaped to be screened
from view.



      7.   Parking.



         a.   Minimum Number of Required Spaces.  The minimum
number of required off-street parking spaces shall be calculated in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Section 2 above; however, the total
number of required spaces may be reduced by up to fifty percent (50%) for all
new developments, excluding multi-family residential projects. When two (2)
or more adjacent property owners combine their off-street parking in
accordance with the code and construct a shared parking facility with common
access drives, the total number of required off-street parking spaces may be
reduced by an additional ten percent (10%).



         b.   Allowable Location of Off-Street Spaces.



            (1)   The intent of the OAOZ is to screen
off-street parking areas from abutting rights-of-way and locate buildings
along front and side corner property lines. It is therefore, a requirement to
locate off-street parking areas within rear and side interior yards for all
new projects and those in which parking areas would be altered to accommodate
a proposed building renovation or expansion. Only existing parking areas for
existing developments may remain if the spaces are unaltered as part of any
building renovation or expansion. In these instances, the existing off-street
parking area shall be substantially screened from off-premises by a hedge,
decorative fencing, or a combination thereof, provided that such hedge and/or
fencing would be compliant with the intent of the OAOZ, and to the standards
of the urban landscape code to the maximum extent possible.  Any deviation
from the above standards would require the approval of a waiver in accordance
with Chapter 2. Article II, Section 4.E.



            (2)   If one hundred percent (100%) of the
required off-street parking spaces cannot be provided on-site, they may be
provided at an off-site location provided the following conditions are met:
1) the proposed location is not farther than five hundred (500) feet from the
subject property as measured by a straight line from a point on the boundary
of the property to the closest boundary line of the property to be leased:
and 2) the off-site location is owned or leased by the owner or operator of
the subject business or property owner. Any lease agreement must be approved
by the City Commission. The parent business property shall be posted with
signage indicating the location of the off-site parking spaces. All spaces
provided by the property/business owner on and off-site shall be maintained
as unreserved, unrestricted parking available to the public, except
designated handicap spaces required by law.



         c.   Exceptions to Providing Required Parking.  See
Chapter 4, Article V, Section 4.A. for additional provisions regarding
exceptions to providing required off-street parking.



      8.   Landscape and Streetscape Design.  See Chapter 4,
Article II, Section 4.B.5. for additional regulations regarding required
landscaping and streetscape design.



      9.   Building Design.



         a.   New Buildings. All new buildings used for
non-residential purposes shall be designed to be residential in character.
The building design is encouraged to utilize sloped roofs, gables, porches,
residential style windows and other elements normally associated with the
typical frame vernacular buildings found in the City and throughout South
Florida, and those of historic structures anticipated to be relocated to the
area.  New structures shall be constructed with the building entry oriented
towards the street and shall be sensitive to the scale, massing and design
envisioned in the Downtown Master Plan.



         b.   Additions to Existing Buildings and Structures. All
building additions shall be sensitive to the original building design
relative to the architectural style, building materials/components and
treatments, and proportions. Original materials and details, as well as
distinctive form and scale features, which contribute to the character of the
building and/or surroundings, shall be preserved to the maximum extent
feasible. Rehabilitation work shall not destroy the distinguishing quality or
character of the property or its environment.



         For historic structures, any new additions, exterior
alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials
that characterize the structure. The new work shall be differentiated from
the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and
architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and
its environment. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall
be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential
form and integrity of the historic structure and its environment would be
unimpaired.



      10.   Signage and Exterior Lighting Standards.



         a.   Signs allowed within the Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone
shall be externally illuminated only, and consist of the prototypical
monument sign designed for the area, wall mounted, and/or a projecting sign.



         b.   The size of wall mounted signs shall be calculated
at one-half (0.5) square foot of sign area per one (1) lineal foot of
building frontage measured along the main building entrance.



         c.   Projecting signs and mounting brackets shall be
decorative in nature, and the sign face shall not exceed six (6) square feet
in size.



         d.   General lighting of the site shall harmonize with
and blend into residential/mixed use environment. Ground lighting and up
lighting of the building and landscaping is encouraged. However, when the use
of pole lighting is necessary, the fixture height shall not exceed fifteen
(15) feet, be decorative in nature and compatible with the color and
architecture of the building.



   E.   Downtown Transit-Oriented Development District (DTODD) Overlay
Zone.



      1.   Intent.  This overlay zone implements Policy No. 1.18.1
of the Comprehensive Plan's future land use element which establishes the
DTODD to improve land development patterns around the future station of the
planned commuter service. The overlay zone's features further enhance the
vision embodied by mixed-use zoning districts with increased density and
intensity as well as strong emphasis on interconnectivity throughout the area.



      2.   Defined.  The DTODD Overlay Zone coincides with the
Station Area of a one-half (½) mile radius around the intersection of Ocean
Avenue and the Florida East Coast rail corridor, which is the anticipated
location of the Downtown Boynton Beach Station for the planned commuter
Tri-Rail Coastal Link service on the FEC Corridor.



      3.   General.  See additional standards and requirements for
mixed-use (urban) districts based on the proximity to the planned train
station in Chapter 3, Article III, Section 5.A.



      4.   Use(s) Allowed.  For the DTODD, allowed uses are based
on the underlying zoning district. See “Use Matrix,” Table 3-28 in
Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3.D.



      5.   Building and Site Regulations.  See Chapter 3, Article
III, Section 5.C.



      6.   Additional Standards.  See Chapter 4, Article III,
Section 6.H. for additional standards related to urban design and building
location for properties located within the transit core of the Station Area.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-002, passed 3-1-11; Am. Ord.
12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord. 15-006, passed 3-2-15; Am. Ord. 17-023,
passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 9.   Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE IV.  USE REGULATIONS



Sec. 1.   Operational Performance Standards.



   All existing and subsequently considered uses located within the city
shall conform to the operational performance standards set forth below, and
shall be constructed, maintained and operated so as not to be a nuisance or
hazard to persons, animals, vegetation or property located on adjacent or
nearby properties or rights-of-way; or to interfere with the reasonable use
or enjoyment of adjacent or nearby property by reason of noise, vibration,
smoke, dust or other particulate matter; toxic or noxious matter; odors,
glare, heat or humidity; radiation, electromagnetic interference, fire or
explosion hazard, liquid waste discharge, or solid waste accumulation. 
Furthermore, no use shall be carried out so as to create any nuisance or
hazard which is a violation of any applicable federal, state, county, or city
law or permit, and all such laws and permits are hereby adopted as
performance standards in these zoning regulations.



   A.   Noise.  No use shall be carried out in any zoning district so
as to create sound which is in violation of City Code of Ordinances Part II,
Section 15-8.  Any use wherein floorshows or other forms of entertainment
consisting of one (1) or more persons, amplified or non-amplified sound, are
provided indoors or outdoors, including but not limited to entertainment
provided by a disc jockey (DJ), master of ceremonies (MC), karaoke, or the
like shall be subject to the Live Entertainment Permit requirement of Part II
(City Code of Ordinances), Chapter 13, Article IV, Section 13-80.



   B.   Vibrations.  No use shall be carried out in any zoning
district so as to create inherently and recurrently generated ground
vibrations which are perceptible without instruments at any point at or
beyond the property lines of the property on which the use is located.



   C.   Particulate Matter.  No use shall be carried out within any
zoning district so as to allow the emission of smoke, dust, dirt or other
particular matter which may cause damage to property or vegetation,
discomfort or harm to persons or animals, or prevent the reasonable use and
enjoyment of property and rights-of-way, at or beyond the property lines of
the property on which the use is located.  Furthermore, no use shall be
carried out so as to allow the emission of any substances in violation of any
federal, state, county or city laws or permits governing the emission of such
substances.



   D.   Odor.  No use shall be carried out in any industrial district
so as to allow the emission of objectionable or offensive odors or fumes in
such concentration as to be readily perceptible at any point at or beyond the
boundary of industrial districts.  For all non-industrial districts, the
standards contained in this paragraph shall apply where the district abuts
any residential district.



   E.   Toxic Matter.  No use shall be carried out in any zoning
district so as to allow the discharge of any toxic or noxious matter in such
concentrations as to cause damage to property or vegetation, discomfort or
harm to persons or animals, or prevent the reasonable use and enjoyment of
property or rights-of-way, at or beyond the property line of the property on
which the use is located; or to contaminate any public waters or any
groundwater.



   F.   Fire and Explosions.  No use shall be carried out in any
zoning district so as to create a fire or explosion hazard to adjacent or
nearby property or rights-of-way, or any persons or property thereon. 
Furthermore, the storage, use, or production of flammable or explosive
materials shall be in conformance with the provisions of City Code of
Ordinances Part II, Chapter 9.



   G.   Heat, Humidity, and Glare.  No use shall be carried out in any
zoning district so as to produce heat, humidity or glare which is readily
perceptible at any point at or beyond the property line of the property on
which the use is located.  Artificial lighting which is used to illuminate
any property or use shall be directed away from any residential use which is
a conforming use according to these zoning regulations, so as not to create a
nuisance to such residential uses.



   H.   Waste.



      1.   Liquid Waste.  No use shall be carried out in any zoning
district so as to dispose of liquid waste of any type, quantity, or manner
which is not in conformance with the provisions of City Code of Ordinances
Part II, Chapter 26, or any applicable federal, state, or county laws or
permits.



      2.   Solid Waste.  No use shall be carried out in any zoning
district so as to allow the accumulation or disposal of solid waste which is
not in conformance with City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 10, or which
would cause solid waste to be transferred in any manner to adjacent or nearby
property or rights-of-way.



   I.   Electromagnetic Interference.  No use shall be carried out in
any zoning district so as to create electromagnetic radiation which causes
abnormal degradation of performance of any electromagnetic receptor of
quality and proper design as defined by the principles and standards adopted
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, or the Electronic
Industries Association.  Furthermore, no use shall be carried out in any
zoning district so as to cause electromagnetic radiation which does not
comply with the Federal Communications Commission regulations, or which
causes objectionable electromagnetic interference with normal radio or
television reception in any zoning district.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 2.   Hazardous/Toxic Waste and Substances.



   A.   Fire Department Hazardous Material Disclosure Form.  Prior to
the issuance or renewal of a business tax receipt in the city, the operator
of any use that uses, handles, stores, displays, or generates hazardous
materials, hazardous waste, or a toxic substance, as the same are defined in
40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 261 or the Florida Substance List as set
forth in Rule 4A-62.004, Florida Administrative Code, and requires a permit
for same from a state or federal agency, or requires periodic reporting to a
state or federal agency, shall be required to file a Fire Department
Hazardous Material Disclosure Form in accordance with City Code of Ordinances
Part II, Chapter 9, Article VIII, Section 9-122.



   B.   Spill Containment System.  The operator of any such use shall
be required to design and construct, prior to occupancy, an appropriate
separate spill containment system to hold spilled hazardous materials for
cleanup, independent from the storm water drainage system, along with an
appropriate early warning monitoring program.  The containment system and
monitoring program shall be a type which is generally acceptable to the
Florida Department of Environmental Regulation and the South Florida Water
Management District, and shall serve all structures or areas where hazardous
materials are used, handled, stored, or displayed, or where hazardous wastes
are generated.



   C.   Depressed Truck Wells.  Depressed truck wells which are
utilized by users of hazardous materials and generators of hazardous waste
shall provide a drainage system which shall be designed and maintained to
include oil and grease receptors, and open bottom sedimentation pumps as
pollutant retardant structures.  Such systems shall be designed so as to
prevent pollutants from entering surface waters and groundwater.  Parking
areas and driveways adjacent to truck wells shall be designed to divert
runoff to storage and exfiltrations systems on-site, prior to discharge into
surface waters or storm sewers.



   D.   Hazardous Materials Response Plan.  Those using, storing,
displaying, or generating hazardous materials, hazardous waste, or toxic
substances shall develop hazardous materials response plans prior to the
operation of such uses, which shall require the approval of the Fire
Marshal.  This plan shall identify appropriate measures for contamination
response including, but not limited to:



      1.   Contamination Response.  Provision of equipment and
trained personnel on-site or a contract with a contamination response firm
meeting Florida Department of Environmental Regulation standards, where
appropriate;



      2.   Water Quality Monitoring.  Specification of follow-up
water quality monitoring programs to be implemented in the event of
contamination;



      3.   Containment.  Specification of design and operational
measures to contain and direct contaminated surface runoff away from lakes,
ponds, canals, drainage structures and/or other connections to the surficial
aquifer;



      4.   Early Warning Monitoring Program.  Specifications for
the development and implementation of an early warning monitoring program;



      5.   Cleanup Cost.  Proof of financial responsibility which
will assure that cleanup costs can be provided;



      6.   Permits.  A copy of the permit issued by or application
for permit to the governmental agency or agencies responsible for permitting
the handling, storage, display, or generation of the particular hazardous
materials,  hazardous wastes, or toxic substances.  Where only periodic
reports are required to be supplied to such agencies, copies of these reports
shall be provided to the Fire Marshal; and



      7.   Miscellaneous.  Where the information required under 1.
through 6. above is required as part of the information required for
permitting by or reporting to governmental agencies responsible for
regulating hazardous materials or hazardous wastes, this information shall be
considered sufficient for the purpose of this section.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Use Regulations.



   A.   General.  Except as otherwise provided in this article,
regulations governing the use of land and structures are hereby established
as shown in the following use matrix (Table 3-28).  The use matrix is
intended to classify uses on the basis of common functional characteristics
and land use compatibility.  The use matrix indicates eligible zoning
districts for the various uses based on the exact nature of the use, and
detailed requirements which specify permitted uses or any additional
application requirements, as well as additional standards (see "Notes and
Restrictions" of Section 3.E. below) that may be necessary to justify and
establish each use.



   B.   General Rules of Use Matrix.  The following general rules are
applicable to the use matrix:



      1.   Vacant Box.  Except for within the IPUD district and PID
district, a vacant box that contains no symbol signifies that the use
category is not allowed within the corresponding zoning district.



      2.   Business Activity.  All business activity and uses shall
be conducted within a fully enclosed building, unless otherwise specified.



      3.   Terms.  Whenever the word "district" is used, it is
construed to mean zoning district.



      4.   Column Headings in Title Block.



         a.   The major column headings in the title block of the
use matrix (i.e., residential, commercial, mixed use, industrial, and
miscellaneous) are further defined in Chapter 1, Article II, Definitions.



         b.   The regulations of each zoning district (e.g.,
R-1-AAB, R-1-AA, etc.) shown in the title block of the use matrix are
described in Chapter 3, Article III, Zoning Districts and Overlay Zones.



      5.   Fire Department Hazardous Material Disclosure.  Any use
which uses, handles, stores, displays, or generates hazardous materials,
hazardous waste, or a toxic substance, as defined by 40 Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 261 or the Florida Substance List as set forth in Rule
4A-62.004, Florida Administrative Code, shall require Fire Department
Hazardous Material Disclosure in accordance with City Code of Ordinances Part
II, Section 9-71.



      6.   Drive-Through Facilities.  Drive-up, drive-through, and
drive-in facilities require conditional use approval unless otherwise
specified.  The facility, including the stacking lanes, must not be visible
from public rights-of-way where located within the SMU district, MU-L1
district, MU-L2 district, and MU-L3 district.  Furthermore, these facilities
are prohibited in the MU-H and PID districts for all establishments listed
under the "commercial" and "public & civic" use groups.  See Chapter 4,
Article VI, Section 3.F. for additional standards regarding queuing and
vehicular stacking.



      7.   Distribution of Narcotics and Other Controlled Substances.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  These Regulations are in
connection with the mass effort to discourage the misuse and abuse of
narcotics and other controlled substances such as pain medications, and the
impacts upon land uses that are associated with businesses that would operate
principally to dispense pain medications for chronic pain but without the
services of typical medical offices that provide thorough on-site
examinations, medical treatments or procedures, and continued medical
oversight.  Such businesses have been determined to be associated with the
excessive use of, addictions to, and subsequent illegal sales/distribution of
addictive controlled substances.



         b.   Applicability.  This section applies to all
medical, professional and business offices, clinics, and any other use or
establishment that dispenses narcotics and other controlled substances. 
Such uses shall be subject to the following:



            (1)   On-site dispensing of controlled substances
that are identified in Schedule II, III, or IV in F.S. §§ 893.03, 893.035
or 893.036, is prohibited, unless otherwise expressly permitted by statutory
or general law.  The following are exempt from this prohibition:



               (a)   A health care practitioner when
administering a controlled substance directly to a patient if the amount of
the controlled substance is only intended to treat the patient during that
particular treatment session.



               (b)   A pharmacist or health care
practitioner when administering a controlled substance to a patient or
resident receiving care as a patient at a hospital, nursing home, ambulatory
surgical center, hospice, or intermediate care facility for the
developmentally disabled which is licensed in this state.



               (c)   A health care practitioner when
administering a controlled substance in the emergency room of a licensed
hospital.



               (d)   A health care practitioner when
administering or dispensing a controlled substance to a person under the age
of sixteen (16).



               (e)   A health care practitioner when
dispensing a one-time, seventy-two (72)-hour emergency resupply of a
controlled substance to a patient.



         c.   Enforcement.



            (1)   Law enforcement officers shall, in
connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the
provisions of this section and may issue citations, arrest and arrest with
warrant persons acting in violation of this section.



            (2)   Law enforcement officers shall have the
authority to seize, confiscate and impound any substance, or other article
which, upon probable cause, they find to be used or possessed in violation of
this section.



            (3)   The city may prosecute violations by
issuance of notices to appear for violation of a city ordinance, in which
case, the penalty for a violation shall be as follows:



               (a)   First violation - $100.00;



               (b)   Second violation within twelve (12)
months of adjudication of first violation - $500.00; and



               (c)   Third violation within eighteen (18)
months of adjudication of first violation - $1,000.00.



         Each calendar day on which a violation exists shall
constitute a separate violation for the purpose of determining the fine.



            (4)   A violation of this section may be
prosecuted as a nuisance.  The City Attorney may bring suit on behalf of the
city, or any affected citizen may bring suit in his/her name against the
person or persons causing or maintaining the violation, or against the
owner/agent of the building or property on which the violation exists. 
Relief may be granted according to the terms and conditions of Chapter 15,
Article 8 of the City of Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances and/or F.S. Chapter
60.



            (5)   Any person convicted of violating any of the
terms or provisions of this article or any code, requirements, or standards
adopted hereby shall be subject to the penalties as provided in Chapter 1,
Section 1-6 of the City of Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances.  In addition,
the city may use any equitable or legal remedy available at law to enforce
any violation of the terms or provisions of this section.



      8.   Prohibited Use of Public Parking Spaces.  Major and
minor motor vehicle or boat repair, including oil changes, adding of oil or
lubricants, and installation of new tires, is prohibited in public parking
lots or spaces, and commercial parking or loading areas and is declared to be
a public nuisance.  Commercial property owners engaged in the sale of motor
vehicle or boat parts, oils, or lubricants, shall post notices within their
premises in close proximity to check out counters or exit doors notifying
customers of this prohibition.  Violations of this provision of the code is
subject to enforcement through code enforcement action, nuisance abatement
action, municipal ordinance violation, or action for injunctive relief.  Law
enforcement officers are authorized to issue notice to appear for violation
of this section.



      9.   Essential Services and Infrastructure.  Essential
services and infrastructure as defined in Chapter 1, Article II are allowed
in all zoning districts, contingent upon meeting all city codes and
regulations.  Additional regulations and standards, such as landscaping or
other types of screening, may apply on a case-by-case basis as determined by
the Director of Planning and Zoning.



      10.   Miscellaneous.  It should be noted that each use
category may contain additional limitations or restrictions.  Please refer
to the definitions (see Chapter 1, Article II), the applicable zoning
district regulations in Chapter 3, Article III, and the supplemental
regulations in Chapter 3, Article V.



   C.   Use Matrix Legend.  Uses regulated herein are classified in
one (1) or more of the following categories:



      1.   "P" - Permitted Uses.  A permitted use is allowed by
right within a zoning district provided that all development regulations are
met.  A permitted use must be conducted on a site in order to have accessory
or ancillary uses on that site.  Uses identified with a "P" on the use
matrix are permitted by right in the district, subject to compliance with 1)
the additional standards indicated in the "Note" column, which directly
corresponds with Section 3.E. below; and 2) any other applicable requirements
prescribed by these Land Development Regulations.



      2.   "C" - Conditional Uses.  A use that because of special
requirements or characteristics may be allowed in a particular zoning
district but only with conditions as necessary to make the use compatible
with other uses permitted in the same zone or vicinity.  Uses identified
with a "C" on the use matrix are allowed in the zoning district, subject to
compliance with the following:  1) additional standards indicated in the
"Note" column, which directly corresponds with Section 3.E. below; 2)
standards for evaluating conditional uses in accordance with Section 4 below;
and 3) any other applicable requirements prescribed by these Land Development
Regulations.



      3.   "A" -    Accessory Uses.  A use that is customarily
incidental to the principal use.  Uses identified with an "A" on the use
matrix are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted principal use in the
district, subject to compliance with the following:  1) additional standards
indicated in the "Note" column, which directly corresponds with Section 3.E.
below; and 2) any other applicable requirements prescribed by these Land
Development Regulations.  The nature of the principal use will determine the
use review authority required to review and approve the accessory use. 
Accessory uses, unless otherwise provided, shall be located on the same
premises as the principal use.



      4.   "√" - IPUD District.  The following regulations are
applicable to the infill planned unit development district identified with a
"√" symbol on the use matrix:



         a.   Uses.  In the use matrix (Table 3-28),
non-residential uses of the "Commercial," "Office & Health Care," and "Arts,
Entertainment & Recreational" industry classifications are allowed in the
IPUD district, provided that such non-residential uses are proposed within a
mixed use development containing dwelling units, unless otherwise specified.



         b.   Location.  Non-residential uses shall only be
allowed for developments fronting on streets classified as "Arterial" on the
"Functional Classification of Roadways" map in the City of Boynton Beach
Comprehensive Plan.



         c.   Frontage.  Any non-residential use must front on
the arterial roadway or on an access wholly contained within the project with
neither entrances nor exit on or visible from or disruptive to adjacent
properties, streets, and rights-of-way.



         d.   Design.  Such development must be found compatible
with adjacent uses and established design characteristics.



   D.   Use Matrix (Table 3-28).



Editor's Note: To view a PDF version of the Use Matrix, please click HERE



 

P = Permitted
C = Conditional
A = Accessory
 

Residential

 

Commercial

 

Mixed-Use

 

Industrial

 
Misc


R-1-AAB
 
R-1-AA
 
R-1-A
 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
R-4
 
IPUD√
 
PUD
 
MHP
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
C-3
 
C-4
 
CBD
 
PCD
 
SMU
 
MU-L1
 
MU-L2
 
MU-L3
 
MU-4
 
MU-H
 
M-1
 
PID
 
PU
 
REC




RESIDENTIAL & LODGING


Accessory Dwelling Unit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 36
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 36
 
P 36
 
P 36
 
P 36
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 36
 
 
 
P 20 36
 
P 20 36


Bed & Breakfast
 
C 37
 
C 37
 
C 37
 
C 37
 
 
 
C 37
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 37
 
 
 
 
 
C 37
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Dwelling, Single- family (detached)
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 19 34
 
P
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 19 34
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 34
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 20 34
 
A 20 34


Dwelling, Two-family (duplex)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 34
 
P 19 34
 
P
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 19 34
 
P 34 38
 
 
 
C 34
 
P 34 38
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
 
 
C 34
 
 
 
 
 
A 20 34
 
A 20 34


Dwelling, Multi-family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 19 34
 
P
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 19 34
 
P 34 39
 
 
 
C 34
 
P 34 39
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 6 34
 
P 6 34
 
 
 
P 27 34
 
A 20 34
 
A 20 34


Dwelling Units in Mixed Use Buildings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 19 34
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 19 34
 
 
 
 
 
P 34
 
 
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 6 34
 
P 6 34
 
 
 
P 27 34
 
A 20 34
 
A 20 34


Group Home Type 1 (2 per room up to 10 residents, limited service)
 
P 40
 
P 40
 
P 40
 
P 40
 
P 40
 
P 40
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Group Home Type 2 (2 per room up to 14 residents, limited service)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 14 40
 
C  40
 
C  40
 
 
 
C  40
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Group Home Type 3 (comprehensive service)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 14 40
 
C 14 40
 
 
 
C 40
 
 
 
C 40
 
C 40
 
P 40
 
 
 
 
 
P 40
 
 
 
C 40
 
C 40
 
C 40
 
C 40
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Hotel & Motel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 41
 
P 41
 
P 41
 
P 41
 
C 41
 
C 41
 
C 41
 
C 41
 
P 41
 
P 41
 
 
 
P 41
 
 
 
 


Live-Work Units
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 42
 
P 42
 
P 42
 
P 42
 
P 42
 
P 42
 
 
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Manufactured Home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 34
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Townhouse
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 19 34
 
 
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 19 34
 
P 34
 
 
 
C 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
P 34
 
 
 
P 27 34
 
A 20 34
 
A 20 34


COMMERCIAL
Retail Sales


Art, Book, Craft, Hobby, Music, Sporting Goods, & Toys
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P 43
 
P
 
P 10 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
 
 
P 28 43
 
A 20
 
A 20


Auto Dealer, New
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 14 16 44
 
 
 
P 14 16 44
 
 
 
P  44
 
 
 
 


Auto Dealer, Used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 14 16 44
 
 
 
P 14 16 44
 
 
 
P  44
 
 
 
 


Automotive Parts Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
 
 
P 17
 
P 23
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Beer, Wine, & Liquor Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 35
 
 
 
P 35
 
P 35
 
P 17 35
 
P 17 35
 
P 17 35
 
P 17 35
 
P 17 35
 
P 17 35
 
 
 
P 15 27 35
 
 
 
 


Boat Dealer/Rental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 45
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 16 45
 
A 16 45
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Cleaning Supply Store (Swimming Pool, Janitorial)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
 
 
P 17
 
P 22
 
P 28
 
 
 
 


Clothing & Accessories
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 10 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
 
 
P 28 30
 
 
 
 


Convenience Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 2 3 8 35
 
 
 
 
 
P 2 3 35
 
P 3 35
 
P 3 35
 
P 7 35
 
P 35
 
P 17 35
 
P 17 35
 
P 17 35
 
P 17 35
 
P 1 11
 
P 17 35
 
P 22 35
 
P 15 27 35
 
 
 
 


Cosmetics, Beauty supply, & Perfume
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 10
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P
 
 
 
P 28 30
 
 
 
 


Electronics & Appliance Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 10
 
P 14
 
P 14
 
P 14
 
P 17
 
P
 
P 22
 
P 28 30
 
 
 
 


Florist
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
P 1 8
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 22
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Furniture & Home furnishing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 10 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 22
 
P 2 28 30
 
 
 
 


Gasoline Station
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 46
 
C 46
 
C 46
 
 
 
C 46
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 16 46
 
 
 
C 16 46
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Grocery Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P 10 17
 
C 17 47
 
P 17 47
 
P 17 47
 
P 17
 
P 17 47
 
 
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Hardware Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 2
 
P
 
P
 
P 48
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17 48
 
P 17 48
 
P 17 48
 
P 17 48
 
P 17 48
 
P 22
 
P 27 48
 
 
 
 


Health & Personal Care (Eyeglass, Medical Supplies, Hearing-Aids)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 68
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 22
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Home Improvement Center
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 10 16
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 16 27 49
 
 
 
 


Jewelry, Luggage, & Leather Goods
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
 
 
P 28
 
 
 
 


Marine Accessories
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1 50
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17 50
 
P 17 50
 
P 17 50
 
P 17 50
 
P 17 50
 
P 22
 
P 28
 
 
 
 


Merchandise, New (Supercenter, Discount, Department, Club)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 10 16
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 16 27 51
 
 
 
 


Merchandise, Used (Antique Shop)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 52
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P  1 52
 
P 52
 
P 52
 
P 52
 
P 52
 
P 17 52
 
P 17 52
 
P 17 52
 
P 17 52
 
P 17 52
 
P 17 52
 
 
 
P 27 52
 
 
 
 


Merchandise, Used (Other)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 53
 
P 53
 
 
 
P 53
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 15 27 53
 
 
 
 


Mobile Vending Unit (MVU)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
 
 
P 54
 
 
 
 


Multiple-Vendor Market
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 55
 
P 55
 
 
 
P 55
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 15 27 55
 
 
 
 


Novelty, Gift, Souvenir, & Miscellaneous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 1 11
 
P 17
 
 
 
P 27
 
A 20
 
A 20 21


Nursery, Garden Ctr. & Farm Supply
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 2 3 56
 
P 3 56
 
P 3 56
 
 
 
P 3 56
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 3 22 56
 
 
 
 
 
 


Office Supplies & Stationery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
 
 
P 28
 
 
 
 


Pet Store & Supplies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
 
 
P 28
 
 
 
 


Pharmacy & Drug Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1 57
 
P 2 57
 
P 57
 
P 57
 
P 57
 
P 57
 
P 17 57
 
P 17 57
 
P 17 57
 
P 17 57
 
P 17 57
 
P 17 57
 
 
 
P 15 27 57
 
 
 
 


Restaurant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 58
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 58
 
P 2 58
 
P 58
 
P 58
 
P 58
 
P 58
 
P 17 58
 
P 17 58
 
P 17 58
 
P 17 58
 
P 17 58
 
P 17 58
 
P 58
 
P 27 58
 
A 20 58
 
A 20 21 58


Restaurant, Take-out
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
P 2 8
 
 
 
 
 
P 2
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 59
 
P 28
 
A 20
 
A 20 21


Showroom warehouse (single-product line)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 100
 
 
 
 
 
P 100
 
P 100
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 100
 
 
 
 


Specialty Food Store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 2
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 2 11
 
P
 
 
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Tile and Carpet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
P 10 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
 
 
P 17
 
P 22
 
P 24 28
 
 
 
 


COMMERCIAL
Services


Auto Broker
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 


Auto/Car Wash (Polishing, Waxing, Detailing)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 60
 
C 60
 
C 60
 
 
 
C 60
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 60
 
 
 
 


Auto/Car Wash, Self- serve Bay
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Automobile Rental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 61
 
P 3 61
 
 
 
C 61
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 16 61
 
 
 
P 16 61
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Automotive, Minor Repair
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 62
 
C 62
 
P 3 62
 
 
 
C 62
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 3 62
 
A 62
 
 
 
 


Automotive, Major Repair
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 3 13 63
 
 
 
 
 
 


Automotive Window Tinting/Stereo Installation/Alarms
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 64
 
P 64
 
P 64
 
 
 
C 64
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 64
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Bar & Nightclub
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C 16
 
 
 
C 14 16
 
C 14 16
 
C 16
 
C 16
 
 
 
C 27
 
 
 
 


Caterer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 22
 
C
 
 
 
 


Check Cashing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 65
 
P 65
 
 
 
P 65
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Coin-operated Laundry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1 8
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Day & Trade Labor Pool (Temporary Help)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13
 
 
 
 
 
 


Dry Cleaner
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 2 8 66
 
 
 
 
 
P 2 66
 
P 66
 
P 66
 
P 66
 
P 66
 
P 66
 
P 66
 
P 66
 
P 66
 
P 66
 
P 66
 
P 22 66
 
P 27 66
 
 
 
 


Fortune Teller, Palm Reader, or Psychic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 22
 
 
 
 
 
 


Funeral Home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
P 3
 
P 3
 
 
 
P 3
 
 
 
C 16
 
C 16
 
C 16
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 3 67
 
 


Interior Decorator Studio
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 11
 
P 11
 
P 11
 
P 11
 
P 11
 
P 11
 
P 22
 
P
 
 
 
 


Landscaping Debris Stockpiling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 103
 
 
 
 
 
 


Locksmith
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 22
 
P
 
 
 
 


Mobile Vending Unit (MVU)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 54
 
 
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54
 
P 54


Personal Care (Beauty, Hair, Nails)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 68
 
 
 
 
 
P 8 68
 
 
 
 
 
P 1 68
 
P 68
 
P 68
 
P 68
 
P 68
 
P 17 68
 
P 17 68
 
P 17 68
 
P 17 68
 
P 17 68
 
P 17 68
 
P 22 68
 
P 27 68
 
 
 
 


Pet Care (Boarding and Daycare)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 69
 
C 69
 
C 69
 
C 69
 
C 69
 
C 16 69
 
C 16 69
 
C 16 69
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 3 22 69
 
C 27 69
 
 
 
 


Pet Care (Grooming)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 22
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Pet Care (Veterinary Services)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 22
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Photography Studio
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 18
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 22
 
P 27
 
A 20
 
A 20


Postal/Mail Center
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 70
 
P 1 70
 
P 70
 
P 70
 
P 70
 
P 70
 
P 16 70
 
P 16 70
 
P 16 70
 
P 16 70
 
P 16 70
 
P 16 70
 
P 22 70
 
P 28 70
 
 
 
 


Repair/Maintenance, Personal and Household Goods
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1 8
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
 
 
P 17
 
P 22
 
P
 
 
 
 


Repair, Rental, & Maint of Home/Garden Tools
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 71
 
P
 
 
 
P 71
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 12
 
 
 
 
 
 


Repair, Rental, & Maint of Office, Home Equip
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 10 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
 
 
P 17
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 


Travel Agency
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P 1 19
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 22
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Tuxedo, Formal Wear, Costume Rental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
 
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Videos, Games & DVD Rental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 14
 
P 14
 
P 14
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


OFFICE & HEALTH CARE


Bank and Financial Office
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
 
 
P 27 31
 
 
 
 


Business or Professional Office
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 19
 
 
 
 
 
P 8
 
 
 
P
 
P 18 19
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 73
 
P 73
 
P 73
 
P 73
 
P 73
 
P 73
 
P 22
 
P 28 31
 
 
 
 


Call Center
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 5
 
P
 
P 5
 
P 5
 
P 5
 
P 5
 
P 5
 
P 5
 
P 13
 
C 29
 
 
 
 


Copying, Printing, and Sign Design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 2
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 22
 
P
 
 
 
 


Counseling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 22
 
P 27 31
 
 
 
 


Diet/Nutrition Center
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 17
 
P 22
 
P 27 31
 
 
 
 


Hospital
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 72
 
 


Information and Data Processing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 29
 
 
 
 


Investigative Service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 8
 
 
 
P
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 22
 
P 27 31
 
 
 
 


Manufacturer Representative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 24 28 31
 
 
 
 


Medical Care or Testing (In-patient)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 14 101 102
 
P 14 101 102
 
P 14 101 102
 
 
 
 
 
P 14 101 102
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Medical or Dental Imaging/Testing/ Support Services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 22
 
P 24 27 31
 
 
 
 


Medical or Dental Laboratory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13
 
P 29
 
 
 
 


Medical or Dental Office (Out-patient)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 22
 
P 27 31
 
 
 
 


Real Estate Business
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 18 19
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
 
 
P 27 31
 
 
 
 


Social Service Agency
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 74
 
C 74
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Temporary Employment Agency
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
P 16
 
 
 
P 27 31
 
 
 
 


ARTS, ENTERTAINMENT & RECREATIONAL


Adult Entertainment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 75
 
C 75
 
 
 
C 75
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13 75
 
P 75
 
 
 
 


Artist Studio
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
P 76
 
P 76
 
P 76
 
P 76
 
P 76
 
P 76
 
P 76
 
P 76
 
P 76
 
P 76
 
P
 
P
 
A 20
 
A 20


Arts Campus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
P 18


Entertainment, Indoor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1 77
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 11
 
P 11 14
 
P 11 14
 
P 11 14
 
P 11
 
P 11
 
P 22 77
 
P 27
 
 
 
A 21


Entertainment, Outdoor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 78
 
 
 
 
 
C 78
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Gym, Fitness & Health Club
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 10 11
 
P 11 14
 
P 11 14
 
P 11 14
 
P 11
 
P 11
 
 
 
P 27
 
 
 
 


Indoor Athletic Instruction/Training
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
P 14
 
P 14
 
P 14
 
P 1
 
P 1
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 


Marina, (including Yacht Club)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 79
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 79
 
 
 
 
 
P 11 79
 
P 11 79
 
P 11 79
 
P 11 79
 
P 11 79
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Museum
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 18


Rentals, Recreational (bicycles, canoes, personal watercraft)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 11
 
P 11 14 80
 
P 11 14 80
 
P 11 14 80
 
P 11
 
P 11
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 21


Shooting Range, Indoor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 4 29
 
 
 
 


Sightseeing & Scenic Tours
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 81
 
P 81
 
P 81
 
P 81
 
P 81
 
P 81
 
P 11 81
 
P 11 81
 
P 11 81
 
P 11 81
 
P 11 81
 
P 11 81
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Theater
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 82
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18 82
 
P 82
 
P 82
 
P 82
 
P 82
 
P 11 82
 
P 11 14 82
 
P 11 14 82
 
P 11 14 82
 
P 11 82
 
P 11 82
 
 
 
 
 
P 20 82
 
P 18 82


PUBLIC & CIVIC USES


Cemetery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 3 83
 
A 3 83
 
A 3 83
 
A 3 83
 
 
 
A 3 83
 
 
 
A 3 83
 
A 3 83
 
A 3 83
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 


Church
 
C 33 84
 
C 33 84
 
C 33 84
 
C 33 84
 
C 84
 
C 84
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 15
 
P 15
 
P 15
 
P 15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Civic & Fraternal Club/ Organization
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 3
 
P 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 15
 
C 14 15
 
C 14 15
 
C 14 15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Government, Municipal Office/ Emergency/ Civic Facilities
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
 
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
 
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 85
 
P 25
 
P
 
P


Government, Municipal Utility/ Support Facilities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 


Government, Non- Municipal Office Facilities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1
 
P 1
 
P 1 5
 
P 1
 
P 1 5
 
P 1 5
 
P 5 86
 
P 86
 
P 86
 
P 5 86
 
P 5 86
 
P 5 86
 
P 86
 
P 24 25 28 31 86
 
P
 
 


Government, Non- Municipal Utility/ Support Facilities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 


Government, Post Office
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 


EDUCATIONAL


College, Seminary, University
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
P 15
 
P 15
 
P 15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 


Day Care
 
C 33 87
 
C 33 87
 
C 33 87
 
C 33 87
 
C 87
 
C 87
 
 
 
 
 
P 8 87
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C 87
 
P 11
 
P 11 14
 
P 11 14
 
P 11 14
 
P 11
 
P 11
 
P 22
 
 
 
 
 
 


School, Industrial & Trade
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 22
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


School, Primary and Secondary
 
C 33
 
C 33
 
C 33
 
C 33
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 25
 
P
 
 


School, Professional & Technical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 18
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 15
 
P 15
 
P 15
 
P 15
 
 
 
P 15
 
 
 
P 24 27 31
 
 
 
 


Tutoring and Testing Centers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
C
 
P
 
P 11
 
P 11
 
P 11
 
P 11
 
C 11
 
C 11
 
P 22
 
P 24 27 31
 
 
 
 


INDUSTRIAL
Manufacturing, Fabrication & Processing


Bakery, Commercial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 9
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Beverage Mfg
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 9
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Converted Paper Product Processing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Dairy Products Mfg
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 9
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Electrical Equipment, Appliance & Component Assembly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Food Processing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 9
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Footwear & Other Leather Products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Frozen Food
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 9
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Furniture Products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Glass Products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Ice Cream & Frozen Dessert
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 9
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Jewelry Mfg
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Medical Equipment & Supplies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Metal, Fabricated Products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Motor Vehicle Seating & Interior Trim
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Ornamental, China, Fine Earthenware, & Pottery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Paint, Coating & Adhesive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Pharmaceutical & Medicine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Plastic Products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Rubber Products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Soap & Toiletry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Sporting Goods and Toys
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Stone cutting & finishing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23 88
 
P 26 88
 
 
 
 


Textile Products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Wood Products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


INDUSTRIAL
Storage, Distribution & Wholesale Trade


Packing & Shipping, Trucking, and Moving
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13
 
P 29
 
 
 
 


Storage, Boats/ Motor/Recreational Vehicles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 89
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 89
 
A 89
 
 
 
A 89
 
P 13 89
 
 
 
 
 
 


Storage, Self-Service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 5 11 90
 
C 5 11 90
 
C 5 11 90
 
C 5 11 90
 
 
 
 
 
P 90
 
 
 
 
 
 


Warehouse, Internet Sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Warehousing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 12
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Wholesale Trade
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 12
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


INDUSTRIAL
Services


Boat Repair
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P  13 91
 
 
 
 
 
 


Carpet and Upholstery Cleaning Services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 92
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 22
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Contractor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 93
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23 93
 
C 29 93
 
 
 
 


Dry Cleaning Plant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Exterminating and Pest Control
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 3 13
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Glass and Mirror
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Janitorial and General Cleaning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Lawn Maintenance & Landscaping Service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 94
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13 94
 
 
 
 
 
 


Publishing & Commercial Printing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 23
 
P 26
 
 
 
 


Radio & TV Broadcasting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 95
 
P 95
 
P 95
 
P 95
 
P 95
 
P 95
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 95
 
P 29 95
 
 
 
 


Recording Studio
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P 29
 
 
 
 


Rental/Leasin g, Industrial & Commercial Equipment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13 32
 
 
 
 
 
 


Repair/Maint enance, Industrial & Commercial Equipment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13 32
 
 
 
 
 
 


Research & Development, Scientific/ Technological
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 96
 
P 29 96
 
 
 
 


Security Services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13
 
P 29
 
 
 
 


Sewer/Septic & Waste Mgmt Cleaning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 3 13 97
 
C 4 26 97
 
 
 
 


Taxi, Limo, Charter Bus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 1 98
 
P 98
 
P 98
 
C 98
 
P 98
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 3 13 98
 
 
 
 
 
 


Testing Laboratory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 13
 
C 26
 
 
 
 


Towing, Motor Vehicle
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P 3 13
 
 
 
 
 
 


AGRICULTURAL


Community Garden
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
 
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
P 99
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



   1.   General Note.  Gross floor area shall not exceed five thousand
(5,000) square feet.



   2.   General Note.  The gross floor area shall not exceed ten
thousand (10,000) square feet.



   3.   General Note.  Conditional use approval shall be required if
located within one hundred (100) feet from a residential zoning district or
mixed use zoning district.



   4.   General Note.  As a principal or accessory use, it is allowed
if there is a minimum separation of three hundred (300) feet between such use
and a residential zoning district.  The distance shall be measured in a
straight line from the property line of the subject use to the property line
of the residential zoning district.



   5.   General Note.  This use shall be prohibited on the first floor.



   6.   General Note.  For those projects with frontage on an arterial
road, this use is allowed as a permitted use if the ground floor fronting the
arterial is devoted to office or retail use; otherwise, conditional use
approval shall be required.



   7.   General Note.  Shall exclude drive-through facilities.



   8.   General Note.  Non-residential uses located in a PUD must
serve the needs of the PUD and not the general needs of a surrounding area.
Areas designated for commercial activities shall not generally front on
exterior or perimeter streets, and shall be located centrally within the
project. The only exception to these rules is when a residential mixed-use
project would promote new urbanism design standards and helps to further
sustainable initiatives.  Such developments shall also be designed to
further any applicable recommendations within the corresponding redevelopment
plan.



   9.   General Note.



         a.   All districts.  The maximum size of a tasting room
shall be less than 50% of the gross floor area for that establishment.  No
use shall be carried out so as to allow the emission of objectionable or
offensive odors or fumes in such concentration as to be readily perceptible
at any point at or beyond the boundary of the zoning district.  See Chapter
4, Article V, Section 2.E for additional regulations pertaining to off-street
parking requirements for tasting rooms.



         b.   C-4 district. If proposed on a site that fronts on
an arterial or collector roadway, the establishment shall be required to have
an accessory commercial component (i.e., tasting room or retail showroom) to
the operation. The size of the tasting room/retail showroom shall be at least
ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area or one thousand (1,000) square
feet, whichever is greater. This minimum size requirement is not applicable
to those establishments which do not front on an arterial or collector
roadway. See subparagraph d. below for additional provisions pertaining to
beverage manufacturing establishments.



         c.   M-1 District.



            (1)   An accessory commercial component (i.e.,
tasting room or retail showroom) shall be required for any establishment
located on an arterial roadway. In all other instances, an accessory
commercial component is optional.



            (2)   No drive-up, drive-through, or drive-in
facilities shall be allowed.



            (3)   See subparagraph d. below for additional
provisions pertaining to beverage manufacturing establishments.



         d.   Beverage Manufacturing.



            (1)   A tasting room, retail showroom, and/or
facility tours shall not be open to the public after 10:00 p.m., except
Fridays and Saturdays, whereby it may remain open until 11:00 p.m.



            (2)   This type of establishment may be eligible
for a live entertainment permit; however, no amplified music shall be allowed.



            (3)   No permanent food preparation is allowed on
premises.



   10.   General Note.  Buildings greater than eighty thousand
(80,000) square feet shall require conditional use approval.  Maximum
footprint is one hundred twenty-four thousand (124,000) square feet. Building
elevations shall be enhanced with appropriate design elements to break up
wall expanses (i.e. articulation, windows, columns, varied rooflines, etc.).



   11.   General Note.  This use shall be integrated into a mixed use
building or development.



   12.   General Note.  This use is allowed, but it shall not be
located on a lot that fronts on an arterial roadway.



   13.   General Note.  This use is allowed, but it shall not be
located on a lot that fronts on an arterial or collector roadway.



   14.   General Note.  The subject use is only allowed on a lot that
fronts on an arterial or collector street as defined in Part III, Chapter 1,
Article II of the LDR under definitions for "Street-Arterial" and
"Street-Collector". Except for uses providing Medical Care or Testing
(In-patient) shall be limited to lots that front on an arterial roadway.



   15.   General Note. This use shall be integrated into a mixed-use
building or development.  It must not 1) occupy more than fifty percent
(50%) of the gross floor area of any given building; and 2) exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the mixed use development.



   16.   General Note. This use shall be integrated into a mixed-use
building or development.  It must not 1) occupy more than fifty percent
(50%) of the gross floor area of any given building or 2) exceed thirty
percent (30%) of the gross floor area of the mixed use development.



   17.   General Note.



      a.   All Mixed-Use Districts.  This use shall be integrated
into a mixed-use building or development. It must not 1) occupy more than
fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of any given building or 2)
exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross floor area of the mixed use
development.



      b.   MU-1 district, MU-2 district, MU-3 and MU-4 district. The
subject use is only allowed on lots fronting on arterial or collector
roadways.



   18.   Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone.



      a.   This use is allowed in this zoning district only when
proposed on a lot located within the Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone (OAOZ).



      b.   Any proposed non-residential use that would abut a side
property line of a residential use located on Northeast 1st Avenue or
Southeast 1st Avenue requires conditional use approval.



      c.   Any allowable use is considered permitted by right,
provided that it is proposed on property with frontage on Ocean Avenue;
otherwise conditional use approval shall be required. Additionally, no
existing uses shall be deemed non-conforming.



      d.   Professional and technical schools allowed in the OAOZ
are limited to those that teach the culinary and visual arts.



   19.   General Note. This use shall be prohibited on the ground level
of buildings located on lots that front on Ocean Avenue located within the
Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone.



   20.   General Note. This use is allowed as an accessory use to any
lawful Arts Campus located within the Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone.



   21.   General Note. This use is allowed as an accessory use to any
city-owned and operated park facility.



   22.   General Note. This non-industrial use is allowed within the
M-1 district, provided that it 1) is located within a multiple-tenant
development on a lot that fronts on an arterial roadway; 2) does not exceed
five thousand (5,000) square feet; 3) excludes a drive-up, drive-through, or
drive-in facility; and 4) complies with all off-street parking requirements
of Chapter 4, Article V.  In addition, the sale of used merchandise is only
allowed as accessory to the sale of new merchandise.



   23.   General Note. This use is allowed on an arterial or collector
roadway within the M-1 district provided that it has accessory commercial
component to the operation.  This establishment will be required to meet the
following criteria:



      a.   Location.  The accessory commercial component shall be
located within a building situated on a lot that fronts on an arterial or
collector roadway; and



      b.   Interior.  An indoor showroom of at least two hundred
fifty (250) square feet for retail sales shall be required for establishments
twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or less.  An indoor showroom area
of at least one percent (1%) of the gross floor area shall be required for
establishments greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.



   24.   General Note. This non-industrial use is allowed within the
PID district provided it is located on a lot that has a Commercial (C) land
use option.



   25.   General Note. This non-industrial use is allowed within the
PID district provided it is located on a lot that has a Governmental &
Institutional (G&I) land use option.



   26.   General Note. This use is allowed within the PID, except that
if proposed in Quantum Park, it shall be restricted to a lot that has an
Industrial (I) land use option.



   27.   General Note. This non-industrial use is allowed within the
PID district provided it is located on a lot that has a Mixed Use (MU) land
use option fronting on an arterial roadway or on a MU lot with a development
order that is not solely for residential development.



   28.   General Note. This non-industrial use is allowed within the
PID district provided it is located 1) on Lot 3B of the Boynton Commerce
Center PID; or 2) on a lot with a Mixed Use (MU) land use option fronting on
an arterial roadway or on a MU lot with a development order that is not
solely for residential development.



   29.   General Note. This use is allowed within the PID, except on
lots that have either a Governmental & Institutional (G&I) or Mixed Use (MU)
land use option.



   30.   General Note. If proposed on Lot 3B of the Boynton Commerce
Center PID, it shall be required to have an on-site manufacturing component
to the operation.



   31.   General Note. This non-industrial use is allowed within the
PID district provided it is located on a lot that has an Office (O) land use
option. No drive-through facility shall be allowed in connection with this
use.



   32.   General Note.



      a.    Landscaping. All exterior (temporary) storage of
equipment shall be adequately screened. Additional buffering may be required
as recommended by the Director of Planning & Zoning to ensure compatibility.



      b.   M-1 district. Outdoor storage of equipment shall require
conditional use approval if located within two hundred (200) feet of a
residential zoning district.  No exterior storage of equipment in a wrecked
condition shall be permitted.



   33.   Non-Residential Uses in Single-Family Residential Districts.
The following applies to facilities to be located within zoning districts
limited to single-family homes (R-1-AAB district, R-1-AA district, R-1-A
district, and R-1 district):



      a.   Location. Along the following roadway types as designated
in the City of Boynton Beach Comprehensive Plan: arterials and collectors.



      b.   Minimum Lot size.  One (1) acre for all non-residential
uses, except for day care establishments, which shall be regulated in
accordance with Section 3.D.87 below.



      c.   Frontage.  Except for day care establishments, a minimum
frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet for all non-residential uses.



      d.   Landscaping. A minimum buffer width of five (5) feet and
a landscaping barrier shall be required for all parking and vehicle use
areas, and outdoor recreation areas that abut single-family residential
zoning districts.



      e.   Design. Building design shall be consistent with
surrounding residential styles.



      f.   Separation.  Distances between residential properties
and outdoor play areas shall be maximized.



   34.   Home Occupation.



      a.   Home occupations shall be permitted subject to these
specific regulations designed for the protection of residential
neighborhoods, where all of the activity takes place within a structure, and
where the principal use is for residential purposes. In order for any home
occupation to be permitted or continue to be permitted, the following
performance standards shall be agreed to in writing by the applicant and be
maintained for the duration of the occupational license:



         (1)   Compatibility. The residential character and
integrity of the neighborhood must not be disturbed and the occupational
activity at the home shall not be noticeable from off the premises.



         (2)   Size.  A home occupation shall only be conducted
within twenty percent (20%) of the living area of the dwelling including
interior halls, closets and storage areas, but excluding garages, screened
porches, accessory buildings or any similar space not suited or intended as
living quarters.



         (3)   On-site Restrictions.  The home occupation shall
be conducted at the licensed address only by residents of that dwelling unit
and shall only be the type of occupation which does not involve client
business visits to the home, and is typified by business transactions
conducted by telephone, mail, or off premises of the licensed address. (The
giving of individual instruction to one (1) person at a time, such as an art
or piano teacher, shall be deemed a home occupation).



         (4)   Performance Standards. No equipment or process
shall be used in a home occupation which creates fumes, glare, noise, odors,
vibration, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the
lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside
the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family  residence. 
In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used
which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
receivers off the premises.



         (5)   Traffic. No traffic shall be generated by a home
occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a
residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct
of a home occupation shall be met by off-street parking which complies with
Chapter 4, Article VI.



         (6)   Storage. All storage of materials or supplies used
in the home occupation shall be done within the living area of the dwelling
unit, within the space limitations specified in subsection 2 above and shall
not be visible from adjacent residential units. Contractors, tradespersons
and the like shall not use their home garage or yard areas for storage of
materials and supplies used in business activities.



         (7)   Signage.  No sign or display shall be visible
other than a non-illuminated sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area,
placed on the exterior wall of the residence as close as practical to the
front entrance.



         (8)   Parking. A panel, pick-up truck, van, or similar
type of truck, not to exceed a one (1) ton chassis configuration, may be
parked in a residential zoning district. However, such vehicle must be used
by a resident of the premises, and no more than one (1) such truck shall be
located on each plot.



         (9)   Miscellaneous.  A home occupation shall be
subject to all business tax provisions defined in Part II of the City Code of
Ordinances.



   35.   Alcoholic Beverages. Subject to the provisions of City Code of
Ordinances, Part II, Chapter 3, Alcoholic Beverages.



   36.   Accessory Dwelling Unit.



      a.   All districts. An accessory dwelling unit is allowed as
an accessory use to any lawful non-residential principal use within a
non-residential building. Such unit shall have a minimum living area of seven
hundred fifty (750) square feet and limited to occupancy by the property
owner or business owner/operator.



      b.   M-1 district. This use is allowed as an accessory to any
lawful self-service storage facility and which meets the prerequisites
contained therein.



   37.   Bed & Breakfast.



      a.   Generally. A bed & breakfast is a private owner occupied
residence having more than three (3) and less than ten (10) guest units,
which are subordinate and incidental to the main residential use of the
building. Prior to the establishment and operation of a bed & breakfast, all
required business licenses and health permits shall be obtained in compliance
with all building, sign, sanitary and fire codes. Prior to the issuance of a
business tax certificate, which shall be renewed annually, the city shall
conduct an inspection of the property to determine compliance with the
current requirements of the city's regulations, state building codes, and
conditions of approval.



      b.   Interior.



         (1)   Common Area.  Within each bed & breakfast
establishment, a common area must be provided for a central dining area and
for at least one (1) sitting/reading/discussion room.



         (2)   Number of Rooms. The number of bedrooms and
bathrooms are to remain unchanged unless modifications are necessary to
comply with building, fire, and/or health codes.



      c.   Miscellaneous.



         (1)   Cooking.  Except as hereinafter provided, there
shall be no cooking facilities or food storage in any guest unit. Breakfast
shall be the only meal provided for paying overnight guests. The breakfast
meal shall not be served after 11:00 a.m.



         (2)   Maximum Stay. The maximum stay for each guest
shall be fourteen (14) consecutive days and not more than fourteen (14) days
during any forty-five (45) day period. The owner and/or manager shall
maintain a guest book, which accurately identifies all guests for each
night's lodging. This register of guests shall be available for city
inspection during reasonable business hours. Check-in and check-out shall
take place between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. only.



         (3)   Owner.  The owner of the bed & breakfast
establishment must reside on the premises.



         (4)   Commercial.  Commercial social activities and
events and the sale of merchandise to non-guests are prohibited in the bed &
breakfast establishment.



         (5)   Kitchenettes. Existing kitchenettes within one (1)
or more guest units are considered within the scope of this section and will
not have to be removed.



   38.   Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex).



      a.   C-3 district and PCD district.  A two-family dwelling
(duplex)  shall  comply  with  the  R-2 district regulations. See
Chapter 3, Article III, Section 2.E.



   39.   Dwelling, Multi-Family.



      a.   C-3 district and PCD district.  A multi-family dwelling
shall comply with the R-3 district regulations. See Chapter 3, Article III,
Section 2.F.



   40.   Group Home.



      a.   Group Home Type 1. Maximum persons per unit. Two (2)
persons per bedroom, not to exceed 10 persons including a resident caretaker
or overseer.



      b.   Group Homes Type 1 and 2.



         (1)   Common Area. At least ten percent (10%) of the
total floor area shall be devoted to a common area, exclusive of halls,
corridors, stairs, and elevator shafts, wherein a variety of recreational or
therapeutic activities may occur.



         (2)   Rooms. Residents’ rooms or suites shall, in no
case, have kitchen facilities available for the preparation of food.



         (3)   Design. Pursuant to Chapter 4, Article III,
Section 3.G.1, the appearance of a group home shall be residential in
character and similar in appearance to the surrounding neighborhood.



         (4)   Parking. See Chapter 4, Article V for application
parking requirements.



      c.   Group Home Type 2.



         (1)   Two (2) persons per bedroom, not to exceed 14
persons including a resident caretaker or overseer.



         (2)   Conditional use approval is not required within a
Planning Unit Development (PUD) if approved on the master plan or modified
master plan.



      d.   Group Home Type 3.



         (1)   PUD or Mixed Use Zoning District. Conditional use
approval is not required within a planned development zoning district (i.e.
PUD or MU Zoning District) if approved on the master plan or modified master
plan.



         (2)   MU-1, MU-2, MU-3 and MU-4. Projects require a
minimum of 60% of the dwelling units to be for independent living with full
kitchen and bath facilities, and not require licensing by the State of
Florida Department of Health.



   41.   Hotel & Motel (includes Boutique, Extended-stay, Apartment,
Timeshare Apartment).



      a.   C-3 District.  Timeshare hotel shall comply with R-3
district regulations.  Boutique hotels are not listed as permitted uses.



      b.   C-4 District.  Boutique hotels and timeshare hotels are
not listed as permitted uses.



      c.   CBD District.  Apartment hotels require conditional use
approval.



      d.   PCD District.  Timeshare apartments shall comply with
R-3 district regulations.  Boutique hotels are not listed as permitted uses.



      e.   SMU District.  Hotels require conditional use
approval.  Apartment hotels, boutique hotels, and timeshare apartments are
not listed as permitted uses.  Motels are prohibited uses.



      f.   MU-1 District, MU-2 District, MU-3 District and MU-4
District.  Timeshare hotels are not listed as permitted uses.  Boutique
hotels and motels are prohibited uses.



      g.   MU-4 District and MU-C District.  Boutique hotels
require conditional use approval and must be integrated into a commercial or
mixed use development and not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross floor
area of the entire development.  Apartment hotels and timeshare apartments
are not listed as permitted uses.  Motels are prohibited uses.



      h.   PID district. This non-industrial use is allowed within
the PID district provided it is located on a lot that has a Hotel (H) land
use option.



   42.   Live-Work Units.



      a.   SMU District.  This subsection provides for the use of
residential structures to accommodate live/work opportunities.  Live-work
units shall be specifically designated on the site plan, and comply with the
following standards and requirements.  These provisions are not applicable
to dwellings or occupations that meet the definition of home occupation. 
All respective site plan pages shall identify all proposed live-work units
and buildings.  Live-work units shall be tallied in the site plan tabular
data.



         (1)   Location.  To minimize impacts to the greater
neighborhood, units planned for live-work units shall be located at the
perimeter of the residential project or along the project's principal
roadway, and/or where possible, adjacent to perimeter/external rights-of-way.



         (2)   Use(s):  Non-residential uses that are permitted
in live-work units are generally limited to professional service, business
service, or tutoring services.  A listing of common uses permissible in
live-work units, subject to issuance of occupational license are located in
subsection (16) below.  No work activity shall be permitted that by virtue
of intensity or number of employees has the potential to create impacts by
reason of traffic, parking issues, hazardous materials, or excess waste. 
The following list identifies the permitted uses within designated live-work
units, subject to processing through the city’s business tax office:



      Addressing service/mailing list compiler



      Arbitrator, mediator services



      Cleaning services, maid, housekeeping, janitorial



      Commercial artist/design studio



      Commercial photography



      Computer programming service



      Computer software development



      Data processing



      Direct mail advertising services



      Editing, proofreading, typing service



      Paralegal



      Party supplies, rental/leasing (office only, no storage on-site)



      Private investigator



      Recording service



      Secretarial service



      Boat broker (office only)



      Alteration, dressmaking shop, tailor



      Abstract and/or title company



      Accountant/income tax services



      Adjusters, insurance



      Advertising office



      Appraiser



      Architect



      Attorney



      Auctioneer (office only)



      Author



      Broker



      Business analyst



      Calculating and statistical service



      Court reporting/stenographers



      Credit reporting



      Engineer’s office



      Importer/exporter (office only)



      Insurance agency/bond office



      Interior decorating



      Loan company office



      Market research office



      Model agency



      Notary public office



      Public relations office



      Real estate sales/management office



      Travel agency



      Tutoring or instruction (academics, music, art)



      Art studio with ancillary sales



         (3)   Floor Area.  The minimum floor area of a
live-work unit shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet.  No more than
seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of the live-work unit shall be reserved
for living space, including kitchen, bathroom, sleeping, and storage areas. 
The remaining gross floor area of each unit shall be reserved and regularly
used for sleeping space.



         (4)   Construction.  Each live-work unit shall be a
separate unit from other uses in the building.  The ground floor of all
live-work units shall meet the Florida Building Code requirements for mixed
occupancy buildings.  Each unit, including the garage, shall be separated by
walls from other live-work units or other uses in the building.



         (5)   Accessibility.  Buildings designated as live-work
units shall provide universal accessibility to the front and to the interior
space of the non-residential area of the live-work unit from the public
sidewalk adjacent to the street.



         (6)   Miscellaneous.  No more than two (2) on-site
employees, in addition to the resident(s) of the live-work unit, may
undertake business activities from said unit.  At least one (1) resident of
an individual live-work unit shall maintain a current occupational license
for a business located in that unit.  Acknowledgment, in the form of an
affidavit, of the employee limitation shall be made by the unit resident, at
the time of application for an occupational license.  The work area shall
not be rented separately from the living space.



      b.   MU-1 District, MU-2 District, MU-3 District, MU-4
District and MU-C District.  The following restrictions apply to projects
within zoning districts that contain master plans approved for live-work
units:



         (1)   Floor Area.  The minimum floor area of a
live-work unit shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet.  No more than
seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of the live-work unit shall be reserved
for living space, including kitchen, bathroom, sleeping, and storage areas. 
The remaining gross floor area of each unit shall be reserved and regularly
used for sleeping space.



         (2)   Use(s).  The work activity in a building where
live-work units are allowed shall be any use permitted by right in the zoning
district, except that in order to protect the health and safety of persons
who reside in a live-work unit, no work activity shall be permitted that by
virtue of size, intensity, number of employees or the nature of the
operation, has the potential to create significant impacts by reason of dust,
glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration or other
impacts, or would be hazardous by way of materials, process, product or
wastes.



         (3)   Construction.  Each live-work unit shall be a
separate unit from other uses in the building.



         (4)   Accessibility.  Access to each live-work unit
shall be provided from common access areas, common halls or corridors, or
directly from the exterior of the building.



         (5)   Separation.  Each live-work unit shall be a
separate unit from other uses in the building.  Access to each live-work
unit shall be provided from common access areas, common halls, or corridors,
or directly from the exterior of the building.



         (6)   Miscellaneous.  At least one (1) resident of an
individual live-work unit shall maintain a current business tax receipt for a
business located in that unit.  No portion of a live-work unit may be
separately rented or sold as a commercial space for a person or persons not
living in the premises or as a residential space for a person not working in
the same unit.  No live-work unit shall singly be changed to exclusively
commercial or exclusively residential use.  No conversion of all live-work
units in a single structure to exclusively residential use shall be permitted
where the work portion of the units is the only commercial use in a project,
nor shall conversion to exclusively commercial use be permitted where the
live portion of the units is the only residential use in a project.



   43.   Art, Book, Craft, Hobby, Music, Sporting Good, & Toy Store.



      a.   CBD District.  Bait and tackle shops are permitted as an
accessory use to marinas, including yacht clubs.



      b.   PID district. This use is also allowed as an accessory
use to an artist studio.



   44.   Auto Dealer, (New & Used).



      a.   C-4 district. Allowed only as a conditional use accessory
to the repair or customizing of motor vehicles. No outdoor storage of
vehicles for sale shall be permitted.



      b.   MU-L3 district and MU-H district.



         (1)   General.  Indoor storage/display only and shall
not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet.  This use excludes automotive,
minor repair, and auto car/wash. Conditional use approval shall be required
if all or a portion of the inventory is located within a parking
garage/structure.



         (2)   Access.  Shall not be directly from any major
roadway.



         (3)   Storage.  No outside storage of materials, parts,
and vehicles.



         (4)   Design.  Pursuant to Chapter 4, Article III,
Section 3.A.7, overhead doors shall not be visible from any major roadway
frontage.



         (5)   Loudspeakers. No exterior loudspeakers or paging
equipment shall be permitted on-site.



      c.   M-1 district. Allowed only as a conditional use accessory
to the repair, manufacturing, assembling or customizing of motor vehicles. No
outdoor storage of vehicles for sale shall be permitted.



      d.   PID district. This non-industrial use is allowed within
the PID district as a conditional use. Also, within the Quantum Park PID such
uses are limited to lots with an Industrial (I) use option or Industrial/R
(with retail sales) option. Vehicle inventories must be stored/displayed
indoors. A pre- existing business located on Quantum Park lots 77 through 80
is exempt from the requirements relative to conditional use approval, outdoor
storage or display of vehicle inventories, and locating on lots with the
“I” and “I/Retail” use options.



   45.   Boat Dealer/Rental.



      a.   C-3 District. Boat dealer/rental, as a principal use,
shall exclude the repair or service of vessels on the premises. No outdoor
storage of boats shall be permitted.



      b.   C-4 District.  Conditional use approval shall be
required if merchandise is to be stored outdoors. Outdoor storage areas shall
be adequately screened from abutting properties and rights-of-way, with the
exception that a single merchandise item may be visible from abutting
rights-of-way. The display must be in combination with project signage, and
the setback, landscaping and design of this site feature shall minimize the
visual impact on the adjacent roadway. If any vehicle use areas are not
separated by an intervening building and visible from an arterial roadway,
right-of- way landscaping shall be in accordance with the City’s Urban
Landscape Code except that the width shall be at least 10 feet, it shall
include a berm, and enhanced with additional plants selected and maintenance
to facilitate, varying growth heights to provide some screening of the space
between the hedge material and tree canopies. The landscaping required to
represent “adequate” screening, as well as the appropriate design of the
merchandise display feature and right-of-way landscaping shall be determined
as part of the conditional use review process.



      c.   PCD District. Boat dealer/rental, as a principal use,
shall exclude the repair or service of vessels on the premises. No outdoor
storage of boats shall be permitted. Inventories must be stored/displayed
indoors.



      d.   MU-4 District and MU-C District.  Boat dealer/rental is
allowed as an accessory use to a marina but conditional use approval is
required.  No exterior loudspeakers or paging equipment shall be permitted
on-site.  Storage/display allowed only in wet docks or indoor not to exceed
ten thousand (10,000) square feet.  The sales, rental, service, repairs, and
storage of marine trailers are prohibited.



      e.   M-1 District. Allowed only as a conditional use accessory
to the repair, manufacturing, assembling or customizing of boats. Outdoor
storage areas shall be adequately screened from abutting properties and
rights-of-way.



      f.   PID District. Required conditional use approval. Also,
within the Quantum Park PID such uses are limited to lots with an Industrial
(I) use option or Industrial /R (with retail sales) option. Inventories must
be stored/displayed indoors.



   46.   Gasoline Station.



      a.   All Districts.



         (1)   Location.  Gasoline stations, except where
otherwise allowed by these regulations, are only allowed on properties
located at three-way or four-way intersections involving arterial and
collector road of rights-of-way as designated by the Comprehensive Plan,
excluding local streets and alleys. Interchanges with I-95 are included as
eligible intersections. Eligible properties at an intersection with I-95
include the first parcel directly west or east of the toe embankment of the
I-95 interchange.  This may also be defined as the first parcel with
frontage on and access from the arterial road that intersects with the I-95
right- of-way.  A maximum of two (2) gasoline stations shall be allowed at
each intersection, except this limitation shall not apply to eligible
intersections, as defined by this paragraph, that consist of an urban
principal arterial roadway.  The purpose of this exception is to maximize
service potential during times of designated emergencies involving major
storm events and power outages, particularly along or near evacuation
routes.  A convenience store with retail gasoline sales is considered to be
a gasoline station and is, therefore, restricted to these location
requirements.



         (2)   Lot Size.  Minimum lot size: thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet.



         (3)   Access.



            (a)   Only one (1) access driveway is allowed from
each major street frontage.  Driveways shall be located a minimum of fifty
(50) feet from the intersection unless county or state standards require a
greater distance; and



            (b)   Driveways shall be a minimum of thirty (30)
feet and a maximum of forty-five (45) feet in width.



         (4)   Setbacks.



            (a)   No canopy shall be located less than twenty
(20) feet from any property line; and



            (b)   No gasoline pump island shall be located
less than thirty (30) feet from any property line.



         (5)   Storage.  No outside storage of materials, parts,
and no overnight storage of vehicles outside.



         (6)   Design.  Pursuant to Chapter 4, Article III,
Section 3.G.4., all gasoline stations located on designated out-parcels to
shopping centers, business centers, or other planned commercial developments
shall conform in design to the approved design plan of the principal center.



         (7)   Landscaping.  See landscaping standards in
Chapter 4.



         (8)   Lighting.  See lighting standards in Chapter 4.



         (9)   Except for where otherwise approved on a master
sign program, gasoline stations shall only be permitted to advertise on
signage located within the property boundaries.



         (10)   Gasoline stations shall be permitted uses if
located greater than 200 feet from a boundary of a residential zoning
district. Distances for the purpose of this subsection shall be measured from
the closest gasoline pump island or canopy of the gasoline station to the
closest boundary of the residential or mixed-use zoning district.



         (11)   A station existing prior to amendment of these
regulations that is located on a lot that does not conform to the property
development regulations of the zoning district, as defined in Section 11 of
this chapter, may be enlarged, expanded, reconstructed or restored without
limitation based on percent of property value, as long as the magnitude of
the non-conformity is not worsened by the improvement.



      b.   C-2 District, C-3 District, and C-4 District.



         (1)   Use(s) Allowed:  A convenience store; auto/car
wash, automotive, minor repair; and automotive window tinting/stereo
installation/alarms are allowed as accessory uses to gasoline stations.



         (2)   Setbacks.  Except for properties located within
the Urban Commercial District Overlay Zone, the following building setbacks
shall apply to all structures on the property including the primary
structure, or any accessory structures such as car washes or above-ground
storage facilities.



            (a)   Building front (and side corner)
-      35 feet;



            (b)   Building side
-                  20 feet;



            (c)   Building rear
-                  20 feet;



            (d)   Automated car wash.  The entrance to an
automatic car wash shall be setback no less than seventy-five (75) feet from
the street in order to provide for an area of vehicular queuing (stacking). 
An accessory auto/car wash shall be fully automatic and recycle all water
used in the car washing process.



         (3)   Exceptions to requirement for location at
intersections as stated above under section a.(1). When a gas station is
accessory to a principal retail use and when all requirements applicable to
the PCD District are satisfied.



      c.   PCD District.



         (1)   Use(s) Allowed:  A convenience store; auto/car
wash, automotive, minor repair; and automotive window tinting/stereo
installation/alarms are allowed as accessory uses to gasoline stations.



         (2)   Setbacks.  The following building setbacks shall
apply to all structures on the property including the primary structure, or
any accessory structures such as car washes or above-ground storage
facilities.



            (a)   Building front (and side corner) -
      35 feet;



            (b)   Building side
-                  20 feet;



            (c)   Building rear
-                  20 feet;



            (d)   Automated car wash.  The entrance to an
automatic car wash shall be setback no less than seventy-five (75) feet from
the street in order to provide for an area of vehicular queuing (stacking). 
An accessory auto/car wash shall be fully automatic and recycle all water
used in the car washing process.



         (3)   Separation. No gasoline pump island shall be
located less than two hundred (200) feet from any public right-of-way.



         (4)   Exceptions to requirement for location at
intersections as stated above under section a.(1). Uses within the PCD
District shall not be required to comply with the location standard described
above in subsection a.(1).



         (5)   Pre-existing uses. Gasoline stations that were in
existence prior to the adoption of these regulations shall not be deemed
non-conforming to the corresponding site standards if located in compliance
with the location (intersection) standard stated above in section a.



            (6)   Relief from Standards.  Waivers from the
following standards may be granted in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II
by the City Commission for existing projects annexed into the city, when the
regulation cannot be fully complied with, but where the intent of the LDR is
met:



            (a)   Section 3.D.46.a.(5)(a) above;



            (b)   Section 3.D.46.a.(5)(b) above;



            (c)   Section 3.D.46.c.(3)(a) above; or



            (d)   Section 3.D.46.c.(3)(b) above.



      The applicant shall provide justification of the waiver and
submit a mitigation plan off-setting the impact.



      d.   MU-L3 District and MU-H District.



         (1)   Use(s) Allowed.  A convenience store is allowed
as an accessory use to a gasoline station.



         (2)   Setbacks.



            (a)   Building setbacks shall meet those required
by the applicable zoning district.



            (b)   Canopy structure over the fuel pumps shall
be located either to the side or rear of its associated principal building.



      e.   PID District. This non-industrial use shall be allowed
within the PID district provided it is located on a lot with a Mixed Use (MU)
land use option and at an intersection that would satisfy the location
requirements of this note.



         (1)   Use(s) Allowed. A convenience store; auto/car
wash, automotive, minor repair; and automotive window tinting/stereo
installation/alarms are allowed as accessory uses to gasoline stations.



         (2)   Setbacks. Except for properties located within the
Urban Commercial District Overlay Zone, the following building setbacks shall
apply to all structures on the property including the primary structure, or
any accessory structures such as car washes or above-ground storage
facilities.



            (a)   Building front (and side corner) - 35 feet;



            (b)   Building side - 20 feet;



            (c)   Building rear - 20 feet;



            (d)   Automated car wash. The entrance to an
automatic car wash shall be setback no less than seventy-five (75) feet from
the street in order to provide for an area of vehicular queuing (stacking).
An accessory auto/car wash shall be fully automatic and recycle all water
used in the car washing process.



   47.   Grocery Store.



      a.   MU-1 District, MU-2 District, MU-3 District, MU-4
District and MU-C District.  Gross floor area of grocery store must be a
minimum of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and a maximum of eighty
thousand (80,000) square feet.



   48.   Hardware Store.



      a.   CBD District.  Excluding lumber or building materials
dealers, lawn & garden shops, glass, electrical, plumbing, heating supplies,
and the like.



      b.   MU-1 District, MU-2 District, MU-3 District, MU-4
District, MU-C District, and PID District.  Indoor storage/ display only and
shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet.



      c.   PID District. This use excludes an on-site lumber yard
and any other exterior (outside) activity or storage.



   49.   Home Improvement Center.  This use excludes an on-site lumber
yard and any other exterior (outside) activity or storage.



   50.   Marine Accessories.



      a.   C-2 District.  Excluding any installation on premises,
and excluding machine shop service.



      b.   MU-1 District, MU-2 District, MU-3 District, MU-4
District and MU-C District.  Indoor storage/display only and shall not
exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet.  The sales, rental, service,
repairs, and storage of marine trailers are prohibited.  Marine customizing,
detailing, service, parts, or repair is also prohibited.



   51.   Merchandise New.  This use excludes an on-site lumber yard
and any other exterior (outside) activity or storage.



   52.   Merchandise, Used (Antique & Consignment Shops and
Bookstores).  Gross floor area shall not exceed twenty five thousand
(25,000) square feet, except if proposed within the Community Redevelopment
Area, the maximum size is twenty five hundred (2,500) square feet. The
maximum size may be increased up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet if
approved as a conditional use. This size restriction shall prevail if it
conflicts with the size limit set by another applicable note.  An auction
house is allowed but only as an accessory use qualifying under this paragraph.



   53.   Merchandise, Used (Other).  This establishment shall be
limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area
except if proposed within the Community Redevelopment Area, the maximum size
is twenty five hundred (2,500) square feet, and must be located a minimum
distance of two thousand, four hundred (2,400) feet from another merchandise,
used (other) or multiple-vendor market establishment, as measured by direct
distance between property lines.  The floor area of an existing merchandise,
used (other) establishment shall not be expanded in instances where located
less than the minimum separation requirement.  All new applications to
operate such uses or applications for building permits to expand such uses
shall be accompanied by an affidavit certifying compliance with this
restriction.  Exterior storage and display in connection with such uses
shall be prohibited.



   54.   Mobile Vending Unit (MVU).  See Chapter 3, Article V, Section
10 for additional regulations regarding an MVU.



   55.   Multiple-Vendor Market.  A multiple-vendor market shall be
limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area and must be
located a minimum distance of two thousand, four hundred (2,400) feet from
another multiple-vendor market or merchandise used (other) establishment, as
measured by direct distance between property lines.  The floor area of an
existing multiple-vendor market establishment shall not be expanded in
instances where located less than the minimum separation requirement.  All
new applications to operate such uses or applications for building permits to
expand such uses shall be accompanied by an affidavit certifying compliance
with this restriction.  Exterior storage and display in connection with such
uses shall be prohibited.



   56.   Nursery, Garden Center, & Farm Supply.  The exterior display
of live plants is exempt from the three hundred (300)-foot distance
requirement of Chapter 3, Article V, Section 5.D. and such plants may remain
outdoors after normal business hours provided that their placement complies
with the location criteria of Chapter 3, Article V, Section 5.C.



   57.   Pharmacy, Drug Store, and Medical Marijuana Dispensary.



         a.   All Districts. 



            1.   No more than fifteen percent (15%) of the
total number of prescriptions sold within a thirty (30) day period can be
derived from the sale of Schedule II controlled substances as listed in F.S.
§ 893.03.  All pharmacies and drug stores shall be staffed by a state
licensed pharmacist who shall be present during all hours the pharmacy, or
pharmacy function of the drug store, is open for business.  This restriction
on prescription sales shall not apply to a pharmacy operating accessory to a
facility licensed pursuant to F.S. Chapter 395 (e.g., hospital).



            (2)   A medical marijuana dispensing facility may
not be located within five hundred (500) feet of the real property that
comprises a public or private elementary school, middle school, or secondary
school.



         b.   MU-4 and MU-C District.  Use shall be subject to
the following distance separation requirements from similar uses, measured in
a straight line, using the shortest distance between property lines shall be
the following:



            (1)   Seven hundred fifty (750) feet:  For uses
with less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area;



            (2)   One thousand, five hundred (1,500) feet: 
For uses with a gross floor area equal to or greater than five thousand
(5,000) gross square feet.



   58.   Restaurant.



      a.   All Districts.  See Chapter 3, Article V, Supplemental
Regulations regarding the sidewalk café permit.



      b.   C-1 District.  A restaurant is allowed as accessory use
to a business or professional office and/or a medical or dental office but
subject to the following conditions:



         (1)   Signage.  No external signage for the restaurant
use shall be allowed;



         (2)   Hours of operation shall be limited to coincide
with the hours of operation of the principal use.



      c.   M-1 district. This non-industrial use is allowed within
the M-1 district, provided that it 1) is located within a multiple-tenant
development on a lot that fronts on an arterial or collector roadway; 2) does
not exceed two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet; 3) excludes a
drive-up, drive-through, or drive-in facility; and 4) complies with all
off-street parking requirements of Chapter 4, Article V. In addition, the
sale of used merchandise is only allowed as accessory to the sale of new
merchandise.



   59.   Restaurant (Take-Out).



      a.   M-1 district. This non-industrial use is allowed within
the M-1 district, provided that it 1) is located within a multiple-tenant
development on a lot that fronts on an arterial or collector roadway; 2) does
not exceed two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet; 3) excludes a
drive-up, drive-through, or drive-in facility; and 4) complies with all
off-street parking requirements of Chapter 4, Article V. In addition, the
sale of used merchandise is only allowed as accessory to the sale of new
merchandise.



   60.   Auto/Car Washes (Polishing, Waxing, Detailing).



      a.   C-2 District, C-3 District, C-4 District, and PCD
District.  Only a fully automated-style auto/car wash facility is allowed as
an accessory use to a gasoline station.  However, conditional use approval
is required for this component of the establishment.



      b.   PID District. Only allowed as an accessory use to an auto
dealer, new or used.



   61.   Automobile Rental.



      a.   C-3 District.  Allowed as an accessory use to
automotive, minor repair.  Conditional use approval is required.  In
addition, the following criteria must be met:



         (1)   Location.  On sites greater than seventy-five
(75) acres and only within a separate building in a shopping center,
automobile rental is allowed subject to the following additional conditions:



            (a)   The customer service area shall be located
within the building being used for an automotive, minor repair;



            (b)   No more than twelve (12) automobiles shall
be stored on-site for the purpose of rental, and such automobiles shall be
stored in marked stalls;



            (c)   No fueling or refueling of automobiles shall
be permitted on-site.



      b.   C-4 District.  Automotive, minor repair is allowed as an
accessory use to automobile rental, provided that the service and maintenance
of the fleet vehicles is relegated to the rental operation and not open to
the public.



      c.   PCD District.  Uses listed as conditional uses would be
considered permitted uses if the following conditions are met:



         (1)   If shown on the originally approved master plan;



         (2)   Uses will not be subject to the minimum acreage
requirements of the C-3 zoning district if the site meets the minimum acreage
requirement for rezoning to PCD; and



         (3)   All portions of any building dedicated to such use
are separated from residentially zoned property by a distance of two hundred
(200) feet.



      d.   MU-3 District and MU-C District.  The indoor
storage/display of fleet vehicles are permitted but shall not exceed ten
thousand (10,000) square feet.  Conditional use approval shall be required
if all or a portion of the inventory is located within a parking
garage/structure.



         (1)   Access.  Shall not be directly from any major
roadway.



         (2)   Storage.  No outside storage of materials, parts,
and vehicles.



         (3)   Design.  Pursuant to Chapter 4, Article III,
Section 3.A.7., overhead doors shall not be visible from any major roadway
frontage. 



   62.   Automotive, Minor Repair.



      a.   C-2 District.  Automotive, minor repair is allowed as an
accessory use to a gasoline station.  Conditional use approval is required
for this component of the establishment.



      b.   C-3 District.



         (1)   As an Accessory Use.  Automotive, minor repair is
allowed as an accessory use to a gas station and also to automobile rental,
provided that the service and maintenance of the fleet vehicles is relegated
to the rental operation and not open to the public.



         (2)   As a Principal Use.  Automotive, minor repair is
allowed as a principal use, provided that it is located on a lot that is at
least five (5) acres. The following restrictions shall also apply, where
applicable:



            (a)   On sites of greater than five (5) acres and
less than seventy-five (75) acres, all such uses shall be located in either a
principal building of a shopping center or in a subordinate, stand-alone
building and/or outparcel within a commercial master plan, provided that the
subordinate stand-alone building and/or outparcel within a commercial master
plan is not located between the principal building and an adjoining
right-of-way or between the principal building and abutting residentially
zoned property.



            (b)   On sites of greater than seventy-five (75)
acres all such uses will be allowed to be located in a separate building in a
shopping center. For the purpose of this section, motor vehicles shall mean
only motorcycles, mopeds, passenger cars (a motor vehicle with motive power,
except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or motorcycle, designed for carrying
ten (10) persons or less), or multipurpose passenger vehicles (motor vehicle
with motive power designed to carry ten (10) persons or less which is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation). All repair and service of vehicles shall be done within
an enclosed building.



      c.   C-4 District.  This use is allowed within the C-4
district but it shall not be located on a lot that borders an arterial
roadway. All repair functions must occur within enclosed buildings and
exterior storage of vehicles in a damaged or disassembled condition must be
adequately screened from rights-of- way and adjacent properties.



      d.   PCD District.  Automotive, minor repair is allowed as an
accessory use to automobile rental, provided that the service and maintenance
of the fleet vehicles is relegated to the rental operation and not open to
the public.  Automotive, minor repair is allowed as a principal use but
conditional use approval is required.  Uses listed as conditional uses would
be considered permitted uses if the following conditions are met:



         (1)   If shown on the originally approved master plan;



         (2)   Uses will not be subject to the minimum acreage
requirements of the C-3 zoning district if the site meets the minimum acreage
requirement for rezoning to PCD; and



         (3)   All portions of any building dedicated to such use
are separated from residentially zoned property by a distance of two hundred
(200) feet.



      e.   M-1 District.  Excluding the keeping of vehicles in
violation of City of Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances, and excluding gasoline
stations selling motor fuels at retail.  Any exterior storage of motor
vehicles or boats in a wrecked condition shall be permitted only in
connection with a lawful principal use, and shall be adequately screened.



      f.   PID District. Only allowed as an accessory use to a
retail auto dealer, new or used.



   63.   Automotive, Major Repair. Excluding the keeping of vehicles in
violation of the City of Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances, and excluding
gasoline stations selling motor fuels at retail.  Any exterior storage of
motor vehicles or boats in a wrecked condition shall be permitted only in
connection with a lawful principal use and shall be adequately screened.



   64.   Automotive Window Tinting/Stereo Installation/Alarms.



      a.   C-2 District.  Automotive window tinting/stereo
installation/alarms is allowed as an accessory use to a gasoline station;
merchandise, new (supercenter, discount, department, club); or an electronics
& appliance store.  Conditional use approval is required for this component
of the establishment.



      b.   C-3 district.



         (1)   As an Accessory Use. Automotive window
tinting/stereo installation/alarms is allowed as an accessory use to
automobile rental, provided that the service and maintenance of the fleet
vehicles is relegated to the rental operation and not open to the public.



         (2)   As a Principal Use.  Automotive window
tinting/stereo installation/alarms is allowed as a principal use, provided
that it is located on a lot that is at least five (5) acres.  The following
restrictions shall also apply, where applicable:



            (a)   On sites of greater than five (5) acres and
less than seventy-five (75) acres, all such uses shall be located in either a
principal building of a shopping center or in a  subordinate,  stand-alone
building  and/or outparcel within a commercial master plan, provided that
the subordinate stand-alone building and/or outparcel within a commercial
master plan is not located between the principal building and an adjoining
right-of-way or between the principal building and abutting residentially
zoned property.



            (b)   On sites of greater than seventy-five (75)
acres all such uses will be allowed to be located in a separate building in a
shopping center. For the purpose of this section, motor vehicles shall mean
only motorcycles, mopeds, passenger cars (a motor vehicle with motive power,
except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or motorcycle, designed for



carrying ten (10) persons or less), or multipurpose passenger vehicles (motor
vehicle with motive power designed to carry ten (10) persons or less which is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation). All repair and service of vehicles shall be done within
an enclosed building.



      c.   C-4 District.  Automotive window tinting/stereo
installation/alarms is allowed as an accessory use to automobile rental,
provided that the service and maintenance of the fleet vehicles is relegated
to the rental operation and not open to the public.



      d.   PCD District.  Automotive window tinting/stereo
installation/alarms is allowed as an accessory use to automobile rental,
provided that the service and maintenance of the fleet vehicles is relegated
to the rental operation and not open to the public.  Automotive window
tinting/stereo installation/alarms is allowed as a principal use but
conditional use approval is required.  Uses listed as conditional uses would
be considered permitted uses if the following conditions are met:



         (1)   If shown on the originally approved master plan;



         (2)   Uses will not be subject to the minimum acreage
requirements of the C-3 zoning district  if the site meets the minimum
acreage requirement for rezoning to PCD; and



         (3)   All portions of any building dedicated to such use
are separated from residentially zoned property by a distance of two hundred
(200) feet.



      e.   M-1 District.  Excluding the keeping of vehicles in
violation of the City of Boynton Beach Code of Ordinances, and excluding
gasoline stations selling motor fuels at retail.  Any exterior storage of
motor vehicles or boats in a wrecked condition shall be permitted only in
connection with a lawful principal use and shall be adequately screened.



   65.   Check Cashing.



      a.   C-3 District, C-4 District, and PCD District.  Check
cashing shall be limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor
area and must be located a minimum distance of two thousand, four hundred
(2,400) feet from another such establishment, as measured by direct distance
between property lines.  The floor area of an existing check cashing
establishment shall not be expanded in instances where located less than the
minimum separation requirement.  All new applications to operate such uses
or applications for building permits to expand such uses shall be accompanied
by an affidavit certifying compliance with this restriction. 



   66.   Dry Cleaner.



      a.   All Districts.  Cleaning services are limited to retail
customers and includes the alteration and/or repair of clothing.



      b.   SMU District, MU-1 District, MU-2 District, MU-3
District, MU-4 District and MU-C District.  On-site drop-off and pick-up is
allowed as a permitted use; however, any cleaning or laundering activities
conducted on the premises requires conditional use approval, and the floor
area of such establishment cannot exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet.



   67.   Funeral Home.  A funeral home is allowed as an accessory use
to a cemetery.



   68.   Personal Care (Beauty, Hair, Nails).



      a.   R-3 District, PUD District, C-2 District, C-3 District,
C-4 District, CBD District, PCD District, all “Mixed Use” Districts and
PID District.  In these districts, body piercing and tattooing are allowed,
but only as accessory to a lawful principal use.  In the M-1 district
however, such businesses are allowed as a principal use, but only in
accordance with Section 3.D.4. above.



   69.   Pet Care (Boarding and Daycare).



      a.   All Districts.  Conditional use applications must
include provisions for proper care and mitigation of potential impacts on
adjacent properties.  Pet care (boarding and daycare) is allowed as an
accessory use to either a pet care (grooming) or pet care (veterinary
services) establishment, but it requires conditional use approval if it
exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area or two thousand, five
hundred (2,500) square feet, whichever is less. 



      b.   C-2 District, C-3 District, C-4 District, CBD District,
SMU District, MU-1 District, MU-2 District, and PID District.  No external
kenneling is allowed in these districts, either as a principal or accessory
use.



      c.   PCD District.  No external kenneling is allowed, either
as a principal or accessory use.  Uses listed as conditional uses would be
considered permitted uses if the following conditions are met:



         (1)   If shown on the originally approved master plan;



         (2)   Uses will not be subject to the minimum acreage
requirements of the C-3 zoning district if the site meets the minimum acreage
requirement for rezoning to PCD; and



         (3)   All portions of any building dedicated to such use
are separated from residentially zoned property by a distance of six hundred
(600) feet.



      d.   M-1 District.  External kenneling shall only be allowed
for those establishments located in excess of six hundred (600) feet from
residentially zoned property.  Such uses shall also comply with the
requirements of City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 4, Section 4-4,
except that the maximum enclosure size and area standards within 4-4(b)2.a.
shall not apply.



   70.   Postal/Mail Center.



      a.   All Districts.  Storage of delivery trucks is prohibited.



      b.   C-1 District.  Allowed as an accessory use to a business
or professional office or a medical or dental office.  Gross floor area
shall not exceed two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet.



      c.   MU-4 District and MU-C District.  This use shall be
limited to a maximum gross floor area of two thousand, five hundred (2,500)
square feet.



   71.   Repair, Rental, & Maintenance of Home/Garden Tools.



      a.   C-3 District.  Excluding exterior display or storage of
merchandise.



      b.   PCD District.  Excluding exterior display or storage of
merchandise.  The repair and service of merchandise shall be permitted as
either an accessory or principal use, for any merchandise, which is typically
sold in the PCD district.



   72.   Hospital. A helipad (also known as a helistop) may be allowed
as an accessory use to a hospital establishment, but it shall require
conditional use approval.



   73.   Business or Professional Office.



      a.   “Mixed Use” Districts.  This use shall be integrated
into a mixed use building or development. It must not 1) occupy more than
fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of any given building or 2)
exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross floor area of the mixed use
development.  However, this requirement does not include those developments
that contain such uses in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet.



   74.   Social Service Agency.



      a.   R-2 District and R-3 District.



         (1)   Location.  Along the following roadway types as
designated in the City of Boynton Beach Comprehensive Plan: Arterials and
collectors.



         (2)   Size.  The maximum building size shall be limited
to two thousand (2,000) square feet (per lot); however, for properties
located within the boundaries of the Federal Highway Corridor Redevelopment
Plan, the maximum building size may be larger, but not to exceed five
thousand (5,000) square feet.



         (3)   Design.  Building design shall be consistent with
surrounding residential styles.



         (4)   Landscaping. A minimum buffer width of five (5)
feet and a landscaping barrier shall be required for all parking and vehicle
use areas, and outdoor recreation areas that abut single-family residential
zoning districts.



   75.   Adult Entertainment.



      a.   Finding of Fact.  The city acknowledges that nude and
exotic dancing and entertainment is an expression protected under the First
Amendment of the Constitution of the United States.  Such expression
communicates a message to the intended audience but shall not be obscene, as
defined by the courts, nor involve children.  The Supreme Court has upheld
local regulations that are not intended to preclude such protected
expression, but rather to prevent the harmful side effects known as
“secondary effects.”  Based on various reports, studies, and judicial
opinions generated throughout the country, including within the State of
Florida, the City of Boynton Beach finds it in the interest of health,
safety, peace, property values, and general welfare of the people and
businesses of the City of Boynton Beach to regulate said businesses to
control the secondary effects associated with them.  Secondary effects have
been proven to include, in part, increased criminal activities, moral
degradation, depreciation of property value, and harm to the economic welfare
of the community as a whole.



   By limiting the location and concentration of such uses, by limiting
the proximity of such uses to places of residence and public gathering, and
by restricting the sale of alcohol within or nearby said establishments, the
secondary effects referenced above will be avoided or minimized.  Also
contributing to the control of secondary effects are restrictions on
operational characteristics, including the interaction between nude or
partially nude entertainers, and patrons, customers, other employees and
entertainers, given the threat they represent to the health of others through
the spread of communicable and social disease.  Requirements regarding
buffers and stage designs are intended to protect public health while
preserving the forms of expression intended by the protected nude and exotic
entertainment.



      b.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for
all terms and definitions (e.g., alcoholic beverage establishment; nudity;
partial nudity) pertaining to adult entertainment establishments.



      c.   All Districts.  In addition to the requirements of the
underlying zoning district, other applicable general regulations, county
licensing requirements, and City Code of Ordinances Part II, Section 3-6, the
following requirements shall apply to adult entertainment establishments:



         (1)   No adult entertainment establishment shall be
located closer than seven hundred fifty (750) feet from any other adult
entertainment establishment measured from lot boundary to lot boundary along
a straight airline route, except when the property containing the adult
entertainment establishment is separated from the above use by the I-95
right-of-way and CSX rights-of-way, or the Boynton (C-16) Canal right-of-way.



         (2)   No adult entertainment establishment shall be
located closer than seven hundred fifty (750) feet from any church use (house
of worship); residential zoning district (including a mixed use district
containing a residential component or a mixed use pod of a planned industrial
development); public usage (PU) district; recreation district except where
the subject property is a preserved natural area not accessible to the
general public; or schools measured from lot boundary to lot boundary along a
straight airline route, except when the property containing the adult
entertainment establishment is separated from the above uses by the I-95 and
CSX Railroad rights-of-way, or the Boynton (C-16) Canal right-of-way.



   76.   Artist Studio.



      a.   C-3 District, C-4 District, CBD District, PCD District,
and all “Mixed Use” Districts.  The fabrication, bending, welding,
assembly, or processing of any heavy metal, wood, plastic, or similar
products shall only be allowed for establishments located within the M-1
district.



   77.   Entertainment, Indoor.



      a.   C-2 District.  Limited to amusement arcades and shall be
only allowed in a shopping center located on an arterial roadway.



      b.   M-1 District.  Limited to indoor playground/play centers
and amusement arcades only.



   78.   Entertainment, Outdoor.



      a.   C-3 District and PCD District.  Must be at least one
thousand (1,000) feet from a residential use.



   79.   Marina, Including Yacht Club.



      a.   All Districts.  Marinas, including yacht clubs, are
limited to the following uses: mooring and docking of private pleasure craft;
sale of fuels and lubricants; occupancy of private craft as living quarters
provided that such craft are connected to public sewer facilities; operation
of drift and charter fishing boats and sightseeing boats; bait and tackle
shops.



      b.   IPUD District.  Private marinas, as a principal use,
requires the following:



         (1)   Minimum lot area:  Four (4) acres.



         (2)   Minimum lot frontage:   One hundred fifty (150)
feet and minimum average width of two hundred (200) feet.



         (3)   Maximum height:  Forty-five (45) feet.



         (4)   Principal land uses may include boat and yacht
clubs, and private or public marinas (see Chapter 1, Article II, Definitions)
contingent upon being located within an area identified with the
“Preferred” siting designation by the 2007 Palm Beach County Manatee
Protection Plan. However, major repairs and boatels, or residing on boats,
shall be prohibited in the IPUD district.  Additionally, all sale or minor
repair of boats, or components thereof, shall only occur within a fully
enclosed structure except as otherwise allowed by paragraph (6) below.  The
above noted principal uses, when combined with residential uses, in which the
residential component occupies twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the total
land area, shall be considered permitted uses, otherwise such marine uses
shall require conditional use approval.



         (5)   Boatels and the residing on boats shall be
prohibited within the IPUD district, except that temporary stays shall be
allowed for a maximum of three (3) nights within a twelve (12)-month period.



         (6)   The following uses shall be allowed as accessory
to one (1) of the principal marine uses described above: boat brokerages,
ship's stores, tackle shops, maritime museums or other related educational
uses, restaurants, boat ramps, and other launching facilities.



         (7)   Marine-oriented and water dependent uses shall
meet all the requirements of Section 3.C.5. above, except for subparagraph
(a) in that a marina may be the sole principal use of a project and is not
required as a component of a mixed use development containing dwelling units.



         (8)   No outdoor dry storing or stacking of boats or
other related items shall be allowed, except that outdoor displays are
allowed for sales purposes as long as the boats are restricted to ground
level display, are not visible from abutting rights-of-way or residential
properties, and are not placed within landscape areas or required parking
spaces.



         (9)   Wash down and other post-use servicing shall be
done within the dry storage building or within an enclosed structure (e.g.,
three-sided and roofed) designed and oriented to minimize external impacts.



         (10)   Water used for flushing and other cleaning
activities shall be properly pretreated prior to discharge into the
stormwater system, and conservation measures shall be considered to
facilitate reclamation/recycling.



         (11)   No outdoor speakers shall be allowed other than
for low volume music that is not audible off-site.



         (12)   In addition to adhering to the city's sound
regulations, no equipment, machines, or tools shall be used between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. that generates noise unique to a residential
neighborhood.



         (13)   See Chapter 4, Article III, Section 3.G.6. for
additional design regulations for commercial buildings and boat storage
facilities.



         (14)   Landscaping above and beyond the regulations
cited elsewhere in this Code shall be required for all non-residential
buildings in excess of forty thousand (40,000) square feet, in order to
reduce the perceived scale and massing of such buildings.



         (15)   The width of the foundation planting areas
visible from streets or residential properties shall be fifty percent (50%)
of the façade height. The applicant may submit an alternate planting plan
that depicts the required screening/softening of the large building façades,
however in no instance shall the planting area be less than twelve (12) feet
in width.



         (16)   The height of the plant material shall be in
relation to the height of the adjacent façade or wall.  Further, the height
of fifty percent (50%) of the required trees or palms shall be a minimum of
two-thirds (2/3) of the height of the building.  One (1) canopy tree or a
cluster of three (3) palm trees shall be installed within the foundation
planting area every twenty (20) feet on center along each façade visible
from streets or residential properties.  Canopy and palm trees shall be
distributed along the entire façade where foundation landscaping areas are
required, with understory plant material arranged in the areas between the
low growing shrubs and tree or palm canopies.  The applicant may submit an
alternate planting plan that depicts the rearrangement of plant material in
order not to interfere with required building enhances discussed herein.



         (17)   A perimeter landscape barrier shall be required
between incompatible uses and/or zoning districts; or where there are
differences in density, intensity, or building heights or mass; or for those
certain uses requiring additional screening in order to shield outdoor
storage or operations.  The barrier shall consist of a decorative buffer
wall of at least six (6) feet in height, in addition to a variety of densely
planted trees, hedges and shrubs.  In areas where sufficient width is
provided or staff determines additional buffering is warranted, a berm may be
required in addition to the above regulations.



         (18)   The applicant shall demonstrate through site
design and buffering how sound associated with the non-residential components
of the project will be mitigated.



   80.   Rentals, Recreational (Bicycles, Canoes, Personal Watercraft).



      a.   MU-1 District, MU-2 District, and MU-3 District.  Indoor
storage/display only and shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet.



   81.   Sightseeing & Scenic Tours.



      a.   All Districts.  Vehicles used in support of the
operation that are of a size in excess of a standard parking stall shall be
stored in a zoning district where outdoor storage of vehicles is allowed.



      b.   CBD District, MU-1 District, MU-2 District, MU-3
District, MU-4 District and MU-C District.  Sightseeing boats are allowed in
conjunction with a marina, including yacht club.



   82.   Theater.  All outdoor style theaters (i.e. band shell,
amphitheater) require conditional use approval.



   83.   Cemetery.



      a.   C-1 District, C-2 District, C-3 District, C-4 District,
PCD District, MU-1 District, MU-2 District, and MU-3 District.  On parcels
ten (10) acres or greater, a cemetery may be allowed as an accessory use to a
funeral home establishment.



   84.   Church.



      a.   R-1-AAB District, R-1-AA District, R-1-A District, and
R-1 District.  Expansions and improvements to, and redevelopment of
pre-existing places of worship that do not meet the minimum lot standards of
the zoning district, or the other requirements of Section 3.D.33 above shall
be allowed in accordance with the following requirements:



         (1)   Improvements shall only be allowed if the subject
property was under proper ownership prior to the adoption of these
regulations.  Ownership shall be based on the records of the County Property
Appraiser's Office.



         (2)   Rights-of-way for primary access shall be adequate
and improved in accordance with (Engineering Design Handbook and Construction
Standards);



         (3)   The size of building improvements shall be allowed
up to a maximum of 100% of the pre- existing area.



         (4)   Expansions that would increase operational space
or capacity, shall require that all existing parking areas and related
landscaping meet the requirements of the city's land development regulations.



         (5)   Parking. Projects eligible for parking space
reductions of the MLK Overlay District, shall be required to meet a minimum
of seventy-five percent (75%) of the spaces required under Chapter 4, Article
V, Section 3.D.



         (6)   Non-conforming and blighted conditions. Expansions
that increase operational space or capacity shall require improvements to all
existing facilities to raise them to a similar appearance level as the
proposed improvement and additions.  Sidewalks shall be added where
partially or totally absent along the boundary of the subject use.  This
requirement shall apply to all parcels used to support the principal use,
including those lots that abut the principal lot or that are separated from
the principal lot by other properties or rights-of-way.



         (7)   Design.  Additions or new facilities shall be
designed to be compatible with its surroundings and/or adopted community
redevelopment plan to further the historic and architectural character of the
neighborhood.



         (8)   No newly proposed physical improvements other than
a wall/fence or landscaping shall be placed closer than thirty (30) feet from
a parcel containing or zoned for a single-family residence.



         (9)   Any outdoor play areas shall be located a minimum
of thirty (30) feet from a parcel containing or zoned for single-family
residence.



         (10)   The foregoing conditions shall also apply to any
repairs or reconstruction required due to damage from fire, a major storm
event, or other natural occurrence.



      b.   R-2 District and R-3 District.



         (1)   Separation.  Distances between residential
properties and outdoor play areas shall be maximized.



         (2)   Landscaping. A minimum buffer width of five (5)
feet and a landscaping barrier shall be required for all parking and vehicle
use areas, and outdoor recreation areas that abut single-family residential
zoning districts.



   85.   Government, Municipal Office/Emergency/Civic Facilities.



      a.   All Districts.  Conditional use approval shall be
required for gross floor area in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet.



   86.   Government, Non-Municipal Office Facilities.



         a.   All "Mixed Use," M-1 District, and PID District. 
This use shall be integrated into a multiple-tenant building.  It must not
1) occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of any given
building; or 2) exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross floor area of the
mixed use development, where applicable.



         b.   M-1 District.  This non-industrial use is allowed
within the M-1 district, provided that it 1) excludes a drive-up,
drive-through, or drive-in facility; and 2) complies with all off-street
parking requirements of Chapter 4, Article V.



   87.   Day Care.



      a.   R-1-AAB District, R-1-AA District, R-1-A District, R-1
District, and PUD District.  The following applies to facilities to be
located within zoning districts limited to single-family homes:



         (1)   Design.  Building design shall be consistent with
surrounding residential styles in accordance with Chapter 4, Article III,
Section 5.G.



         (2)   Lot Size.  A minimum of one-half (0.5) acre.



         (3)   Separation.  Minimum separation requirement
between day cares shall be two thousand, four hundred (2,400) feet (this
distance separation requirement should not apply to day care uses limited to
specific groups such as church members, and should not be intended to place
restrictive limits on the expansion/improvement of those uses existing prior
to codification.



      b.   R-2 District and R-3 District.



         (1)   Location.  Along the following roadway types as
designated in the City of Boynton Beach Comprehensive Plan:  arterials and
collectors;



            (a)   Lot size.  A minimum of one-half (0.5) acre;



            (b)   Landscaping.  A minimum buffer width of
five (5) feet and a landscaping barrier shall be required for all parking and
vehicle use areas, and outdoor recreation areas that abut residential zoning
districts.  Distances between outdoor play areas shall be maximized;



            (c)   Design.  Building design shall be
consistent with surrounding residential styles in accordance with Chapter 4,
Article III, Section 5.G.



      c.   PCD District.  Uses listed as conditional uses would be
considered permitted uses if the following conditions are met:



         (1)   If shown on the originally approved master plan;



         (2)   Uses will not be subject to the minimum acreage
requirements of the C-3 zoning district if the site meets the minimum acreage
requirement for rezoning to PCD; and



         (3)   All portions of any building dedicated to such use
are separated from residentially zoned property by a distance of two hundred
(200) feet.



   88.   Stone Cutting & Finishing.  Conditional use approval shall be
required if located within two hundred (200) feet of a residential zoning
district or a Mixed Use Pod of a PID.



   89.   Storage, Boats/Motor/Recreational Vehicles.



      a.   CBD District, MU-2 District, MU-3 District, and MU-C
District.  The wet storage of boats is allowed as an accessory use to a
marina, including yacht club.  The dry storage of boats shall be prohibited.



      b.   M-1 District.  No exterior storage of boats, motor, or
recreational vehicles in a wrecked condition shall be permitted.



         (1)   Landscaping.  All exterior (temporary) storage of
fleet vehicles shall be adequately screened.  Additional buffering may be
required as recommended by the Director of Planning and Zoning to ensure
compatibility.



         (2)   Lighting.  If a facility abuts a residential
zone, outdoor lighting fixtures shall be no more than twenty (20) feet in
height and shall be shielded away from residential property.



   90.   Storage, Self-Service.



      a.   All Districts.  All self-storage facility uses shall
comply with the following:



         (1)   Rental Facility Office.  A maximum of one
thousand (1,000) square feet of the rental office may be devoted to the
rental and/or sale of retail items used for moving and storage and including,
but not limited to carton, tape and packing materials.



         (2)   Security Quarters.  A single residential unit for
security purposes, not to exceed one thousand, two hundred (1,200) square
feet may be established on the site of a self-service storage facility
provided that said facilities are at least thirty thousand (30,000) square
feet.  This dwelling unit shall be considered a limited exception to the
general prohibition of residential uses in industrial zones.  The security
quarters may continue only so long as the self-service storage facility
remains active.  The security quarters shall be for the exclusive use of,
and shall be occupied only by a guard, custodian, caretaker, owner, manager,
or employee of the owner of the facility, and respective family.



         (3)   Use of Bays.  The use of storage bays shall be
limited to dead storage of household goods, personal property, or records for
commercial businesses.  Storage bays shall not be used to manufacture,
fabricate or process goods; service or repair vehicles, boats, small engines
or electrical equipment, or to conduct similar repair activities; conduct
garage sales or retail sales of any kind; or conduct any other commercial or
industrial activity. Individual storage bays or private postal boxes within a
self-service storage facility shall not be considered a premises for the
purpose of assigning a legal address in order to obtain approval or other
governmental permit or license to conduct business.  Other prohibited uses
include storage, sale, salvage, transfer, or disposal of junk, scrap,
garbage, offal, refuse, or other waste materials.  Further:



            (a)   The maximum size of a storage bay shall be
limited to four hundred fifty (450) square feet.



            (b)   Storage bay doors shall not face any
abutting property that is residentially zoned or any public or private
right-of-way.



            (c)   Lighting.  If a facility abuts a
residential zone, outdoor lighting fixtures shall be no more than twenty (20)
feet in height and shall be shielded away from residential property.



            (d)   Loudspeakers.  No exterior loudspeakers or
paging equipment shall be permitted on- site.



            (e)   Design.  For all self-service storage
facilities adjacent to or visible from any right-of-way, the following shall
apply:



               (i)   The exterior colors, façades,
windows, roof and building materials of all structures located on-site shall
be compatible with the character of or vision for the surrounding area. 
Self-service storage facilities shall incorporate design elements to achieve
the effect of office structures.



               (ii)   All façades viewable from
rights-of-way shall provide variety and interest.  These façades shall not
exceed fifty (50) feet in length without visual relief by means of a vertical
reveal at least one (1) foot in depth and ten (10) feet in width, a
perceptible change in wall angle, or a corner.  Other design attributes
shall include, roof slope and materials, windows, awnings, fencing and other
aesthetic elements.



            (f)   Refuse.  Dumpsters and trash receptacles
shall be screened from view of adjacent lots and streets.



            (g)   Exterior storage.



               (i)   Vehicles shall not be stored within
the area set aside for minimum building setbacks or in areas designated for
landscaping buffering purposes.



               (ii)   Pleasure boats stored on-site shall
be placed and maintained upon wheeled trailers.  No dry stacking shall be
permitted on-site.



               (iii)   The outside storage area shall be
constructed with a dust-free surface.



      b.   Multi-Access Self-Storage Facilities.  In addition to
the general standards above, multi-access self-service storage facilities
shall comply with the following regulations:



         (1)   Lot Size.  The minimum lot size for a
multi-access self-storage facility shall be two (2) acres.



         (2)   Circulation.  The following on-site circulation
standards shall apply:



            (a)   Interior:  Interior loading areas shall be
provided in the form of aisleways adjacent to the storage bays.  These
aisleways shall be used both for circulation and temporary customer parking
while using storage units.  The minimum width of these aisleways shall be
twenty-five (25) feet if only one-way traffic is permitted, and thirty (30)
feet if two-way traffic is permitted.  A minimum width of twelve (12) feet
between aisleways will be required when utilized for outdoor storage.



            (b)   Flow:  The one- or two-way traffic flow
patterns in aisleways shall be clearly marked.  Markings shall consist of
standard directional signage and painted lane markings with arrows.



            (c)   Access:  Appropriate access and circulation
by vehicles and emergency equipment shall be ensured through the design of
internal turning of aisleways.



         (3)   Height.  Limited access and combination
multi-access and limited-access self-service storage facilities shall conform
to the maximum height for that district.  The maximum height for
multi-access self-service storage facilities shall not exceed twenty-five
(25) feet.  These heights will include any screening required to conceal
air-conditioning or any other mechanical equipment.



      c.   Limited Access Self-Storage Facilities.  In addition to
the general standards above, limited-access self-storage facilities shall
comply with the following regulations:



         (1)   Lot Size.  The minimum lot size for a limited
access self-storage facility shall be one (1) acre.



         (2)   Loading.



            (a)   Each entry point used to access hallways
leading to the storage bays shall accommodate a minimum of two (2) loading
berths and related maneuvering area.



            (b)   The loading areas shall not interfere with
the primary circulation system on-site.



         (3)   Circulation.  The following on-site circulation
standard shall apply:



            (a)   Interior.  If a minimum twenty (20) feet
accessway is provided adjacent to the building and serves no other use except
the self-service storage facility, then the loading area may be established
parallel and adjacent to the building.  It will be required to satisfy
current regulations for driveway accessibility dependent on one-way or
two-way traffic.



               (i)   One-way:   25 feet; and



               (ii)   Two-way:   30 feet.



      d.   SMU District, MU-1 District, MU-2 District, and MU-3
District.  Only limited-access self-service storage facilities are allowed
within mixed use districts.  Multi-access self-service storage facilities
are prohibited.



         (1)   Location.  Permitted only on lots fronting on
major arterial roadways.  Retail uses unrelated to the storage business are
relegated to the ground-floor.  Street frontages of the ground floor area
shall be devoted to one (1) or more principal retail and office uses, not
related to the self-storage use, to a depth of at least twenty (20) feet.



         (2)   Driveways.  Access to the self-service storage
use portion of the structure shall not be from/to an arterial roadway and
must be screened from public rights-of-way.



         (3)   Design.  Buildings shall be designed to have the
appearance of a multi-story retail, office, and/or residential structure
through the use of windows, shutters, and appropriate building elements on
the upper floors.



      e.   M-1 District.



         (1)   Buffers.  All perimeter buffers adjacent to
residentially-zoned property shall contain a continuous wall or hedge and
trees, installed no less than twenty-five (25) feet on-center.



         (2)   Exterior Storage.  In connection with a
self-service storage facility, open storage of boats, motor, or recreational
vehicles of the type customarily maintained by private individuals for their
personal use and commercial vehicles shall be permitted provided the
following:



            (a)   The outdoor storage area shall not exceed
forty percent (40%) of the area of the site.



            (b)   Outdoor storage areas shall be entirely
screened from public and private rights-of-way and non-industrial
properties.  Screening materials shall be comprised of a buffer wall, eight
(8) feet in height, or by the project's principal and/or accessory
building(s) or a combination thereof.  Trees, installed no less than
twenty-five (25) feet on-center, in conjunction with shrubs and/or other
foundation plantings, shall be placed on the outside of the buffer wall,
within a landscaping strip of at least five (5) feet in width.  The shrubs
and foundation plantings shall be at least four (4) feet in height at the
time of installation.  However, their inclusion may be waived by the
Director of Planning and Zoning if determined to be unnecessary.



   91.   Boat Repair.



      a.   Landscaping.  All exterior (temporary) storage shall be
adequately screened.  Additional buffering may be required as recommended by
the Director of Planning and Zoning to ensure compatibility.



      b.   C-4 District. Shall not be located on a lot that borders
an arterial roadway unless accessory to a Boat Dealer. No repair shall be
allowed outside an enclosed structure, and exterior storage of boats and
equipment must be adequately screened from adjacent rights-of-way and
properties.



      c.   M-1 District.  The exterior storage of boats or
equipment must be adequately screened from adjacent rights-of-way and
properties. The dry stacking of any boats shall be prohibited.



      d.   PID District. Only allowed as an accessory use to a
retail boat dealer.



   92.   Carpet and Upholstery Cleaning Services.  Permitted off-site
only.



   93.   Contractor.



      a.   Refuse.  Dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be
screened from view of adjacent lots and streets.



      b.   C-4 District.



         (1)   Location.  This use is allowed within the C-4
district but it shall not be located on a lot that fronts on an arterial
roadway.



         (2)   Use(s) Allowed.



            (a)   Office and showroom only as a permitted use.



            (b)   Contractors' outdoor storage and workshop
shall require conditional use approval if located within two hundred (200)
feet of a residential zoning district.



      c.   M-1 District.  Contractors' outdoor storage and workshop
shall require conditional use approval if located within two hundred (200)
feet of a residential zoning district.



   94.   Lawn Maintenance & Landscaping Service.



      a.   Refuse.  Dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be
screened from view of adjacent lots and streets.



      b.   C-4 District.



         (1)   Location.  This use is allowed within the C-4
district but it shall not be located on a lot that fronts on an arterial
roadway.



         (2)   Use(s) Allowed.



            (a)   Office and showroom only as a permitted use.



            (b)   Outdoor storage and workshop shall require
conditional use approval if located within two hundred (200) feet of a
residential zoning district.



   95.   Radio & TV Broadcasting.  Refer to the wireless communication
facilities section in Chapter 3, Article V (Supplemental Regulations) of the
Land Development Regulations.



   96.   Research & Development, Scientific/Technological.  Excluding
treatment, storage, or processing of human or animal bodies or body parts. 
Medical or scientific research which involves the use, treatment, storage, or
processing of human or animal bodies or body parts would require conditional
use approval.



   97.   Sewer/Septic & Waste Mgmt. Cleaning.  This use excludes the
storage, treatment, transfer, dumping, or disposal of waste on-premises.



   98.   Taxi, Limo, Charter Bus.



      a.   C-2 District, C-3 District, C-4 District, CBD District,
and PCD District.  Office only; fleet vehicles shall be stored in a zoning
district where storage, boats/motor/recreational vehicles is allowed.



      b.   M-1 district. No exterior (temporary) storage of fleet
vehicles in a wrecked condition shall be permitted. In addition, the
following shall apply:



         (1)   Landscaping.  All exterior (temporary) storage of
fleet vehicles shall be adequately screened.  Additional buffering may be
required as recommended by the Director of Planning and Zoning to ensure
compatibility.



         (2)   Lighting.  If a facility abuts a residential
zone, outdoor lighting fixtures shall be no more than twenty (20) feet in
height and shall be shielded away from residential property.



         (3)   Loudspeakers.  No exterior loudspeakers or paging
equipment shall be permitted on-site.



   99.   Community Garden.



      a.   All Districts.



         (1)   Setbacks.  The cultivation area shall be setback
or designed (planted) a minimum distance so as to not violate any
cross-visibility requirements and safe-sight standards required near
vehicular use areas.



         (2)   Design.  Walkways shall be unpaved except as
necessary to meet the needs of individuals with disabilities.



         (3)   Parking.  Community gardens shall be exempt from
the off-street parking requirements of Chapter 4, Article V, Minimum
Off-Street Parking Requirements.  No vehicles, including harvesting
machinery shall be stored on the subject property or within the abutting
right-of-way, except that such vehicles may be on the property as necessary
for completion of grading performed in accordance with a land development
permit.  See Chapter 2, Article III, Section 3 for the regulations
pertaining to the land development permit.



         (4)   Hours of Operation.  No activity shall be
conducted on-site between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



         (5)   Exterior Lighting.  No temporary or permanent
exterior lighting shall be used beyond the lawful hours of operation.



         (6)   Walls and Fences.  Walls and fences shall be
allowed and regulated in accordance with Chapter 3, Article V, Section 2.



         (7)   Open Burning.  The open burning of neighborhood
gardens shall be prohibited.  See City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter
9, Article II, Section 9-18 for the restrictions on open burning.



         (8)   Signage.  Pursuant to Chapter 4, Article IV,
Section 1.E., a non-illuminated sign with non- commercial copy is allowed,
provided that it does not exceed three (3) square feet in area.  If proposed
as a freestanding structure, the sign shall not be greater than four (4) feet
in height and must be located at least ten (10) feet from any property line.



         (9)   Grading and Ground Elevation.  The subject site
shall not be excavated, graded, dredged, or filled to the extent that it
would change existing drainage patterns or cause rainwater to outfall onto
abutting properties or rights-of-way.



      b.   Residential Districts.



         (1)   IPUD District, PUD District, and MHP District.  A
community garden shall only be allowed on lands considered common area by the
homeowners or property owners' association or upon lots that are owned by
such association.



         (2)   Lot Size.  The maximum lot size shall not exceed
one-half (0.5) acre.



         (3)   Freestanding Structures and Site Amenities.  No
freestanding structures or site amenities allowed under Chapter 3, Article V,
Section 3 (e.g., sheds and storage containers, generators and fuel tanks,
compost bins and tumblers, agricultural structures) shall be allowed.



         (4)   Seed and Fertilizer.  No seed or fertilizer shall
be stored on-site.



         (5)   Approval Process.  A community garden shall
require the approval of a zoning permit in accordance with Chapter 2, Article
II, Section 5.B.



      c.   All Commercial and Mixed Use Districts.



         (1)   Lot Size.  The maximum lot size shall not exceed
one (1) acre.



         (2)   Separation.  A community garden shall be
separated from another community garden by a minimum of one thousand (1,000)
feet.



         (3)   Freestanding Structures and Site Amenities. 
Freestanding structures and site amenities, including but not limited to
sheds and storage containers, generators and fuel tanks, compost bins and
tumblers, or agricultural structures are allowed, provided that they are
installed, placed, erected, or constructed in accordance with the respective
provisions of Chapter 3, Article V, Section 3.



         (4)   Lot Coverage.  The ground area of all
freestanding structures and site amenities allowed under Chapter 3, Article
V, Section 3 that are installed, placed, erected, or constructed shall count
towards lot coverage; and all of these, including principal structures, shall
not exceed the maximum allowed by the respective zoning district.



         (5)   Approval Process.  A community garden shall
require the approval of a zoning permit in accordance with Chapter 2, Article
II, Section 5.B.  However, those containing storage and/or agricultural
structures greater than one hundred (100) square feet as provided for in the
Supplemental Regulations (Chapter 3, Article V, Section 3) shall require
approval of conditional use and site plan applications in accordance with
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.



         (6)   Retail Sales.  The on-site sale of fruits,
vegetables, nuts, or herbs harvested on-site is allowed, but only in
connection with the approval of a special event permit.  Any temporary farm
stand used during the special event period shall be no larger than
seventy-two (72) square feet and seven (7) feet in height.  No fruits,
vegetables, nuts, or herbs harvested off-site or any products produced
off-site shall be brought to the subject property and sold on-site.



      100.   Warehouse, showroom (single product line).



         a.   All Districts (for recreational vehicles only).



            (1)   Minimum property size for the particular use
shall be ten (10) acres.



            (2)   Must be located in a multi-tenant building.



            (3)   Interior display of recreational vehicles is
required.  Ancillary display outside an enclosed building shall not exceed
one and one-half (1-1/2)times the number of units displayed indoors.



            (4)   If ancillary outdoor display is proposed,
the property shall not be located on an arterial or collector roadway.



            (5)   Only one row of recreational vehicles may be
displayed between the building and any road right-of-way.  No recreational
vehicle may be displayed within ninety (90) feet of any road right-of-way.



            (6)   No ancillary outdoor display shall occur
within required parking spaces.



            (7)   Location of ancillary outdoor display shall
not obstruct or impede vehicular movements or pedestrian access.



            (8)   Landscaping shall be in conformance with
either “perimeter landscape buffer” or “landscape strip abutting
right-of-way” requirements, whichever is applicable.



            (9)   No maintenance shall occur on site.



   101.   Medical Care or Testing (In-patient).  Other requirements
and site standards:



      a.   Conditional use approval shall be required if there
exists less than a fifty (50) foot setback between the subject use and an
abutting residential or mixed use zoning district. This separation is
intended to enable proper site design regarding secured access, private
outdoor patron amenities, buffering, and the like.



      b.   Site security shall be ensured through a minimum of
surveillance cameras, limited and controlled access points, and operational
procedures to restrict unauthorized and/or unarranged accessing or exiting of
the facility and/or property. This subsection may be proven unnecessary based
on the use or operation, surrounding land uses and/or site design.
Justification shall be provided to staff in conjunction with site plan review
or when applying for Certificate of Use approval.



      c.   Privacy and access control shall be ensured through a
minimum of perimeter fencing and landscape buffering intended to support the
objective to control access and increase privacy of areas intended for client
or patient use. This subsection may be proven unnecessary based on the use or
operation, surrounding land uses and/or site design. Justification shall be
provided to staff in conjunction with site plan review or when applying for
Certificate of Use approval.



      d.   In addition to the locational restriction of footnote No.
14 (arterial roadway frontage), allowed locations within the CRA shall
exclude Planning Areas #2, #3, and #4 as defined within the Federal Highway
Corridor Community Redevelopment Plan Update adopted in 2006, and the Boynton
Beach Boulevard corridor. The intent of this standard is to reserve certain
areas within the CRA to those uses that contribute to, and enhance, the
entries into the downtown, the fabric of the streetscape, harmonious land use
relationships, downtown retail and commerce, and other urban development
efforts that establish a sense of place along the key routes leading to, and
within, the downtown pursuant to an adopted redevelopment plan.



   102.   Pre-existing.  Such pre-existing uses which are no longer
allowed uses pursuant to amendments to the Zoning Matrix shall not be
construed as non-conforming uses. However, major modifications to such uses
shall be in accordance with the conditional use approval process if required
pursuant to the Zoning Matrix, and adhere to the site design and operational
restrictions of the applicable footnotes.



   103.   Landscape Debris Stockpiling.  The commercial stockpiling of
landscaping debris is allowed as a conditional use in the M-1 zoning district
subject to the following conditions:



      a.   Prior to commencing the operation of a landscaping debris
storage site, a property owner must first obtain a Business Tax Receipt and
Certificate of Use from the city.



      b.   A site plan notated to show operational components of the
storage facility (i.e. access, storage area, setback, etc).



      c.   No stockpiling of landscaping debris shall be permitted
on properties of less than 0.5 acres.



      d.   A minimum 20-foot wide stabilized all weather access road
around the perimeter of the stockpile.



      e.   All stored landscaping debris shall be setback at least
30 feet from any residential property line and 25 feet from all other
property lines.



      f.   All storm water drainage shall be maintained on the site
by appropriate infrastructure and improvements as approved by the City
Engineer or his or her designees.



      g.   No chipping of stockpiled debris is permitted on the site.



      h.   The perimeter of a storage site shall be screened with a
wall or fence that obstructs the view of the storage area from adjacent
properties, except where such use abuts a residential zoning district
screening shall also include landscape elements that meet the intent of the
Landscape Barrier as defined in Chapter 4, Article II of the Land Development
Regulations.



      i.   The hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and Saturday, from 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.,
or as established during the conditional use approval process.



      j.   Access to operations shall be only from a public
right-of-way. In no case, shall a delivery or removal of the stored
landscaping debris utilize a private road or alley serving residential uses
for access.



      k.   The delivery, removal and storage shall utilize dust
control measures.



      l.   Debris piles shall nol be placed on surfaces intended or
designed for open space, or for parking or vehicle circulation.



      m.   Storage areas shall include fire protection monitoring,
alert and suppression systems as approved by the City Fire Marshal. The
following are minimum requirements which must be demonstrated to obtain Fire
Marshal approval:



         1)   No pile shall be higher than 10 feet. During any
declared drought the height shall be limited to six feet.



         2)   All piles shall be covered with a “breathable
blanket” or site provided with a sprinkler system approved by the City Fire
Marshal.



         3)   All piles shall be secured behind a fence or other
approved barrier that will be locked at all times when not in use.



         4)   Because of the health hazards from the rotting
vegetation and the vermin that may live there and the fire hazard these piles
shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any commercial building and 40 feet from
any residence.



         5)   A working garden hose shall be at the ready at all
times to put out small spot fires.



         6)   Each pile shall be churned at least once per week
and so noted on a roster to be maintained onsite and made available to a Fire
Department representative on request.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-002, passed 3-1-11; Am. Ord.
11-018, passed 7-5-11; Am. Ord. 11-023, passed 10-4-11; Am. Ord. 11-028,
passed 10-18-11; Am. Ord. 12-006, passed 4-17-12; Am. Ord. 12-010, passed
6-19-12; Am. Ord. 13-020, passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 13-025, passed 10-1-13; Am.
Ord. 13-029, passed 11-19-13; Am. Ord. 15-002, passed 3-17-15; Am. Ord.
15-003, passed 3-17-15; Am. Ord. 15-019, passed 8-18-15; Am. Ord. 15-030,
passed 11-3-15; Am. Ord. 16-010, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 16-011, passed
7-5-16; Am. Ord. 16-023, passed 1-3-17; Am. Ord. 17-005, passed 2-21-17; Am.
Ord. 17-014, passed 7-18-17; Am. Ord. 17-023, passed 9-19-17; Am. Ord.
17-031, passed 11-7-17; Am. Ord. 18-010, § 2, 7-3-18; Am. Ord. 18-013, § 3,
7-17-18; Am. Ord. 18-018, 2, 8-7-18)



Sec. 4.   Conditional Uses.



   A.   Applicability.  Where zoning district regulations indicate
that a use is allowed as a conditional use, the procedures, requirements, and
standards set out in Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.C. and this section
shall apply.



   B.   Definition.  See Chapter 1, Article II, Definitions.



   C.   Standards for Evaluating Conditional Uses.  In evaluating an
application for conditional use, the Board and Commission shall consider the
effect of the proposed use on the general health, safety, and welfare of the
community and make written findings certifying that satisfactory provisions
has been made concerning all of the following standards, where applicable:



      1.   Ingress and egress to the subject property and proposed
structures thereon, with particular reference to automobile and pedestrian
safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire
or catastrophe;



      2.   Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with
particular attention to the items in subsection C.1. above, and the economic,
glare, noise, and odor effects the conditional use will have on adjacent and
nearby properties, and the city as a whole;



      3.   Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to
the items in subsection C.1. and C.2. above;



      4.   Utilities, with reference to locations, availability, and
compatibility;



      5.   Screening, buffering and landscaping with reference to
type, dimensions, and character;



      6.   Signs, and proposed exterior lighting, with reference to
glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with
adjacent and nearby properties;



      7.   Required setbacks and other open spaces;



      8.   General compatibility with adjacent properties, and other
property in the zoning district;



      9.   Height of buildings and structures, with reference to
compatibility and harmony to adjacent and nearby properties, and the city as
a whole;



      10.   Economic effects on adjacent and nearby properties, and
the city as a whole;



      11.   Where applicable, the proposed use furthers the purpose
and intent of a corresponding mixed use zoning district or redevelopment
plan; and



      12.   Compliance with and abatement of nuisances and hazards
in accordance with the operational performance standards as indicated in
Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 1 and the Noise Control Ordinance, and City
Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 15, Section 15-8.



      A sound impact analysis shall be required for new or expanding
bar, nightclub or similar uses when involving property within 300 feet of a
residential district. The analysis shall include mitigating solutions that
would reduce or eliminate any potential for off-site nuisance conditions.
Depending on the size of the proposed use, the distances to and level of
compatibility with adjacent land uses, the sound analysis may be required to
include information, diagrams and sketches indicating the types and locations
of proposed sound emitting equipment, speaker orientations, maximum output,
building or site design intended to mitigate sound impacts, and any
operational standards including an affidavit documenting maximum sound limits
to be maintained based on the findings of the analysis.



      A live entertainment permit shall be required for a bar/nightclub
use pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 3, Article IV, Section l.a, and
Part II (Code of Ordinances).  Chapter 13, Article IV, Section 13-80.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-010, passed 6-19-12; Am. Ord.
12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 5.   Nonconforming Uses.



   A.   Definition.  See Chapter 1, Article II, Definitions.



   B.   Existing Uses. 



      1.   General. Any lawful use of land or structures existing on
the effective date of the adoption or amendment of these zoning regulations,
but which would become a nonconforming use under the terms of these
Regulations or future amendments hereto, shall be permitted to continue,
subject to the provisions of this section pertaining to its extension,
alteration, reconstruction, business tax renewal, discontinuance or change.



   Any use or structure in lawful existence at the time of adoption or
amendment of these zoning regulations which would thereafter require a
conditional use approval under its provisions shall be construed to be a
nonconforming use.  Such uses or structures may become conforming upon
application, review, and approval as a conditional use according to the
procedures and standards set forth in these zoning regulations for
conditional use approvals.  However, if approval of a conditional use is not
granted for such use or structure, then it shall continue to be construed as
nonconforming.  Any enlargement, increase, extension, or intensification of
a use or structure would require such approval as if it were a new use or
structure.  Any alteration or movement of such use which the Development
Director finds does not enlarge, increase, extend, or intensify the use,
shall not require conditional use approval, but shall conform to all other
applicable provisions contained in the Boynton Beach Land Development
Regulations.



      2.   Exclusions (Ordinance 12-010).  Any legally conforming 
use  with  previous  city  approval  or in possession of an active
Business Tax Receipt and/or Certificate of Use at the time of this ordinance,
but no longer listed as permitted or conditional in the zoning district in
which it is located pursuant to Ordinance 12-010 shall continue to be
considered conforming to the extent that it may expand business operations
and/or associated building by up to twenty percent (20%), provided it does
not expand onto an abutting lot. This same provision shall apply to the Land
Use Option(s) of individual lots depicted on the Quantum Park Master Site
Development Plan.



   C.   Nonconforming Use Limitations.



      1.   Use of Land.  No nonconforming use of land shall be
enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was
occupied on the effective date of the adoption or amendment of these
Regulations, unless such use is subsequently changed to a use permitted in
the district in which such use is located.



   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use on the effective date
of the adoption or amendment to these Regulations, nor shall such
nonconforming use be moved to any other parcel or located in any district
within which said use is not permitted.



   No additional structures or buildings shall be erected in connection
with such nonconforming use of land.



      2.   Use of Structures.  Any nonconforming use which occupies
a portion of a building or other structure not originally designed or
intended for such use shall not be extended to any other part of the building
or structure.  No nonconforming use may be extended to occupy any land
outside the building or structure, nor any additional building or structure
on the same plat, which was not used for such nonconforming use at the
effective date of the adoption or amendment of these Regulations.



   No structure used for a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, or structurally altered, unless the use is changed to one
which complies with the provisions of these Regulations. However, ordinary
repairs, maintenance and improvements, such as plumbing or wiring,
replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures or other interior alterations,
shall be permitted each year in an amount not to exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the assessed value of the building or structure for that year as
determined by the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser, subject to the
provisions of the preceding paragraph and provided such work does not
increase the cubic volume of the structure, the floor area devoted to the
nonconforming use or the number of dwelling units. Nothing in these
Regulations shall prevent compliance with applicable laws or ordinances
relative to the safety and sanitation of a building occupied by nonconforming
use.



   D.   Change of Use.  Any part of a structure or land occupied by a
nonconforming use which is changed to or occupied by a conforming use shall
not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use.  A nonconforming
use of land or structure shall not be changed to any other use except one
which would be permitted as a conforming use in the district in which the
land or building is located.  However, no change shall be required in the
plans, construction, or designed use of any structure for which a building
permit was lawfully issued pursuant to Chapter 4, Article IX, and upon which
construction has actually begun prior to the effective date of the adoption
or amendment of these Regulations.



   E.   Discontinuance.  If for any reason a nonconforming use of
land, structure or any part thereof ceases or is discontinued for a period of
more than six (6) consecutive months, except when government action impedes
access thereto, the land shall not thereafter be used for a nonconforming
use.  The issuance or existence of a required business tax receipt, permit,
or other governmental authorization to conduct such nonconforming use shall
not mean that the use has not ceased, but that the lack of the same shall
create a refutable presumption that the use has ceased.



   F.   Nonconforming Lots/Structures.  See Chapter 3, Article V,
Section 11 for the regulations pertaining to nonconforming lots and
structures.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-010, passed 6-19-12)



Sec. 6.   Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




ARTICLE V.  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  This article is to maintain standards for
those accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to the main use or building(s) and located on the same lot.  The
intent of the supplemental regulations provides common regulations for
circumstances encountered throughout the city.



   B.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee shall coordinate, interpret, and administer this article.



   C.   Applicability.  Except as otherwise specifically provided
herein, the regulations set out in this article shall be applicable to all
zoning districts.



   D.   Rules.



      1.   Conformity.  No building or structure, or part thereof,
shall hereafter be erected, constructed, or altered except in conformity with
the provisions of this article.



      2.   Timing.  Construction of accessory structures, excluding
walls or fences, may not precede construction of the principal building.  No
accessory structure, including boat docks and swimming pools, shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the principal building has
commenced.



   E.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of this
Code are at conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply, unless
otherwise stated herein.



   F.   Relief from Regulations.  Unless described otherwise in this
article, any deviation from these zoning regulations shall require approval
of a variance application, which is subject to review and approval by the
City Commission.  A request for a variance shall be reviewed in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.D.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Walls and Fences.



   Walls and fences are allowed in all zoning districts within all
required yards and shall be regulated as follows:



   A.   Location and Height.  Walls and fences shall only be erected
on the lot of the applicant and not protrude or extend outside the property
line or into a public right-of-way.  The maximum height of walls and fences
shall be eight (8) feet, except as described below:



      1.   Single-family and Two-family Residential Districts. 
Walls and fences shall be a maximum of four (4) feet in height where located
within front and corner side corner yards of single-family or duplex dwelling
units. 









 



      However, the four (4)-foot height limitation may not apply under
the following instances:



         a.   Corner Side Yard of Corner Lots.  Within the
corner side yard of a corner lot that abuts and shares a common rear property
line with another corner lot.



   The front yard of each corner lot must be located on a separate street,
opposite and/or parallel from each other.  Walls and fences shall be setback
at least two (2) feet from the side corner property line in order to
accommodate its footer and a continuous hedge, which shall be maintained a
minimum one-half (½) the height of the wall or fence.  The hedge shall be
located on the street-side of the wall or fence and must be appropriately
maintained.









 



         b.   Rear Yard of Through-Lots.  On through-lots with
double frontages, walls and fences may be erected at the regulated height for
rear yards provided that a provision is made for a hedge along the
street-side of the wall or fence.  Walls and fences shall be setback at
least two (2) feet from the side corner property line in order to accommodate
its footer and a continuous hedge, which shall be maintained a minimum
one-half (½) the height of the wall or fence.  The hedge shall be located
on the street-side of the wall or fence and must be appropriately maintained.



      2.   Multi-family and Townhouse Developments.  Walls and
fences shall be a maximum of six (6) feet in height where located within
landscape strips abutting rights-of-way on all developments that have less
than four hundred (400) feet of frontage on typical city streets.  However,
the maximum height of walls and fences (located within the landscape strip
abutting rights-of-way) may be increased to eight (8) feet when in compliance
with the following:



         a.   The street frontage of the development is at least
four hundred (400) feet in length;



         b.   The development has no more than one (1) parking
lot driveway opening or access point along such street frontage;



         c.   Walls and fences shall be setback at least two (2)
feet from the property line along such street frontage, in order to
accommodate its footer and a continuous hedge, which shall be maintained a
minimum one-half (½) the height of the wall or fence.  The hedge shall be
located on the street-side of the wall or fence and must be appropriately
maintained.



      3.   Low Voltage Security Fencing in Industrial Districts. 
Low voltage security fencing, as provided for in Section 2.I. below, may be
placed on a perimeter fence, not to exceed the perimeter fence height by more
than two (2) feet.



   B.   Cross-Visibility and Safe Sight.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to promote safety in the use of opaque walls and fences where
in close proximity to rights-of-way, off-street parking areas, and other
vehicular use areas.  The intent is to ensure safe and unobstructed views
for both pedestrians and motorists.



         b.   Administration.  The City Engineer or designee
shall coordinate, interpret, and administer this subsection.



      2.   Visibility at Driveway Openings.  The "safe-sight
triangle" is the triangular-shaped area described by the Engineering Design
Handbook and Construction Standards (EDHCS).  Unobstructed cross-visibility
shall be maintained in the safe-sight triangle where parking lot driveway
openings and access points occur along rights-of-way or between individual
properties.  Walls and fences are allowed within the safe-sight triangle
provided that unobstructed cross-visibility is maintained thirty (30) inches
above the pavement, measured from the abutting right-of-way or cross-access
drive, whichever is applicable.  The City Engineer shall determine the
appropriate size and location of each safe-sight triangle in accordance with
the EDHCS.



      3.   Visibility at Corners of Rights-of-Way.  Opaque walls
and fences shall comply with cross-visibility standards pursuant to Chapter
4, Article VIII, Section 3.C.4.u.



      4.   Visibility along State Roads.  The placement of a wall
or fence shall not cause any line-of-sight obstruction and must comply with
the visibility requirements of Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT)
Standard Index No. 546 or the latest supplement thereof.



      5.   Visibility in Front and Side Corner Yards.  Unobstructed
cross-visibility shall be maintained within the front and side corner yards
of single-family and duplex residential lots in accordance with Chapter 3,
Article II, Section 6.



   C.   Design .  Walls and fences shall be symmetrical in appearance
with columns and posts conforming to a definite pattern and size of uniform
design and separation.  The wall or fence shall be kept in good repair and
be continuously maintained in its original appearance.  All walls and fences
shall be erected with the finished side facing adjacent properties.  The
face of any fence or wall visible to the public shall also be finished.







   The exterior surface of a wall shall be finished with paint, stucco, or
other commonly accepted material.  See Chapter 4, Article III, Section 3.E.
for additional standards regarding the appearance of walls and fences.



   D.   Dangerous Materials.  Walls and fences shall not contain any
substance such as broken glass, spikes, nails, or razors that are designed to
inflict discomfort, pain or injury to a person or animal, except where
located around industrial uses in the PID or M-1 districts.  In these
instances, they may be topped off with no more than three (3) strands of
barbed-wire, provided that they are not visible from a road right-of-way. 
Fences shall not be electrified, except as provided for in Section 2.I. below.



   E.   Attachments.  Gates, gateposts, lights, and/or other
decorative features, which are attached to a wall or fence, shall not exceed
the height of said wall or fence by more than two (2) feet.  In addition,
these attachments, excluding gates, shall not exceed an area of three
(3)-feet in any horizontal direction.  No more than eighty percent (80%) of
the length of a decorative gate may exceed the height of the wall or fence. 









 



   Arbors and trellises intended for pedestrian walkways are not included
within this height limitation and are regulated differently in accordance
with Chapter 3, Article V, Section 3.F.



   F.   Construction Sites.  Temporary security and safety fencing,
which may be required around construction sites in accordance with the
Florida Building Code, shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and must
comply with cross-visibility and safe-sight standards pursuant to Chapter 4,
Article VIII, Section 3.C.4.u. and the EDHCS.  Such fencing shall be
approved in conjunction with the building permit(s) and must be removed prior
to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion.  Any
signage placed on the temporary security fencing shall comply with Chapter 4,
Article IV, Section 3.B.3.  However, the screening material allowed in the
Sign Code shall not conflict with the original intent for said fencing, mesh,
and related materials, which is to offer protection from dust, debris, and
other airborne particulate matter.



   G.   Easements.  Walls and fences cannot abridge any easement
rights without approval from the affected utility company and/or the city. 
See Chapter 4, Article II, Section 3.A.10.c. for additional regulations
regarding buffer walls and easements.



   H.   Buffer Walls.



      1.   Definition.  See Chapter 1, Article II for the
definition of a buffer wall.



      2.   Where Required.  See Chapter 4, Article II, Section
4.B.3. and Chapter 4, Article II, Section 4.C.3. for additional regulations
regarding buffer walls and the requirement for them to be located within
perimeter landscape buffers and barriers.



      3.   Timing.  Construction of a buffer wall shall be
completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the
building or buildings sought to be built in connection therewith.



   I.   Low Voltage Security Fencing.  The construction and use of
electric fences shall be allowed in the city only as provided in this
section, subject to the following standards:



      1.   IEC Standard 60335-2-76.  Unless otherwise specified
herein, electric fences shall be constructed or installed in conformance with
the specifications set forth in International Electro technical Commission
(IEC) Standard No. 60335-2-76.



      2.   Electrification.



         a.   The energizer for electric fences must be driven by
a commercial storage battery not to exceed twelve (12) volts DC.  The
storage battery is charged primarily by a solar panel.  However, the solar
panel may be augmented by a commercial trickle charger.



         b.   The electric charge produced by the fence upon
contact shall not exceed energizer characteristics set forth in paragraph
22.108 and depicted in Figure 102 of IEC Standard No. 60335-2-76.



      3.   Perimeter Fence or Wall.



         a.   No electric fence shall be installed or used unless
it is completely surrounded by a non-electrical fence or wall that is not
less than six (6) feet in height.



         b.   The separation between the non-electrified
perimeter fence and the electrified fence shall be one (1) foot.



      4.   Location.  Electric fences shall be permitted on any
property zoned M-1, or PID if on a parcel that allows industrial uses
according to the corresponding Master Plan, and must be occupied by a
business that has an active business tax certificate.



      5.   Warning Signs.  Electric fences shall be clearly
identified with warning signs that are three (3) square feet in size and that
read: "Warning - Electric Fence".  The letters on the sign shall be a
minimum of six (6) inches in height, and the signs shall be spaced no greater
than forty (40) feet apart, mounted on the fence at least five (5) feet above
finished grade.  The signs shall be written in English, Spanish and Creole.



      6.   Permitting.  Electric fences shall be governed and
regulated under burglar alarm regulations of City Code of Ordinances Part II,
Chapter 2.5, Alarm Systems, and permitted as such.



      7.   Emergency Shut-off.  An emergency shut-off switch shall
be accessible to all emergency personnel to allow for necessary access. 
Control and access shall be of a type, location, and marking specified and
approved by the Police Chief and Fire Marshal.



      8.   Miscellaneous.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
install, maintain or operate an electric fence in violation of this section.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 3.   Common Building Appurtenances, Freestanding Structures, and Site
Amenities, Excluding Walls and Fences.



   Common building appurtenances, freestanding structures, and site
amenities (excluding walls and fences) shall be allowed in all zoning
districts within all required yard setbacks unless specifically stated
otherwise as contained herein.  In all instances, the aforementioned shall
not abridge any easement rights without express written consent from the
affected utility company or governing entity having jurisdiction over such
easement.  Any proposed building appurtenance, freestanding structure, or
site amenity that decreases the permeable land area in excess of eight
hundred (800) square feet on any given parcel shall be reviewed for
compliance with the drainage standards of Chapter 4, Article VIII, Section
3.G. and the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards.  This
review requires the submittal of a drainage plan prepared by a licensed
professional engineer based on the design standards referenced above.  No
building appurtenance, structure, or site amenity shall be installed,
erected, or constructed prior to the construction of the principal building
unless otherwise contained herein.



   A.   Building Appurtenances. The following regulations shall apply,
where applicable:



      1.   Architectural Features.  Eaves, cornices, gutters, facia
boards, copings, soffits, downspouts, belt courses, window sills, window
and/or door trim, applied finish materials, roof and/or equipment vents,
sillcocks, fire hose connections, meters, sand boxes, light fixtures,
hardware, bay windows, balconies, dripcaps, telephone and cable boxes,
electrical risers and outlets, window boxes, thermometers, handrails,
condensate drains, shower heads and ornamental architectural features shall
not extend, protrude, project, or overhang into any required yard setback by
more than three (3) feet.



      2.   Awnings, Canopies, and Shutters.  Awnings, canopies, and
shutters (storm or decorative) shall not protrude into any required yard
setback by more than three (3) feet; however, no setback adjacent to a
right-of-way shall be required where located in the Urban Commercial District
Overlay Zone (UCDOZ) or any "urban" mixed use district.  In these instances,
awnings, canopies, and shutters may extend into an abutting right-of-way,
contingent upon the approval of the entity having jurisdiction over the
right-of-way.  The owner shall obtain all necessary approvals and permits
where awnings, canopies, and shutters protrude into a public right-of-way and
must be moved or removed immediately upon request of the city or entity
having jurisdiction over such right-of-way.



      3.   Chimneys.  Chimneys shall not protrude into any required
yard setback by more than three (3) feet.



      4.   Fire Escapes and Unenclosed Staircases.  Fire escapes
and unenclosed staircases shall not protrude into any required yard setback
by more than four (4) feet.









 



   B.   Decks, Patios, Porches, Steps, Stoops, and Terraces. Unless
otherwise regulated by a master plan or site plan for a planned development,
minimum setbacks shall be as follows:



      1.   Unenclosed and Uncovered: a. two (2) feet from any
property line if less than or equal to one (1) foot in height; b. three (3)
feet from any property line if greater than one (1) foot but less than or
equal to three (3) feet in height; and c. the minimum setbacks required for
the principal building if greater than three (3) feet in height.



      2.   Unenclosed and Covered:



         a.   Unenclosed and covered porches and patios may
extend into the building setback by a maximum of 10 feet, but shall not
extend closer than 15 feet from the property line. The measurement shall be
from the leading edge of the structure to the property line, or the edge of
roadway in instances when the property line extends to the center of the
abutting roadway, unless the methodology for measuring is otherwise stated on
a corresponding plat or master plan.



         b.   Porch and patio steps may encroach an additional 4
feet into the setback.



         c.   Roof additions must be structurally-integrated or
attached with architecturally compatible materials to the principal structure.



         d.   The covered porch shall remain an open-air
structure and at no time shall the structure be enclosed in any manner,
including solid walls or screen materials.



   The aforementioned setbacks may be further reduced, but only in
connection with a swimming pool as provided for in accordance with Section
3.D. below. In both instances, however, they shall be maintained and drained
so as to prevent nuisance conditions to the public and/or abutting property
owners.  Driveways for residential off-street parking areas shall be
regulated in accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Section 2.B.



   C.   Screened-Roof Enclosures.  Screened-roof enclosures shall be
setback at least six (6) feet from the rear property line; however, such
setback may be reduced to three (3) feet in instances where the rear yard of
the subject property abuts a body of water, golf-course, park, interstate or
railroad right-of-way, commercial or industrial property, or the perimeter
wall of a non-residential development.  Unless otherwise regulated by a
master plan or site plan of a planned development, screened-roof enclosures
shall comply with the interior side yard setback required for the principal
structure.  No screened-roof enclosures shall be allowed within the required
front or side corner yard, including forward of the front or side corner
building line, or within a perimeter landscape buffer.



   D.   Swimming Pools and Spas.  Unless otherwise regulated by a
master plan or site plan for a planned development, in-ground and
above-ground swimming pools and spas (less than thirty-six (36) inches in
height) shall be setback at least eight (8) feet from rear and side interior
property lines; however, such required setbacks may be reduced to two (2)
feet in instances where the rear or side interior yard, whichever is
applicable, abuts a body of water, golf-course, an improved road, railroad,
or highway right-of-way, or a non-residential property.  The required
setback may be further reduced in such situations, but only upon the
determination of the Director of Planning and Zoning when determined
necessary to 1) comply with all applicable rules and regulations; 2) be of
minimum scale that will make possible the reasonable use of land; and 3) have
no impact to abutting properties.



   For clarification, the provision to reduce setbacks shall only be
available within the yard(s) along property lines abutting the qualifying
undevelopable or non-residential lands.  Above-ground swimming pools and
spas greater than thirty-six (36) inches in height shall be setback ten (10)
feet from rear and side interior property lines.  In all instances, swimming
pools and spas shall not be allowed within the required front or corner side
yards, including forward of the front or side corner building lines.



      1.   Private Pump Housing and Equipment.  Private pump
housing and equipment for swimming pools (and spas) shall be setback at least
three (3) feet from the rear and interior side property lines and adequately
screened where visible from abutting rights-of-way or properties zoned for
single-family residential dwellings.  Private pump houses and equipment
shall not be allowed within the required front or corner side yards,
including forward of the front or corner side building lines, unless approved
for an administrative adjustment if it is determined that no other on-site
location is available or feasible.  See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.A.
for the regulations pertaining to the administrative adjustment process.



      2.   Miscellaneous.  See the Florida Building Code for
additional regulations regarding barrier requirements around a swimming pool.



   E.   Sheds and Storage Containers.



      1.   Permanent Sheds and Storage Structures.  Permanent sheds
and storage structures may be designed either attached (to) or detached from
the principal building, and shall comply with the following regulations:



         a.   Location and Size.



            (1)   Sheds and storage structures shall not be
allowed within the required front or corner side yards, including forward of
the front or side corner building lines;



            (2)   Sheds and storage structures that are one
hundred (100) square feet or less shall be setback at least three (3) feet
from the rear and interior side property lines.  The maximum height of any
shed or storage structure shall be eight (8) feet for flat roofs or a mean
height of nine (9) feet for sloped roofs;









 



            (3)   Sheds and storage structures greater than
one hundred (100) square feet or in excess of the height restriction of
subparagraph E.1.a.(2) above shall comply with the minimum setbacks required
for the principal building.  The maximum allowable height of the shed or
storage structure shall not exceed the zoning district regulations for which
it is located or the roofline of the principal building, whichever is more
restrictive; and



            (4)   All attached sheds or storage structures
shall have exterior access only; no access from within the principal building
is allowed.



         b.   Number of Structures.  A lot may contain more than
one (1) shed or storage structure; however, any additional structure shall
comply with the minimum setbacks required for the principal building,
regardless of size.



         c.   Screening.  Sheds and storage structures shall be
effectively screened with a wall, fence, landscape material, or a combination
thereof, where visible from an abutting property or right-of-way.



         d.   Miscellaneous.  See Section 3.E.2. below for
additional regulations regarding the use of mobile and temporary storage
container units.  Sheds and storage areas that are designed and used in
connection with fire escapes or unenclosed staircases shall be regulated in
accordance with Section 3.A.4. above.



      2.   Mobile and Temporary Storage Container Units.  Mobile
and temporary storage container units shall only be allowed in residential
zoning districts and must comply with the following regulations:



         a.   Number of Units.  Only one (1) mobile or temporary
storage container unit may be allowed per lot for a single-family or duplex
home.  A maximum of two (2) units may be allowed at any given time within
multi-family developments.



         b.   Location.  Mobile or temporary storage container
units shall not be located within rights-of-way and must comply with the
following location criteria:



            (1)   Single-family or Duplex Homes.  The units
shall only be allowed within the required front or corner side yards if
placed on a driveway or other hard surfaced area, and setback at least five
(5) feet from any property line.  The unit shall not be allowed within the
required rear and side interior yard, or the space allotted for the principal
building.



            (2)   Multi-family Developments:



               (a)   The location of units shall be
restricted to guest parking spaces or other designated overflow parking areas;



               (b)   The location of the units shall not
interfere with any emergency or service vehicle operations;



               (c)   The units shall be setback at least
five (5) feet from all property lines;



               (d)   The units shall not be placed in
tandem with each other within one (1) parking space; and



               (e)   The units shall not be stacked on top
of each other.



         c.   Dimensions.  The size of a mobile or temporary
storage container unit shall not exceed the following dimensions:



            (1)   Maximum width of eight (8) feet;



            (2)   Maximum depth of sixteen (16) feet;



            (3)   Maximum height of eight (8) feet; and



            (4)   Maximum floor area of one hundred
twenty-eight (128) square feet.



         d.   Time Limit.  The maximum time for a mobile or
temporary storage container unit to remain on a property shall be forty-five
(45) days.



         e.   Maintenance.  The mobile or temporary storage
container unit shall be maintained in good condition, free from evidence of
deterioration, rust, holes, or breaks.  The unit shall be kept locked when
not in use.



         f.   Prohibition of Hazardous Materials.  The owner,
supplier, or tenant shall ensure that no hazardous substances shall be stored
or kept in the mobile or temporary storage container unit.



   F.   Arbors, Trellises, and Pergolas.  Arbors, trellises, and
pergolas shall be setback at least three (3) feet from any property line,
unless otherwise regulated by a master plan or site plan of a planned
development.  No setback is required along the front or corner side property
lines if the structure is located at a pedestrian access point that directly
connects to an abutting sidewalk, and when the use and design of such
structure is utilized for nostalgic purposes to better achieve the exterior
building and site design standards of Chapter 4, Article III, Section 1.A. 
In these instances, the maximum dimensions shall be as follows:



      1.   Maximum width between supporting columns – five (5)
feet;



      2.   Maximum depth between supporting columns - five (5) feet;
and



      3.   Length of cross-members at the top of the structure –
eight (8) feet.









 



   The maximum height of arbors, trellises, and pergolas shall be ten (10)
feet; however, a greater height may be allowed if the structure is an
extension of an eave or facia of a one (1)-story principal building.  In
these instances, the maximum height shall not exceed the mean roof height of
the principal building.



   G.   Open Air Structures and Gazebos.  Open-air structures and
gazebos, as defined in Chapter 1, Article II, shall comply with the following
regulations:



      1.   Applicability.



         a.   All open-air structures, excluding qualified
chickee and chiki huts, must be permitted in accordance with the city's
Zoning Regulations and the Florida Building Code.



         b.   Open air structures intended to qualify as a
chickee or chiki hut (see Chapter 1, Article II, Definitions) must be
reviewed for consistency with the regulations of this section and Florida
Statutes.  The issuance of a zoning verification letter from the Planning
and Zoning Division will represent a determination of consistency.  The
following information must be submitted for approval:



            (1)   A site plan or survey that includes scaled
dimensions of the proposed structure including setbacks;



            (2)   Proof that the builder is a member of either
the Miccosukee or Seminole Indian Tribes of Florida.  This shall be a copy
of the tribal members identification card; and



            (3)   Drawings or images of the proposed structure
indicating the open design, roof materials, and height.



      2.   District Regulations.



         a.   Single-family and Single-family/Two-family Zoning
Districts.  In single-family and single-family/two-family residential zoning
districts, an "open-air" structure, which does not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) square feet in floor area and twelve (12) feet in height measured at
the mean roof height for sloped roofs, shall be located according to the
following standards:



            (1)   The side setback shall be allowed to follow
the existing wall of the principal building provided it does not further
encroach into the setback or shall meet the minimum side setback requirement,
whichever is least restrictive.



            (2)   The rear setback shall be eight (8) feet;
however, in instances where the rear yard abuts a body of water, golf course,
park, interstate or railroad right-of-way, commercial/industrial property, or
the perimeter wall of a development abutting other than residential property,
the rear setback my be reduced to three (3) feet.



            (3)   The proposed structure must be located a
minimum of three (3) feet from any principal, accessory or other building and
structure on the property.



            (4)   For all cases in which the total square
footage of one (1) or more open-air structure or combination of such
structures exceeds one hundred fifty (150) feet of floor area, or exceeds
twelve (12) feet in mean roof height, the principal building setback of the
zoning district in which it is located shall apply.



            (5)   The open-air structure shall not be placed
forward of the front or corner side building line, within a utility or
drainage easement, or in a required landscape buffer.



         b.   Planned Developments.  Open air structures are
allowed within rear and interior side yards of individual lots within planned
residential developments.  The required setbacks shall be determined by the
approved master plan or site plan; however, in no case shall they be allowed
forward of the front or corner side building line.  If the master plan or
site plan is silent relative to these accessory structures, and if their
respective governing association has not adopted specific provisions or
standards for such accessory structures, their installation shall only be in
conformance with the approved building setbacks on the approved plan.



         c.   Other Districts.  The installation of such
structures in multi-family residential, mixed use, commercial, and industrial
zoning districts shall meet all building setback regulations for the zoning
district in which it is located.  In addition, the proposed structure must
be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the principal building(s)
on the property and from another such structure.  The city shall consider
other distances calculated by a licensed fire protection engineer in
accordance with NFPA 80A Protection of Buildings from Exterior Fire Exposures.



      3.   Methodology.  The square foot area of the open-air
structure shall be determined from the dimensions taken from inside the
support posts, provided the roof overhang does not exceed three (3) feet. 
For those structures that are supported by a single pole (i.e. umbrella
shape), the area measurements shall be taken from the drip line of the roof
materials.



      4.   Existing Structures.  All chickee/chiki huts constructed
prior to the adoption of these Regulations, within single-family and
single-family/two-family residential zoning districts, without the benefit of
a permit and not in compliance with the zoning regulations noted herein,
shall be reviewed for compliance with the qualification requirements for a
chickee hut as established by state law.  If determined consistent with
state law, such structures shall be considered nonconforming structures as
defined in the city's regulations.  Those improvements determined
inconsistent with state law shall be processed in accordance with the
following subsection.



      5.   Removal.  Except for those structures qualifying as
chickee/chiki huts, all other open-air structures constructed prior to these
Regulations without the benefit of a permit and those that do not comply with
these Regulations, due to application of permitting requirements, must be
removed or brought into compliance with all applicable regulations of the
city.



      6.   Violations.  Failure to comply with the provisions of
this section shall be considered a violation of the city's Code of
Ordinances, and subject the property owner to being cited by the city for
failure to comply with these code provisions pursuant to the city's Code
Compliance provisions, or any other legal process authorized by law. 



   H.   Barbecue Pits.  Barbecue pits and their accessory equipment
shall comply with the following:



      1.   Setback.  Setback at least three (3) feet from the rear
and interior side property lines.  They are not allowed within the required
front or side corner yards setbacks, including forward of the front or corner
side building lines;



      2.   Size.  Occupy more than one hundred (100) square feet;
and



      3.   Height.  Be greater than nine (9) feet in height.



   I.   Rock Gardens.  Rock gardens are allowed within all required
yards.



   J.   Garden.  The cultivation area shall be setback a minimum
distance or designed (planted) so as to not violate any cross-visibility
requirements and safe-sight standards required near vehicular use areas.  In
addition, the following shall apply:



      1.   Accessory Garden.  None of the common building
appurtenances, freestanding structures, site amenities and improvements
contained in this section (excluding walls and fences) are allowed on the
subject property prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a
principal building.  See Section 3.Y. below for additional regulations
regarding accessory agricultural structures.



      2.   Community Garden.  None of the common building
appurtenances, freestanding structures, site amenities and improvements
contained in this section (excluding walls and fences) are allowed on the
subject property, except in commercial and mixed use districts.  See Section
3.Y. below for additional regulations regarding accessory agricultural
structures.



   K.   Fish and Lily Ponds.  Fish and lily ponds are allowed within
all required yards; however, the maximum depth shall not exceed eighteen (18)
inches.  Those which are deeper than eighteen (18) inches shall be treated
the same as swimming pools and spas and regulated in accordance with Section
3.D. above.



   L.   Fountains, Sculptures, and Miscellaneous Art.  Unless used in
connection with the Arts in Public Places ordinance, all fountains,
sculptures, and similar objects of art shall be setback at least ten (10)
feet from the front property line and three (3) feet from all other property
lines, and must not occupy more than one hundred (100) square feet, or exceed
nine (9) feet in height.



   M.   Playground Equipment.



      1.   Playground Equipment, Excluding Basketball Goals. 
Playground equipment, excluding basketball goals, shall comply with the
following, where applicable:



         a.   Residential Uses.  When used in connection with
residential uses, they shall not be allowed within the required front, corner
side, or interior side yards, including forward of the front, corner side, or
interior side building lines. 



         b.   Non-residential Uses.  When used in connection
with non-residential uses, they are allowed within any required yard, but
shall be setback at least five (5) feet from any property line.



      2.   Basketball goals.  Basketball goals shall be setback at
least fifteen (15) feet from the front and corner side property lines and
three (3) feet from the rear and interior side property lines.



   N.   Flags and Flagpoles.  In addition to the standards listed
below, the maximum size of any one (1) flag shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
square.  For the purpose of this subsection, building height shall be
construed to be the highest point of the roof.



      1.   Flagpoles.  A flagpole, which contains no more than one
(1) structural ground member for support, shall be setback at least ten (10)
feet from any property line. 



         a.   Single-Family and Two-Family Residential
Districts.  Only one (1) flagpole, containing a maximum of two (2) flags,
may be erected per lot.  The maximum height of a flagpole shall neither
exceed the building height nor twenty-five (25) feet, whichever is less.  No
flags of any commercial nature may be flown on flagpoles located within any
of these districts.



         b.   All Other Districts.  Only one (1) flagpole,
containing a maximum of two (2) flags, may be erected per lot/development. 
The maximum height of a flagpole shall neither exceed the building height nor
forty-five (45) feet, whichever is less.



         c.   Certain Uses.  A maximum of three (3) flagpoles,
containing one (1) flag each, may be erected per lot/development for the
following uses (as described by the use matrix (Table 3-28) of Chapter 3,
Article IV, Section 3.D.: community facilities, schools (primary and
secondary), and post office.  Two (2) flags may be flown on single flagpole
if only one (1) flagpole is erected for the entire development.



      2.   Stanchions (Affixed to Buildings).  A maximum of two (2)
stanchions, containing one (1) flag each, may be allowed per lot/development.



         a.   Size.  The total projection of a stanchion shall
not exceed nine (9) feet in length.



         b.   Maximum Height.  The projection of the stanchion,
in conjunction with its angle, shall not cause the top of the stanchion to be
taller than the existing building height. 



         c.   Minimum Clearance.  A minimum dimension of nine
(9) feet shall be maintained under the flag, where needed to provide adequate
clearance for pedestrians.



         d.   Location.  Stanchions shall only be affixed to
principal buildings.  They may protrude into any required yard setback but
shall not extend outside the property boundaries, except in instances where
they protrude into an abutting right-of-way.  The owner shall obtain all
necessary approvals and permits where stanchions protrude into a public
right-of-way.



      3.   Wireless Communication Facilities.  See Section 13 below
for regulations regarding flagpoles that are used in connection conjunction
with concealed wireless communication facilities.



   O.   Seawalls, Bulkheads, Docks, and Piers.  Seawalls, bulkheads,
piers and docks installed along access waterways shall be installed under a
permit issued by the Boynton Beach Development Department.  Seawalls and
bulkheads shall be constructed with the water side face not to encroach over
the property line.



   The bulkhead line heretofore established within the city limits by
Ordinance No. 289 of the city, in accordance with Map No. R-56-006 entitled
"Bulkhead Line of the City of Boynton Beach, Florida" dated September, 1956,
is hereby ratified and confirmed and said map is hereby adopted by reference
and made part hereof.  There shall be no bulkhead, seawall, or other
structure for land filling into the water of Lake Worth, which shall extend
eastward from the existing shoreline other than as shown on the map referred
to above.



   It shall be required, prior to commencing any operation for land
filling within the area as shown on the map described in this section, a
permit for land filling, all of which shall be in accord with the directions
and approval by the City Commission.  The improvement, or fill, shall have a
minimum elevation of not less than six (6) feet above mean sea level
according to the current U.S. Government Geodetic Survey.  Any such
applicant shall also be required to comply with all rules, regulations, or
other requirements of the Trustees of the Internal Improvement Fund of the
State of Florida, U.S. Army Engineers or other governmental body regulating
land filling operations of the above nature.



   An applicant who proposes a dock within a waterway that is owned by a
separate property holder shall obtain written consent from such property
holder, prior to the issuance of any permits for the proposed dock.  All
docks, mooring piles, dolphins, groins, seawalls, jetties, revetments, and
similar structures and facilities related thereto, shall not extend farther
into the waterway than one-quarter (¼) the width of the waterway for private
or commercial docking and mooring facilities.









 



   See City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 9, Article II for fire
protection requirements for docks and piers.



   P.   Light Poles and Portable Landscape Lighting.  Light poles and
portable landscape lighting are allowed within all required yards.



   Q.   Mailboxes.  Mailboxes shall be allowed in rights-of-way and
must comply with federal guidelines.  The city shall not be responsible for
any damage caused by normal street maintenance to any mailbox that is located
within a public right-of-way and does not comply with current federal
guidelines.



   R.   Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioner (HVAC) Units. 
Heating, ventilation, and air conditioner units (including their associated
compressors, condensers, intake, and exhaust fans) shall be setback at least
three (3) feet from the rear and interior side property lines.  HVAC units
shall not be allowed within the required front or corner side yards,
including forward of the front or corner side building lines, unless approved
for an administrative adjustment if it is determined that no other on-site
location is available or feasible, or based on the finding that by virtue of
the use or design of the abutting property or development, the location would
have no negative impact.  See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.A. for the
regulations pertaining to the administrative adjustment process.  When used
in connection with non-residential uses, HVAC units shall be effectively
screened with a wall, fence, landscape material, or combination thereof,
where visible from an abutting property or right-of-way.  Exhaust fans shall
be directed vertically or away from abutting residential properties, where
applicable.



   S.   Utility Transmission Lines.  Utility, cable, and telephone
lines, including their associated poles are allowed within all required yards.



   T.   Generators and Storage Tanks.  The permanent installation of
generators and storage tanks, silos and hoppers shall be allowed if used as a
common accessory function to a principal use, and must comply with the
following regulations, unless found in conflict with other adopted federal,
state, or life safety codes, rules, regulations, ordinances, or laws:



      1.   Location.  The siting of all generators and storage
tanks shall require site plan approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Art. II,
Sect. 2.F of these regulations. When practical and not in conflict with other
codes and standards, generators and storage tanks shall be placed adjacent to
a principal or accessory building to utilize the existing available screening
for the structure. All structures regulated by this section shall be setback
at least three (3) feet plus an additional one (1) foot for every one (1)
foot above a height of 6 feet but not greater than the minimum setback for
the principal structure.  In all instances, they shall not be allowed within
the required front or corner side yards, including forward of the front or
corner side building lines, unless approved for an administrative adjustment
if it is determined that no other on-site location is available or feasible,
or based on the finding that by virtue of the use or design of the abutting
property or development, the location would have no negative impact.  See
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.A. for the regulations pertaining to the
administrative adjustment process. Additional setback requirements may be
deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Director to ensure land use
compatibility, or to further a redevelopment plan or other city initiative.



      2.   Height. The maximum height for vertical storage bins,
silos and hoppers shall be the maximum height for the zoning district, or 10
feet above the principal building, whichever is less. Additional restrictions
on height may be deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Director to
ensure land use compatibility, or to further a redevelopment plan or other
city initiative.



      3.   Screening.  When used in connection with non-residential
uses, generators and storage tanks shall be effectively screened from view
with a wall, fence, landscape material, or combination thereof, where visible
from an abutting property or right-of-way.  Screening shall not be required
for vertical storage bins, silos or hoppers if the container is designed
compatible with the principal structure (e.g. similar colors and/or
materials) and if the tank, including all structural members, filling or
emptying equipment and signage are maintained in a clean, rust-free and
working condition without any peeling paint, staining or other signs of wear.
Additional screening may be deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning
Director to ensure land use compatibility, or to further a redevelopment plan
or other city initiative.



      4.   Noise.  In residential zoning districts, emergency
generators shall be exempt from the sound rating values set forth in the City
Code of Ordinances when operated during power outages.  However, in no event
shall the sound rating value of emergency generators exceed seventy-two (72)
dBA.



      5.   Testing.  In residential zoning districts, emergency
generators may be operated for testing purposes, one (1) time, for a period
not to exceed thirty (30) minutes in any seven (7)-day period.  Testing of
emergency generators is permitted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. through
5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.  No testing of emergency generators is
permitted on Sundays or federal holidays.



   U.   Compost Bin and Tumbler.  Compost bins and tumblers shall only
be allowed within residential zoning districts.  They shall be setback at
least three (3) feet from the rear property line and ten (10) feet from the
interior side property line.  A lesser setback from the interior side
property line may be allowed if approved for an administrative adjustment if
it is determined that no other on-site location is available or feasible, or
based on the finding that by virtue of the use or design of the abutting
property or development, the location would have no negative impact.  In
these instances, the compost bin or tumbler shall be adequately screened and
located no closer than three (3) feet from the interior side property line. 
See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.A. for the regulations pertaining to the
administrative adjustment process.  Regardless however, they shall not be
allowed within the required front or corner side yards, including forward of
the front or corner side building lines.  The maximum size of any compost
bin or tumbler shall not exceed thirty (30) cubic feet.  The contents inside
a compost bin or tumbler shall not emit any odor so as to be a nuisance or
hazard to the subject property, neighboring lands, or rights-of-way and the
use of such bin or tumbler must comply with the city's operational
performance standards in accordance with Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 1.



   V.   Rain Barrel.  Rain barrels shall be setback at least four (4)
feet from the rear and interior side property lines.  They shall not be
allowed within the required front or side corner yards, including forward of
the front or corner side building lines.  The intent of these Regulations is
to require the location of the rain barrel within close proximity of the
principal building and to design it with a perforated lid so that any
precipitation that is captured by the principal building's rain leader or
downspout is fed directly into the rain barrel, which would diminish the
likelihood of creating an environment for standing water and possible
breeding ground for mosquitoes and other pests.  The maximum size of any
rain barrel shall not exceed sixty (60) gallons.



   W.   Solar Photovoltaic (PV) Arrays.  For the purposes of this
subsection, a solar photovoltaic (PV) array, hereinafter referred to as "PV
array", is construed to include any mounting system (roof-ground; flush or
wall-mounted; embodied in siding or shingles; or pole) and accessory
equipment.



      1.   At-Grade.



         a.   Applicability.  The regulations of this subsection
shall be applicable to any PV array that is erected or installed at-grade
(ground level).



         b.   Exemptions.  The restrictions of this subsection
with respect to height, location, and setbacks are not applicable to any
at-grade PV array approved under the following circumstances:  1) in
connection with the Arts in Public Places ordinance; or 2) as an accessory
component to a freestanding outdoor lighting fixture, telephone pole, parking
meter, or any other similar structure, as determined by the city.



         c.   Height.  The maximum height of any PV array shall
not exceed twelve (12) feet.



         d.   Location.  No minimum setback from any property
line shall be required, except in the following instances:  1) the subject
property is located in a residential zoning district; or 2) the PV array is
used in connection with a non-residential use that abuts residentially-zoned
property.  In these instances, PV arrays which are less than six (6) feet in
height shall require a minimum setback of three (3) feet (measured from the
leading edge of the array) from the rear and interior side property lines. 
Unless otherwise regulated by a master plan or site plan of a planned
development, PV arrays with heights between six (6) feet and nine (9) feet
shall be setback at least seven and one-half (7-½) feet from the rear and
interior side property lines; those greater than nine (9) feet in height
shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from such property lines.  In
instances when a setback of seven and one-half (7–½) feet or more is
required, a lesser setback may be allowed, contingent upon the approval of an
administrative adjustment if it is determined that no other on-site location
is available or feasible, or based on the finding that by virtue of the use
or design of the abutting property or development, the location would have no
negative impact.  See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.A. for the
regulations pertaining to the administrative adjustment process. 



   PV arrays regulated under this subparagraph shall not be allowed within
the required front or corner side yards, including forward of the front or
corner side building lines.  PV arrays shall not be allowed within a
required landscape buffer or landscape strip abutting a right-of-way.  See
Chapter 2, Article II for additional standards regarding landscape buffers
and landscape strips abutting rights-of-way.



      2.   Rooftop.  The highest point of the PV array shall not
exceed six (6) feet beyond the existing roof onto which it is mounted;
however a greater height may be allowed if it is completely screened from
view at a minimum distance of six hundred (600) feet.  If complete screening
is unattainable, a greater height may be allowed with the approval of a
height exception.  See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.C. for the
regulations pertaining to the height exception process.



      3.   Wall Mounted or Flush to a Building or Structure.  The
following regulations shall be applicable to any PV array that is mounted to
the side of any building or structure:



         a.   Location.  PV arrays are allowed on the walls or
sides of any building or structure but shall not encroach into any required
yard setback by more than three (3) feet, except on those properties located
in the Urban Commercial District Overlay Zone (UCDOZ) or any "urban" mixed
use district where provisions allow PV arrays to extend into an abutting
right-of-way.  The owner shall obtain all necessary approvals and permits
where PV arrays protrude into a public right-of-way.  All such PV arrays
shall be moved or removed immediately upon request of the city or entity
having jurisdiction over such right-of-way.



         b.   Minimum Clearance.  A minimum dimension of nine
(9) feet shall be maintained under the PV array where needed to provide
adequate clearance for pedestrians.



         c.   Appearance.  To the maximum extent possible, wall
mounted PV arrays shall be designed as compatible to the structure and
surface to which it is attached.



   X.   Windmills and Small Wind Energy Systems (SWES).  Windmills and
small wind energy systems (SWES) are allowed in a limited number of zoning
districts, contingent upon compliance with the following:



      1.   Maximum Number, Height, and Minimum Setbacks.



 


Zoning District

 

Maximum Number per Lot

 

Maximum Height1

 

Minimum Setback Ratio



All Commercial and Mixed Use
 

12

 

25 feet

 

1:14



All Industrial
 

1 per acre

 

75 feet3



All Miscellaneous
 

N/A

 

75 feet




 



   1   Height limitations imposed by the Federal Aviation
Administration shall supersede any of the regulations contained herein.



   2   No restriction shall apply with respect to the total number of
structures if the subject property is owned or leased by the city.



   3   If proposed in Quantum Park, the maximum height shall be
restricted to twenty- five (25) feet, except if proposed on a lot that has a
Government & Institutional (G&I) or Industrial (I) land use option.



   4   Minimum required setback is equal to tower height.



      2.   Unauthorized Access.



         a.   All ground mounted electrical and control equipment
shall be labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access.



         b.   The tower shall be designed and installed so as to
not provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a
minimum height of eight (8) feet above the ground.



      3.   Ground Clearance.  At its lowest point, the tip of any
turbine blade shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet above the surface of
the ground.



      4.   Tilt-Down Capability.  The SWES shall be designed with
tilt-down capability where located within commercial and mixed use districts
and such facility shall be lowered to the prone position at least twelve (12)
hours upon the posting of a tropical storm or hurricane watch.  For
clarification, these provisions shall be applied to all SWES located on lots
in Quantum Park wherein the twenty-five (25)-foot height restriction is
applicable.



      5.   Automatic Overspeed Controls.  All SWES shall be
equipped with manual and automatic overspeed controls to limit blade rotation
speed to within the design limits of the system.



      6.   Disconnect.  A means of disconnecting the SWES power
source in an emergency shall be provided.  This equipment shall be located
adjacent to the electric meter on residences and near the shunt trip on
non-residential buildings.



      7.   Electrical Wires.  All electrical wires shall be
installed underground.



      8.   Lighting.  A wind tower and generator shall not be
artificially lighted unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA).



      9.   Sound.  Audible noise due to SWES operations shall not
exceed fifty-five (55) dBA or ten (10) decibels greater than ambient noise
levels, measured at the nearest property line.  Sound levels may be exceeded
during short-term events out of anyone's control such as utility outages
and/or severe wind storms.



      10.   Appearance.  The exterior finish shall be a single
non-reflective neutral color maintained throughout the life of the unit,
excluding identification and warning markings.  The equipment, conduit, and
associated facilities shall be painted to complement existing structures. 
No lattice or use of guyed wires shall be an allowable component to the
design a SWES.



      11.   Signage.  All signs shall be prohibited, other than the
manufacturer or installer's identification or those used for
safety/informational purposes.  The intent is that no advertising shall
occur in connection with a windmill or SWES.  Safety signs shall include "no
trespassing," "high voltage," and the phone number of the property owner or
operator to call in case of an emergency.



      12.   Abandonment.  The governing body of the city finds that
junked, wrecked, dismantled, inoperable or abandoned SWES in and upon private
real property within the city is a matter affecting the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city.  If a SWES is inoperable for
six (6) consecutive months the property owner shall be notified that they
must, within six (6) months of receiving notice, restore their system to
operating condition.  If the property owner fails to restore their system
within the required six (6)-month time frame, said owner shall be required,
at his expense, to remove the wind turbine from the tower.  The tower shall
then be subject to the provisions of city ordinances pertaining to nuisances.



      13.   Certification.  All SWES shall be certified under a
program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association.



   Y.   Agricultural Structures.  Each structure may be designed
either attached (to) or detached from the principal building (in instances
when principal buildings are required).  In addition, agricultural
structures shall comply with the following:



      1.   Accessory Garden.



         a.   Requirement for Principal Building.  Agricultural
structures shall only be allowed on lots containing principal structures
(e.g., dwelling). 



         b.   Location and Size.



            (1)   Each structure shall not be allowed within
the required front or corner side yard, including forward of the front or
side corner building lines;



            (2)   Any structure that is one hundred (100)
square feet or less shall be setback at least three (3) feet from the rear
and interior side property lines.  The maximum height shall be eight (8)
feet for flat roofs or a mean height of nine (9) feet for sloped roofs; and



            (3)   Any structure greater than one hundred (100)
square feet or in excess of the height restriction of subparagraph Y.1.b.(2)
above shall comply with the minimum setbacks required for the principal
building.  The maximum allowable height shall not exceed the zoning district
regulations for which it is located or the roofline of the principal
building, whichever is more restrictive.



         c.   Number of Structures.  A lot may contain more than
one (1) structure; however, any additional structures shall comply with the
minimum setbacks required for the principal building regardless of size.



         d.   Screening.  All agricultural structures shall be
effectively screened with a wall, fence, landscape material (excluding the
crops), or a combination thereof, where visible from an abutting property or
right-of-way.



         e.   Miscellaneous.  See Section 3.E. above for
additional regulations regarding the use of sheds and storage structures.



      2.   Community Garden.



         a.   Lot Coverage.  An agricultural structure shall
count towards lot coverage and it must comply with the maximum allowed by the
zoning district with which it is located.



         b.   Number of Structures.  A lot may contain more than
one (1) structure; however, any additional structures, regardless of size
shall be counted towards lot coverage and must comply with the maximum lot
coverage and minimum setbacks required for principal buildings.



   Z.   Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Station.



      1.   Permits Required.  The installation of an EV charging
station shall comply with all applicable regulations and permitting
requirements required by life-safety/building codes and these land
development regulations.



      2.   Allowable Location(s). EV charging stations shall be
allowed in all zoning districts, but only in connection with a lawful
principal use. In addition, the following restrictions shall apply:



         a.   In residential zoning districts, EV charging
stations shall not be available for public usage, except for where used in
connection with a non-residential use;



         b.   All EV charging stations shall be located within a
conforming parking space or upon an on-site area that is specifically
designed and designated for EV charging. For nonresidential uses, any parking
stall with EV charging is allowed to be used in the computation for meeting
the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces. The preferred
location shall be such that a single EV charging station could service two
(2) parking stalls.



         c.   The provision for an EV charging station may vary
based on the design and use of the primary parking lot; however in all
instances, the proposed location must ensure the safe and efficient flow of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic. EV charging stations, including its
associated equipment and power cords, shall not traverse sidewalks,
accessible routes, or other pedestrian areas. Likewise, the placement of each
EV charging station shall not conflict with landscaping to the extent that
the purpose and intent of the landscape code is no longer met.



         d.   No EV charging station shall be installed within a
designated handicap space unless it is specifically designed and intended for
handicap use only;



         e.   Level 3 EV charging stations shall be prohibited in
all residential zoning districts or in connection with any residential use;
and



         f.   A vendor may be allowed to install EV
infrastructure on public lands or rights-of-way, but only contingent upon the
granting of all necessary approvals and/or agreements with the City
Commission and all applicable agencies.



      3.   Signage. Also see Chapter 4, Article IV, Section 4.D for
special signage that is allowed in connection with EV charging stations.



      4.   Maintenance. EV charging station equipment shall be
maintained in all respects, including the proper functioning of the charging
equipment. A current phone number and other contact information shall be
provided on the charging station equipment for the party responsible for
maintenance and operation of the equipment.



      5.   Safety. Information on the EV charging station must
identify voltage and amperage levels and time of use, fees, or safety
information. When the EV charging station space is perpendicular or at an
angle to curb face and charging station equipment, adequate equipment
protection such as wheel stops or bollards shall be used.



      6.   Data to be Available. To allow for maintenance and
notification, owners of any new public EV charging station shall provide
information on the station's geographic location, date of installation,
equipment type and model, and owner contact information. This information
shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works.



      7.   Restrictions. The property owner of a public EV charging
station shall have the authority to place restrictions on the number of hours
that an EV is allowed to charge, in order to deter indefinite
charging/parking.



   AA.   Miscellaneous.



      1.   Amusement Rides.  Miscellaneous structures, such as
coin-operated rides and other amusement devices, shall only be allowed within
the principal structure, excluding those used in conjunction with an arts,
entertainment, and recreational establishment.



      2.   Donation Bins.  See Chapter 4, Article III, Section
3.F.3. for additional standards regarding donation bins.



      3.   Helicopter Pads (aka Helistops).  See City Code of
Ordinances Part II, Chapter 15, Article V for regulations regarding aircraft
landing facilities.



      4.   Animal Enclosures.  See City Code of Ordinances Part II,
Chapter 4 for the regulations regarding animal enclosures (dog houses).



      5.   Newsracks.  See City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter
15, Article VI for regulations regarding newsracks.



      6.   Other Structures and Amenities.  All other amenities and
structures that are similar, but not specifically mentioned in the above,
shall require applications to the Director of Development.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-002, passed 3-6-12; Am. Ord.
12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord. 13-020, passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 16-014,
passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 17-038, passed 1-2-18)



Sec. 4.   Sale of Used Merchandise.



   Except where permitted as a principal use, the sale of used merchandise
is allowed as an accessory use to the sale of new merchandise, provided that
the used merchandise is of the same type as the new merchandise sold on the
premises.  In all instances, the floor area occupied by used merchandise
shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross floor area.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 5.   Exterior Display of Merchandise.



   A.   Districts.  The temporary exterior display of retail
merchandise is allowed in all commercial and mixed use zoning districts.



   B.   Type of Merchandise.  The temporary exterior display of retail
merchandise is allowed, provided that said merchandise is sold by the
operator of the respective business occupying the establishment, and is of
the same type of merchandise typically sold within the building.



   C.   On-Site Location.  The temporary exterior display of retail
merchandise shall be completely contained within the boundaries of the
subject property or leased parcel.  Retail merchandise shall be displayed on
hard surfaces only and, if placed within walkways, shall not obstruct or
impede pedestrian movement or cause noncompliance with ADA accessible route
requirements.  Merchandise shall not be placed within easements, landscaped
areas, required off-street parking and vehicular use areas, rooftops, or
anywhere that would create a hazard to the public.  Any property owner
desiring to display merchandise within off-street parking areas would need to
obtain a special sales event permit in accordance with Section 6 below.



   D.   Hours of Display.  Retail merchandise shall be secured and
stored inside a principal or accessory building at the close of business
hours, unless said merchandise is placed on-site more than three hundred
(300) feet from any arterial or collector street right-of-way and complies
with the location criteria of paragraph C. above or approved as part of a
special sales event, as described in Section 6 below.  If abutting a local
street, landscape buffering must meet or exceed the minimum standards of
Chapter 4, Article II, to minimize any visual impacts upon abutting
right-of-way or nearby properties.  In these instances, merchandise may
remain outdoors after business hours, contingent upon review and approval
through the site plan modification process.



   E.   Miscellaneous.



      1.   Live Plants.  The exterior display of live plants in
connection with a nursery, garden center, and farm supply establishment is
exempt from the three hundred (300) foot distance requirement of paragraph D.
above, and may remain outdoors after normal business hours, provided that its
placement complies with the location criteria of paragraph C. above.



      2.   Seasonal Sales Event.  See Section 7 below for
additional regulation regarding the seasonal sales event and the temporary
exterior display of Christmas trees, pumpkins, and fireworks.



      3.   Permanent Exterior Storage of Merchandise and
Equipment.  See Section 8 below for the permanent exterior storage of retail
merchandise or equipment.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 18-013, § 4, 7-17-18)



Sec. 6.   Special Sales Event.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of these
Regulations is to establish minimum requirements for special temporary sales
events, in order to discourage the exterior display and placement of retail
merchandise in an unsightly, distracting, cluttered, or hazardous manner.



   B.   Districts.  Special sales events are allowed in commercial and
mixed use zoning districts.



   C.   Approval Required.  It shall be unlawful for any establishment
to display retail merchandise outside a principal building in conjunction
with a special sales event without first having secured approval as required
by these Regulations.  See Chapter 2, Article V, Section 4 for additional
regulations regarding the process for obtaining permits for special sales
events.



   D.   Type of Merchandise.  The temporary exterior display of retail
merchandise is allowed in conjunction with a special sales event, provided
that said merchandise is sold by the operator of the respective business
occupying the establishment, and is of the same type of merchandise typically
sold within the building.



   Any property owner desiring to sell Christmas trees, pumpkins, or
fireworks as an accessory use would need to obtain approval of a seasonal
sales event permit in accordance with Section 7 below.



   E.   On-Site Location.  The temporary exterior display of retail
merchandise in conjunction with a special temporary sales event shall be
completely contained within the boundaries of the subject property or leased
parcel.  Retail merchandise shall be displayed on hard surfaces only, and if
placed within walkways, shall not obstruct or impede pedestrian movement or
cause noncompliance with ADA accessible route requirements.  Merchandise may
be placed within off-street parking spaces but shall not be located within
easements, landscaped areas, vehicular use areas, rooftops, or anywhere that
would create a hazard to the public.



   F.   Hours of Display.  The temporary exterior display of retail
merchandise in conjunction with a special temporary sales event shall not
exceed a total of fourteen (14) days within any one (1) calendar year, unless
said merchandise is placed on-site more than three hundred (300) feet from
any street right-of-way.  In these instances, merchandise may remain
outdoors for no more than sixty (60) days within any one (1) calendar year. 
However, in either instance, city authorization shall be required for any use
of off-street parking areas for display of retail merchandise.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 7.   Seasonal Sales Event.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of these
Regulations is to establish minimum requirements for special sales events, in
order to discourage the exterior display and placement of Christmas trees,
pumpkins, fireworks, and similar items that are principally sold during the
holidays, in an unsightly, distracting, cluttered, or hazardous manner.



   B.   Districts.  Seasonal sales events are allowed in all zoning
districts.



   C.   Approval Required.  It shall be unlawful for any establishment
or organization to display Christmas trees, pumpkins, or fireworks outside a
principal building in conjunction with a seasonal sales event without first
having secured approval as required by these Regulations.  See Chapter 2,
Article V, Section 3 for additional regulations regarding the process for
obtaining permits for seasonal sales events.



   D.   On-Site Location.  The temporary exterior display of Christmas
trees, pumpkins, and fireworks shall be completely contained within the
boundaries of the subject property or leased parcel. 



   E.   Hours of Display.  The temporary exterior display of Christmas
trees, pumpkins, and fireworks shall not exceed a total of forty-five (45)
days within any one (1) calendar year.  City authorization shall be required
for any use of off-street parking areas for display of retail merchandise.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 8.   Permanent Exterior Storage of Merchandise and Equipment.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of these
regulations is to establish minimum requirements for the permanent exterior
storage of retail merchandise or equipment, in order to discourage the
exterior placement of said merchandise or equipment in an unsightly,
distracting, cluttered, or hazardous manner.  These regulations shall not
supersede, but rather supplement any specific regulations pertaining to the
exterior storage of merchandise or equipment as a principal use.



   B.   Districts.  The permanent exterior storage of retail
merchandise or equipment is allowed in the C-3, C-4, PCD, PID, and M-1 zoning
districts.



   C.   Site Plan Required.  The area allocated for the permanent
exterior storage of retail merchandise or equipment shall be shown on the
site plan in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F.



   D.   Type of Merchandise/Equipment.  The permanent exterior storage
of retail merchandise or equipment is allowed, provided that said
merchandise/equipment is owned by the operator of the respective business
occupying the establishment, and is of the same type of merchandise or
equipment typically sold or stored within the principal building.  No
exterior storage of building or construction materials shall be allowed
anywhere, except for that which is stored in connection with a lawfully
operating business (e.g., CONTRACTOR) as provided for in Chapter 3, Article
IV, Section 3.



   E.   On-Site Location.  Storage areas shall be completely contained
within the boundaries of the subject property or leased parcel. 



   The permanent exterior storage areas shall be placed behind the front
or side corner building setbacks line where located in the C-3, C-4, and PID
districts.  This restriction shall also apply to properties located along
arterial or collector roadways when located in the M-1 districts. 



      1.   Required Surface.  In the C-3 and PID districts, the
permanent exterior storage of retail merchandise or equipment shall be placed
on improved and hard surfaces only, including vehicular use areas and excess
off-street parking spaces.



      2.   Prohibitions.  If placed within walkways, the permanent
exterior storage areas shall not obstruct or impede pedestrian movement or
cause noncompliance with ADA accessible route requirements.  In addition,
storage areas shall not:



         a.   Be placed within required off-street parking spaces;



         b.   Obstruct or impede vehicular movement;



         c.   Cause noncompliance with any of the off-street
parking or vehicular use area standards of Chapter 4; or



         d.   Abridge any easement rights without approval from
the affected utility company or the city and shall not be located within
landscaped areas, rooftops, or otherwise create a hazard to the public.



   F.   Size.  The area allocated to the permanent exterior storage of
retail merchandise or equipment shall be restricted in size where properties
are located within the following districts:



      1.   C-3 District.  The size of the permanent outdoor storage
area shall be limited to one percent (1%) of the gross floor area of the
principal building(s)/leased space.



      An additional one percent (1%) of storage area (based upon the
gross floor area of the leased space/principal building(s)) may be granted,
subject to the approval of an administrative adjustment.  See Chapter 2,
Article II, Section 4.A. for the administrative adjustment process.



      2.   PCD District and PID District.  The size of the
permanent outdoor storage area shall be limited to fifteen percent (15%) of
the gross floor area of the principal building(s)/leased space.



   G.   Additional Screening.  To further address potential aesthetic
impacts, where determined necessary due to type of merchandise or magnitude
of off-site visibility, the Planning & Zoning Director may require additional
screening/buffering.



   A landscape barrier (in accordance with Chapter 4, Article II, Section
3.B. and Section 3.C.) may be required where the outdoor storage area abuts
an incompatible land use or zoning district.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord.
18-013, § 4, 7-17-18)



Sec. 9.   Sidewalk Cafés.



   A.   Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for the definition
pertaining to sidewalk cafés.



   B.   Approval Required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a sidewalk café on any sidewalk or public right-of-way within the
city without obtaining approval in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II,
Section 6.E.



   C.   Applicability.  A sidewalk café may be allowed, subject to
review and approval as outlined herein, on an abutting public sidewalk
(right-of-way) and as an accessory use to a legally operating restaurant or
nightclub establishment, provided that such establishment is located within
the boundaries of the Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA) area.  A sidewalk
café shall be subject to any additional limitations or restrictions of the
zoning district for which it is located.  A sidewalk café is prohibited
outside the boundaries of the CRA.



   D.   Regulations.



      1.   Private Sidewalk.  Chairs, tables and related sidewalk
café components shall be restricted to the sidewalk frontage of the building
where the validly licensed restaurant or nightclub is located, unless written
authorization is provided by the owner of the adjacent property and submitted
with the application for sidewalk café approval.



      2.   Accessibility.  Tables or chairs shall be located a
minimum of five (5) feet from a pedestrian crosswalk or handicap ramp, bus
stop shelter, bus stop sign, taxi stand, stop sign or fire-hydrant.



         a.   A clear pathway, parallel with the street, with a
minimum width of four (4) feet, shall be maintained for through pedestrian
traffic.  However, a minimum width of five (5) feet shall be maintained
between the seats where the pedestrian path bisects the proposed seating
arrangement.



         b.   In areas of congested pedestrian activity, the city
may require a wider pedestrian path, as circumstances dictate.



      3.   Perimeter.  No objects shall be permitted around the
perimeter of a sidewalk area occupied by tables and chairs unless placed in a
manner so as not to discourage the use of the pedestrian path of the sidewalk.



      4.   Safety.  Tables, chairs, umbrellas, canopies, awnings,
and any other objects utilized as part of the sidewalk café shall be of
quality design, materials, size, elevation, and workmanship, both to ensure
the safety and convenience of users. 



   Awnings, umbrellas, and other decorative material shall be
fire-retardant, pressure treated or manufactured, or fire resistant
material.  The city may require relocation of tables, chairs, and other
objects at any time for safety or pedestrian flow consideration.



      5.   Design.  All tables, chairs, umbrellas, canopies,
awnings, and any other objects as part of the sidewalk café shall meet the
following minimum design standards:



         a.   Contribute to the aesthetic appearance of the area
where the sidewalk café is proposed by promoting the design and color theme
applicable to that area;



         b.   Contribute to the efforts of community identity and
redevelopment;



         c.   Not constitute or create traffic or pedestrian
hazards; and



         d.   Respect community standards relative to decency and
obscenity.



      6.   Outstanding Debt.  Prior to forwarding the application
to the CRA Board, the CRA Director or designee shall certify that there are
no outstanding fines, moneys, fees, taxes or other charges owed to the city
by the current or past owners or operators of the property requesting a
sidewalk café approval.  Final approval of a sidewalk café shall not
commence until all outstanding debts to the city are paid in full.



      7.   Menu Board.  The proposed location and design of the
menu sign shall be considered a part of the review for a sidewalk café
application, and be subject to any applicable standards of the Sign Code.



      8.   Conditions for all Approvals.  The following conditions
shall apply to all sidewalk cafés:



         a.   The city and its officers and employees shall not
be responsible for sidewalk café components relocated during emergencies.



         b.   The approval shall be specifically limited to the
area shown on the "exhibit" attached to and made a part of the permit.  The
city shall have the right to remove without notice, any tables, chairs or
other objects not in the permit area.



         c.   The operator shall act to assure that its use of
the sidewalk in no way interferes with sidewalk users or limits their free
unobstructed passage.  The city may require relocation of tables, chairs and
other objects at any time for safety or pedestrian flow consideration.



         d.   Operators holding a business tax receipt limited to
take-out food shall not be permitted to provide table service on the
sidewalk.  This provision shall not include an ice cream shop or coffee bar
which is duly licensed for eat-in service.



         e.   Tables, chairs, umbrellas, and any other objects
permitted as part of a sidewalk café shall be maintained with a clean and
attractive appearance and shall be in good repair at all times.



         f.   The sidewalk area covered by the application and
sidewalk and roadway immediately adjacent to it shall be maintained in a neat
and orderly appearance at all times, and the area shall be cleared of all
debris as needed during the day, and again at the close of each business day.



         g.   Unless otherwise provided herein, no signs
associated with the sidewalk café shall be allowed within the public
right-of-way.



         h.   No tables, chairs or any other parts of sidewalk
cafés shall be attached, chained, or in any manner affixed to any tree,
post, sign or other fixture, curb or sidewalk within or near the permitted
area. 



         i.   The area between the exterior walls of a restaurant
or a nightclub and the edge of sidewalk shall be designated as public
space.  The placement of tables and chairs in this public space shall not
constitute a building improvement which otherwise triggers structural
improvements to the operating business under the provisions of the Florida
Building Code (FBC) or any state statute.  In the event an operator of a
restaurant or a nightclub creates a sidewalk café pursuant to the terms of
this section and such creation entails actual structural improvements to any
portion of the structure other than the permanently obstructed ingress or
egress to the restaurant or nightclub then, in that event, all applicable
provisions of the FBC or state statutes necessitating improvements to the
property shall apply.



         j.   No food preparation; fire; fire apparatus; or drink
preparation or dispensing equipment shall be allowed on the public sidewalk,
other than that employed in the course of ordinary tableside service,
including but not limited to menu items which require table preparation,
whether or not such area is covered by the approval.



         k.   Upon the issuance of a "Hurricane Warning" or
"Hurricane Watch" by the authorities, the operator shall forthwith remove and
place indoors all tables, chairs, awnings and other equipment located on the
sidewalk.



   E.   Liability and Insurance.



      1.   Liability.  The operator agrees to indemnify, defend,
save and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees from any and all
claims, liability, lawsuits, damages and causes of action which may arise out
of this permit or the permittee's activity on the premises by executing a
written hold harmless agreement.



      2.   Insurance.  The operator agrees to meet and maintain for
the entire approval period, at his/her own expense, the following
requirements:



         a.   Commercial general liability insurance in the
amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily
injury and property damage.  The city must be named as an additional insured
on this policy, and an endorsement must be issued as part of the policy
reflecting this requirement.



         b.   Worker's compensation and employer's liability as
required by the state.



         c.   All policies must be issued by companies authorized
to do business in the state and rated B+: VI or better per Best's Key Rating
Guide, latest edition.



         d.   The city must receive thirty (30) days written
notice prior to any cancellation, non-renewal or material change in the
coverage provided.



         e.   A certificate of insurance showing evidence that
the above requirements have been met must be included in the renewal
application.  Failure to maintain these requirements shall justify a
suspension or revocation of a sidewalk café permit by the City Manager.



         f.   The approval period shall run and insurance
requirements as described in subsection b. above shall be effective from
October 1 until September 30 of the following calendar year.



   F.   Penalties.  Any violators of this section shall be fined in
accordance with Chapter 1, Article I, Section 7.A. of these Land Development
Regulations.  See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 6.E. for additional
information regarding the denial or revocation of a sidewalk café permit.



   G.   Recovery of Unpaid Fines.  The Code Compliance Board shall
have the power and jurisdiction to hold hearing for recovery of unpaid fees
under this chapter as mandated under City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter
2, Article 5.  The Board at its option may impose liens as provided in
Article 5 of Chapter 2.



   The City of Boynton Beach may institute proceedings in a court of
competent jurisdiction to compel payment of civil fines.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-020, passed 9-20-11)



Sec. 10.  Mobile Vendor Regulations.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this section is to provide
for the regulation of mobile vending activities, including assembly on public
and private property, in certain commercial and mixed use zoning districts of
the city, in order to promote the public interest by contributing to an
active and attractive pedestrian environment.  In recognition thereof,
reasonable regulation of mobile vending is necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare and the interests of the city in the primary use
of public streets, sidewalks, and parking areas, for use by vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.



   B.   Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for specific
definitions applicable to mobile vending units (MVU).



   C.   Approval Required.  It shall be unlawful for any establishment
or organization to engage in or carry on the business of vending food, goods,
or services, upon public or private property in the city without first having
secured a permit or permits as required by this section.  See Chapter 2,
Article II, Section 7.C. for the process and procedure to obtain approval for
an MVU.



   It is not the intent of these Regulations to be applied to mobile
vendors temporarily approved in conjunction with a special sales event or
Special Event Permit.  See Section 6 above for additional regulations
regarding special sales events.



   D.   Districts.  The operating area of an MVU shall be entirely
located in the following zoning districts: C-1,  C-2, C-3, C-4, CBD, PCD,
SMU, MU-1, MU-2, MU-3, MU-4, MU-C, M-1, PU, REC, PUD, and PID.



   E.   Compatibility.  The use of an MVU shall be compatible with the
public interest.  In making such a determination, staff shall consider the
type and intensity of use, the width of pedestrian walkways, the width and
type of drive aisles; location of fire lanes; fire hydrants; distance from
intersections and major driveways; the proximity and location of existing
street furniture, including but not limited to traffic control devices,
signposts, lampposts, parking meters, benches, phone kiosks, mailboxes, fire
hydrants, landscaping, trees, buffer yards, public art and refuse containers,
as well as the presence of truck loading zones.  Staff shall also consider
established and emerging pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns, as well
as other factors it deems relevant in determining whether or not the proposed
use would diminish required parking or result in congestion of the public and
private ways, on-site traffic circulation patterns, or the creation of a
safety hazard.



   F.   Location Criteria.  An MVU shall be permitted to operate
throughout the city in approved zoning districts once a business tax receipt
or certificate of use has been issued; utility service connections are only
permitted once an approved building permit has been issued.  In addition, an
MVU must comply with the following location criteria, whichever is applicable:



      1.   Public Property.  An MVU, located on public property,
shall comply with the following requirements:



         a.   Maximum Area.  An MVU shall not occupy an
operating area of more than four hundred twenty (420) square feet of space,
including the unit, operator, trash receptacle, signage, merchandise, and
covering, if applicable, per site.  A single entity may request approval for
more than one (1) MVU per site.



         b.   Maximum Dimensions.  An MVU shall not exceed ten
(10) feet in width by forty (40) feet in length.



         c.   Maximum Height.  The maximum height of an MVU,
including any covering, such as its canopy, umbrella, and/or transparent
enclosure, shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet, excluding venting equipment.



         d.   Sidewalks.  An MVU vendor located on a public
sidewalk shall not:



            (1)   Vend at any location where the sidewalk is
less than ten (10) feet in width;



            (2)   Vend within twenty (20) feet of an entrance
to any building, bus stop sign, driveway, stop sign, or cross walk of any
intersection; and



            (3)   Obstruct the view of any directional sign,
traffic control sign, or device.



      2.   Private Property.  An MVU is allowed on private
property, provided that it complies with the following regulations:



         a.   Class "A" MVU.  An MVU is considered "Class 'A'"
if it is less than seven (7) feet in height, including its canopy, umbrella,
and/or transparent enclosure and if the operating area is seventy- two (72)
square feet or less, including the unit, operator, and trash receptacle. 
This class includes carts and small trailers.



         A Class "A" MVU may be placed within off-street parking
spaces but shall be restricted to excess parking spaces only.  It shall not
obstruct or impede critical vehicular use movements or otherwise create a
hazard.



         b.   Class "B" MVU.  An MVU is considered "Class 'B'"
if it is either greater than seven (7) feet in height or in excess of
seventy-two (72) square feet in operating area, or both.  This class
includes carts, trailers and vehicles in excess of the size limitations of a
Class “A” MVU.



         A Class “B” MVU shall be allowed on all sites greater
than one-half (0.5) acre in size.  No more than one (1) MVU per one-half
(0.5) acre shall be permitted.



         Both Class “A” and “B” MVU’s are allowed on
improved property only, and if placed within walkways or rights-of-way, shall
not obstruct or impede pedestrian movement or cause noncompliance with ADA
accessible route requirements.  A minimum clear passage of four (4) feet
must be maintained for pedestrian travel at all times.



   G.   Removal.  Each MVU shall be removed daily.  An MVU shall not
remain on any public or private property, or within any rights-of-way,
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.



   H.   Maintenance.  The mobile vending unit, including any canopies,
umbrellas, or transparent enclosures, must be clean, and well maintained. 
The vending site itself must also be clean and orderly at all times, and the
vendor must provide a refuse container for use by his patrons.  The
container shall be removed after the unit has departed for the day.  Vendor
wastes of any kind shall not be deposited or permitted to be deposited upon
the ground, sidewalk, streets, city waste receptacles, or private dumpsters.



   I.   Separation.



      1.   Between Units.  An MVU shall not be placed within one
hundred (100) feet from another MVU of a different vendor for which a permit
had been granted unless requested as a condition of permit. 



      2.   From Selected Land Uses.



         a.   An MVU shall not be placed within one hundred (100)
feet from the property line of any single-family residential zoning district.



         b.   An MVU shall not be placed within one hundred (100)
feet from the property line of any establishment that sells or provides
similar foods, merchandise, or services as that of the MVU without the prior
written consent of the similar establishment.



   J.   Display.



      1.   Display of Permit and License.  All vendors must display
the permit issued by the city in a prominent and visible manner.  In
addition, an MVU capable of operating within public rights-of-way shall
display a current Florida Department of Highway Safety & Motor Vehicles
(DHSMV) license plate.



      2.   Display of Merchandise.  No merchandise shall be
displayed using street structures (planters, trees, trash containers,
signposts, etc.) or placed upon the sidewalk or right-of-way.  Merchandise
may be displayed outside the MVU on private property with the written
permission of the property owner provided that it does not intrude upon the
accessible area around the unit, or otherwise impede parking or access to
structures within the site.



   K.   Emergencies.  Vendors shall obey any lawful order from a
police or fire department official during an emergency or to avoid congestion
or obstruction of the sidewalk.



   L.   Prohibitions.



      1.   Solicitations.  An MVU approved and located within a
right-of-way shall not solicit or conduct business with persons in motor
vehicles.



      2.   Advertisements.  Vendors shall not make loud noises, use
mechanical audio, noise-making devices, moving objects, or lighting systems
to advertise his or her product.



      3.   Unattended.  No MVU shall be left unattended.



      4.   Miscellaneous.



         a.   Vendors shall not hinder or impede the use of any
phone kiosk, mailbox, parking meter, fire alarm, fire hydrant, or traffic
control device.



         b.   No tables, chairs, or umbrellas are to be set up
for use by customers, with the exception for those located on private
properties.



         c.   Freestanding signs, flags, banners, tents,
tarpaulins, canopies, or awnings shall be allowed in connection with an MVU
as a condition of permit.  All signs, flags, banners, tents, tarpaulins,
canopies, or awnings shall be either attached to, centered over, resting
against the vending vehicle/equipment, or located within a designated area
from the MVU based on permit condition in accordance with the requirements of
Land Development Regulations Chapter 3, Article V, Section 10.M.1.



         d.   Live entertainment, defined as performances, shows
or other forms of entertainment consisting of one (1) or more persons,
amplified or non-amplified music or other related sounds or noise, including
but not limited to entertainment provided by musicians, disc jockey (DJ),
master of ceremonies (MC), or karaoke shall not exceed sixty (60) decibels at
a distance of one-hundred (100) feet from the source as measured by a sound
level meter.



         e.   MVU’s utilizing portable generators shall not
exceed sixty (60) decibels at a distance of one-hundred (100) feet from the
source as measured by a sound level meter.



   M.   Specific Regulations by Type of MVU.



      1.   Auto/Car Wash (Polishing, Waxing, Detailing).  An
auto/car wash (polishing, waxing, detailing) type of MVU shall not be allowed
on public property or within any right-of-way.  This type of MVU is only
allowed on private property and shall comply with the location criteria of
paragraph F. above.  One (1) freestanding canopy may be allowed for this
type of MVU in addition to another canopy that is either attached to,
centered over, or resting against the vending vehicle or equipment.  In all
instances, the size of the freestanding canopy shall be the minimum necessary
to accommodate one (1) parked vehicle, but not to exceed twenty (20) feet in
width by twenty (20) feet in length, and must be removed daily.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-011, passed 7-3-12; Am. Ord.
13-027, § 2, passed 10-1-13; Am. Ord. 15-003, passed 3-17-15; Am. Ord.
17-023, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 11.  Nonconforming Regulations.



   A.   Lots and Parcels.



      1.   R-1 District, R-1A District, R-2 District, and R-3
District.  A detached single-family dwelling may be constructed on any
parcel located in an R-1, R-1A, R-2, or R-3 district, provided that it meets
all of the following requirements:



         a.   The parcel contains at least one (1) whole platted
lot, platted prior to August 7, 2001;



         b.   The parcel, or assemblage of platted parcels which
individually meet the requirements of paragraph a. above, has a frontage of
not less than fifty (50) feet, and a lot area of not less than five thousand
(5,000) square feet (irregular, other than rectangle-shaped lots with less
than five thousand (5,000) square feet of area may be developed if in
conformance with all other lot regulations);



         c.   All such parcels, when developed, shall comply with
all provisions of the Land Development Regulations and applicable building
code regulations, including without limitation sections of the building code
regulations regarding the impact of construction and drainage on or to
adjacent properties.



      2.   R-2 District.  Within R-2 districts, in subdivisions
platted prior to the effective date of these Regulations, where the platted
lots have a frontage of at least forty (40) feet but less than fifty (50)
feet, the following rules shall apply:



         a.   A detached single-family dwelling may be
constructed on any such parcel, provided that the parcel contains at least
one (1) whole platted lot.



         b.   A duplex dwelling may be constructed on any parcel,
provided that it meets the following requirements:



            (1)   The parcel contains at least two (2) whole
platted lots;



            (2)   Property cannot be acquired from adjacent
parcels so as to make the subject parcel conforming, without causing the
adjacent parcels to become nonconforming or more nonconforming.



         c.   For any parcel, lot, or combination of lots, where
the total frontage is equal or greater than one hundred twenty (120) feet,
and the total area is greater than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet, said
property shall not be developed except in accordance with the minimum
frontage and lot area required in the R-2 zoning district.



         d.   Ownership of parcels shall be determined by the
property tax rolls on file in the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser's
Office as of the effective date of these Regulations.



      3.   R-1AA District.  A detached single-family dwelling may
be constructed on any parcel located in an R-1AA district, without requiring
a variance, provided that it meets the following requirements:



         a.   The parcel contains at least one (1) whole platted
lot.



         b.   The parcel has a frontage of not less than sixty
(60) feet, and a lot area of not less than six thousand, seven hundred fifty
(6,750) square feet in area.



         c.   It would not be possible to acquire property from
adjacent parcels so as to make the subject parcel conforming, without causing
the adjacent parcels or structures thereon to become nonconforming or more
nonconforming.



   For any parcel or lot, or combination of lots under the same ownership,
where the total frontage and the total area is equal to or greater than that
which is required by the R-1AA district building and site regulations, said
property shall not be developed except in accordance with the minimum
frontage and lot area required in the particular zoning district.



   Not more than one (1) parcel or lot, or combination of lots under the
same ownership, that is nonconforming but which meets the requirements under
b. above may be developed for a single-family house.



   Ownership of parcels shall be determined by the property tax rolls on
file in the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser's Office as of the effective
date of these Regulations.



      4.   R-1AAB District.  In the R-1AAB district, any parcel
which includes, at a minimum, one (1) whole platted lot may be developed
without requiring a variance, if it would not be possible to acquire property
from adjacent parcels so as to make the subject parcel conforming, without
causing the adjacent parcels or structures thereon to become nonconforming or
more nonconforming.



   Not more than one (1) lot parcel or lot, or combination of lots under
the same ownership, that is nonconforming but which meets the requirements of
this paragraph may be developed for a single-family house.



      5.   Densities.  The densities created by the rules set forth
above shall be construed to be in conformance with the densities shown on the
future land use map contained in the city's Comprehensive Plan.



      6.   Minimum Development Regulations.  Nonconforming lots
which may be developed without requiring the approval of a variance, and
which lie in residential districts, shall meet the minimum property
development regulations that are generally applicable in the district;
except, however, that the minimum setbacks shall be as follows:



   Minimum yard setback requirements:



   Front yard         25% of depth



   Side yard (corner)      20% of depth



   Side yard (interior)   15% of width



   Rear yard         25% of depth



provided, however, that the setbacks specified above shall, in no instance,
be construed to be greater than the setbacks that are generally applicable in
the district in which the lot is located.



   The minimum living area on such lots shall be permitted to be reduced
below the minimum living area required by the district building and site
regulations, to the extent that this reduction is necessary in order to
maintain the abovementioned setbacks.  Furthermore, the maximum lot coverage
on such lots shall be permitted to be increased above the maximum lot area
allowed by the district building and site regulations, to the extent that
this increase is necessary to obtain the minimum living area required by the
district building and site regulations.



      7.   Non-residential Districts.



         a.   Generally.  In non-residential districts,
additional floor area and/or expansions to nonconforming buildings and
structures are allowed, provided that the development meets all district
setbacks.  In non-residential zoning districts, excluding M-1 Light
Industrial, if both the lot area and lot frontage are not less than
eighty-five percent (85%) of that required for the particular district, then
structures and floor area may be added and the use may be changed from a
residential to a non-residential use on a nonconforming lot, without
requiring the approval of a variance for the lot area or lot frontage.  If
either the lot area or lot frontage is less than eighty-five percent (85%) of
that required for the particular district, then approval of a variance would
be required in order to add structures or add floor area to existing
buildings or to change the use from a residential to a non-residential use. 
Improvements which do not add structures or floor area or change the use of
the property shall be permitted, regardless of lot size or frontage.  For
nonconforming lots which are vacant or are proposed to be cleared and
redeveloped, approval of a variance shall be required prior to the
construction of any structures or establishment of any use on the lot or
parcel.



         b.   M-1 District.  A property that does not meet the
minimum lot size required by Chapter 3, Article III, Section 6.A.3 shall be
considered conforming only if it contained a whole platted lot prior to the
effective date of this ordinance (October 2, 2012), and was not in
combination with other in which the cumulative size would have met the
minimum required by code.



         c.   Landscaping.  All developed or redeveloped lots
zoned M-1 or C-4 and determined to be valid nonconforming lots relative to
minimum lot area standards shall provide landscaping on-site that meets the
intent of the urban landscape code to the maximum extent feasible (see
Chapter 4, Article II, Section 4.B).



   B.   Buildings and Structures.  A nonconforming building or
structure is a building or structure constructed according to the law
existing at the time of permit but which does not presently conform to the
property development regulations of this article for minimum site area or
dimensions, minimum setback requirements, maximum building or structure
height, maximum lot coverage, minimum floor area, parking or loading, or for
other characteristics of buildings or structures regulated in this Code, or
for its location on the lot. A nonconforming building or structure may
continue to exist in a nonconforming state so long as it otherwise conforms
to law, subject to the following provisions:



      1.   Building or Structure Enlargement, Expansion, or
Extension.  Nonconforming buildings and structures may be enlarged, expanded
or extended subject to all property development regulations, including
minimum site area and dimensions of the district in which the building or
structure is located.  No such building or structure, however, shall be
enlarged or altered in any way so as to increase its nonconformity. Such
building or structure or portion thereof, may be altered to decrease its
nonconformity, except as hereafter provided.



      2.   Building or Structure Deterioration or Destruction.



         a.   Greater than Fifty Percent (50%).  Should the
structure or building be deteriorated or destroyed by any means to an extent
of more than fifty percent (50%) of the assessed value of the structure or
building as determined by the Building Official, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the regulations and standards of the
Land Development Regulations.



         b.   Less than Fifty Percent (50%).  Should the
structure or building be deteriorated or destroyed by any means to an extent
of less than fifty percent (50%) but more than thirty-three percent (33%) of
its assessed value as determined by the building official, it may be restored
only upon issuance of a variance by the City Commission in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.D. herein for the
particular building or structure nonconformity or nonconformities.  A
variance by the City Commission shall not supersede a condemnation order of
the Building Official or of the Building Board of Adjustments, and such
variance shall not obviate the necessity of obtaining other needed waivers or
variances from the city.



      3.   Building or Structure Relocation.  Should such building
or structure be moved to a new site or to a new location on the same lot or
site, it shall conform to the current property development regulations
relevant at the time of the relocation.



   C.   Newsracks.  See City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 15,
Article VI for additional regulations regarding nonconforming newsracks.



   D.   Signs.  See Chapter 4, Article IV, Section 7 for additional
regulations regarding nonconforming signs.



   E.   Satellite Earth Stations and Antennas.  See Section 12.E.
below for additional nonconforming regulations regarding satellite dishes and
antennas.



   F.   Uses.  See Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 5 for additional
regulations regarding nonconforming use regulations.



   G.   Certificate of Conformity.



      1.   Applicability.  The provisions of this section shall
apply to any real property which has been or will be rendered nonconforming
because of the institution of eminent domain proceedings by a governmental
agency.  Any nonconforming lot so created shall be deemed a conforming lot
upon the issuance of a certificate of conformity as provided in this section.



      2.   Process.  The process by which to obtain a certificate
of conformity shall be in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 6.A.



      3.   Regulations.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee shall issue a certificate of conformity if the following regulations
are met:



         a.   Severance or business damages relative to the
remainder lot would be reduced by the issuance of the certificate of
conformity.



         b.   A site plan for the remainder lot has been prepared
which minimizes the nonconformities caused by the eminent domain proceedings,
and is otherwise consistent with all requirements of the zoning code.



         c.   The remainder lot can reasonably and safely
function if redeveloped in accordance with the site plan described above.



      4.   Landscape.  All lots subject to eminent domain
proceedings must provide perimeter landscaping abutting rights-of-way to
screen off-street parking, vehicular use, exterior service and storage areas
to the extent physically possible and deemed feasible by staff.  Landscaping
shall be provided in areas of non-pedestrian or non-vehicular use.



      5.   Enforcement.  Noncompliance with the provisions set
forth pursuant to the issuance of the certificate of conformity shall
constitute a violation and is subject to those procedures set forth in City
Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 2, Article 5.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 12.  Satellite Earth Stations and Antennas.



   A.   Types.  For the purpose of clarifying regulations, satellite
dish antennae are hereby classified into two (2) groups.  Group A antennae
are those that will fit within a one (1) meter cube.  Group B antennae are
those that will not fit within a one (1) meter cube.



   B.   Permits Required.  No satellite dish antenna shall be
installed or modified without first obtaining a permit from the city.



   Satellite dish antennae shall conform with provisions of Chapter 4,
Article IX of the Florida Building Code and the amendments thereto as adopted
by the city provided such provisions do not conflict with any standards set
forth in this section, in which case this section shall control.



   All applications for the installation of Group B satellite dish
antennae shall be accompanied by proper certification that the installation
will meet windload requirements of the Florida Building Code.



   C.   Fees.  An application fee shall be payable to the city as
adopted by resolution of the City Commission.



   D.   Prohibitions.



      1.   No exterior satellite dish antenna may be used for
display or advertising purposes and none shall have writing thereon which is
visible from a public right-of-way or residential district.



      2.   Portable Group B satellite dish antennae are not allowed.



   E.   Nonconforming.  Satellite dish antennae properly permitted
prior to April 4, 1995 may remain in place notwithstanding provisions
stipulated herein but they may not be replaced, reconstructed, or modified
without bringing the entire installation into full compliance with this
section.



   F.   Citizens' Band (CB) and Television (TV) Antennae.  In
residential zones, freestanding television and citizens' band broadcasting
antennae may not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, and no freestanding
antenna may be constructed within the building setback lines.  Roof-mounted
or wall-supported antennae may exceed the maximum district height regulation
by ten (10) feet; but in no instance, may an antennae exceed the roof line
height by more than fifteen (15) feet.



   G.   Satellite Earth Stations.  Satellite dish antennae installed
to serve single-family or duplex homes must also comply with the following
requirements:



      1.   Height.  No part of any satellite dish antenna
installation may extend beyond the peak of the roof or height of the
horizontal eave line of the uppermost floor of any single-family or duplex
home.



      2.   Group B.  Group B satellite dish antennae shall be
freestanding, ground mounted, and self- supporting without structural
connections to any other structure or building.



         a.   Screening.  All Group B satellite dish antennae
shall be screened on three (3) sides with landscape materials or walls with
landscaping which are of a height equivalent to the total height of the
mounted satellite dish.



         b.   Lot Size.  For all Group B antennas lot size must
comply with zoning regulations.



         c.   Multi-family Dwelling Units and Non-residential
Districts.  Satellite dish antennae located within multi-family and
non-residential districts shall comply with the following regulations:



            (1)   Shall require site plan review in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F.;



            (2)   In multi-family districts, only one (1)
Group B satellite dish antenna is allowed.  The antenna must be screened and
shall not be located on the roof.  Its height shall not exceed the maximum
allowable height of the district in which it is located.



            (3)   A Group B satellite dish antenna installed
in commercial and industrial zoning districts may not be located on a roof so
that the dish is visible from a public right-of-way or residential district.



            (4)   Group B satellite dish antennae which are
mounted on a tower and used for communication in connection with the
operation of a business shall provide reasonable screening.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 13.  Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF).



   WCF means any manned or unmanned location for the transmission and/or
reception of radio frequency signals, or other wireless communications, or
wireless data transmission/reception, and usually consisting of an antenna or
group of antennas, transmission cables, and equipment cabinets, and may
include an antenna support structure.  WCF include developments containing
new, mitigated, pre-existing antenna support structures, or co-location on
existing antenna support structures, and include attached WCF, concealed WCF,
and non-concealed WCF.



   A.   General Provisions.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of these Regulations is
to establish minimum development standards for the regulation of commercial
WCF and their related accessory equipment and buildings.  The intent of
these Regulations is the following:



         a.   Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of
the public by regulating the siting of WCF;



         b.   Control placement of WCF in a way that minimizes
the visual impact to nearby properties by locating them in areas where the
impact on the community is minimal;



         c.   Implement the provisions of the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 at a local level; and



         d.   Maximize the opportunity for the shared use of new
and existing WCF through co-location, in order to reduce the number of new
WCF needed to serve the community.



      2.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee shall be responsible for the overall coordination and administration
of this section.



      3.   Applicability.  Except as otherwise specifically
provided herein, the installation, construction, or modification of proposed
and existing WCF shall be subject to the regulations of this section.



      4.   Exemptions.  The following are exempt from the
provisions of this section:



         a.   Non-commercial Antennas and Satellite Earth
Stations.  Non-commercial amateur radio antennas and satellite earth
stations subject to the provisions of Section 12 of this article.



         b.   City-owned WCF on Public Property or
Right-of-Way.  If this section would prohibit city-owned WCF from being
located at a specific site, and WCF are required to protect the public
welfare or safety, the applicable criteria of this section may be exempted by
the City Commission, except as otherwise required by Florida Statutes.  In
such cases the Commission shall make a finding of fact indicating the
justification for the exemption.



         c.   Temporary Facility.



            (1)   State of Emergency.  Temporary, commercial
WCF, upon the declaration of a state of emergency by federal, state, or local
government, or determination of public necessity by the City Manager, except
that such facilities must comply with all applicable federal and state
requirements. Said WCF may be exempt from these provisions up to sixty (60)
days after the duration of the state of emergency.



            (2)   Special Event.  Temporary, commercial WCF,
utilized in conjunction with coverage of a special event, except that such
facilities must comply with all applicable federal and state requirements.
Said WCF may be exempt from these provisions up to one (1) week after the
duration of the special event.



         d.   Radio and TV Broadcasting.  Antenna support
structures, antenna, and/or antenna arrays for AM/FM/TV/HDTV broadcasting
transmission facilities that are licensed by the FCC shall be regulated in
accordance with the use matrix of Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3.D. as an
industrial service use.



      5.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for
all applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the regulations and
standards contained herein.



   B.   General Standards.  Where allowed as provided in Table 3-29
(Zoning Districts and Affiliated Process) herein, the following development
regulations shall apply to all new, mitigated, co-located, or combined
wireless facility installations.



      1.   Pre-Existing WCF.  Any WCF which legally existed prior
to the effective date of these Regulations are considered permitted
nonconforming uses and structures, and shall be deemed pre-existing WCF. 
Additions to or enlargement of any pre-existing nonconforming WCF shall be
required to comply with this section and shall be governed as follows:



         a.   Routine Maintenance.  To encourage the use of
existing facilities, such nonconforming status shall not prevent the routine
maintenance on nonconforming WCF, or prohibit the placement, modification or
relocation of any antenna on any such WCF.



         b.   Modifications.  Despite any provision of this
section to the contrary, the city may allow nonconforming WCF to be repaired,
reconstructed, replaced, or increased in height upon a demonstration by the
applicant that the new or modified WCF complies with the current regulations
to the maximum extent practicable, while achieving an overall public benefit
in terms of the provision of services.



      2.   Additional Uses on Lot.  WCF may be located on a leased
parcel of a conforming lot containing a lawful principal use.  Separation
between WCF and other uses on the lot may be required to ensure compatibility.



      3.   District Height Limitations.  The requirements set forth
herein shall govern the location of WCF that exceed, and antennas that are
installed, at a height in excess of the building height limitations specified
for each zoning district.  The height limitations applicable to buildings
and structures shall not apply to WCF regulated by this section, and WCF
shall not require an exception to the building height limitations.



      4.   Equipment Cabinets.  Cabinets and equipment shelters may
be provided within the principal building, behind an approved screen on a
rooftop, or on the ground within the fenced-in and screened equipment
compound, or mounted on the pole of an attached WCF within a right-of-way,
depending on the type of WCF.  Cabinets and equipment shelters shall not be
visible from pedestrian views and shall be fenced and screened as required
below.



         a.   Storage.  Equipment shelters shall not be used for
the storage of any excess equipment or hazardous waste (e.g., discarded
batteries).  Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of WCF
shall not be stored or parked on the site of WCF, unless on a temporary basis
while repairs are being made to WCF.  No outdoor storage yards shall be
allowed in WCF equipment compounds.



         b.   Unmanned.  Equipment shelters shall be unmanned
and not used as habitable space.



      5.   Equipment Compound Enclosure.  All equipment compounds
on the ground, with the exception of concealed attached stealth WCF
integrated into the architecture of a building, shall, at a minimum, be
enclosed with a fence eight (8) feet in height.  To effectively screen the
equipment compound in residential districts and in any district where the
equipment compound is visible from a public right-of-way, the enclosure shall
consist of a masonry wall eight (8) feet in height, constructed in accordance
with the community design standards (see Article III, Section 3.E.).  For
public safety, access to WCF shall be through a locked gate.



      6.   Landscaping.  Landscaping around the perimeter of ground
equipment shall consist of a landscaped strip wide enough to accommodate
trees, shrubs, and a fence or wall enclosure installed around the outside of
the entire equipment compound.  The general landscape standards shall be
consistent with those of Chapter 4, Article II, Landscape Design and
Buffering, Section 4.A. (City-Wide Standards), except that the shrubs are
required to be a minimum of three (3) feet in height at the time of
installation.  Water-wise trees with a minimum of four (4) caliper inches
shall be spaced every twenty (20) feet on center within the landscape
strip.  Additional landscaping may be required around the perimeter of a
wall or use of a screening fabric around the perimeter of a fence to maximize
compatibility with adjacent properties.  An alternative design may be
allowed with respect to proposed buffering components, tree spacing, and
plant material; provided that such alternate landscape plan is approved in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article II, Section 5 (Alternate Compliance). 
Irrigation, maintenance, and replacement of required landscaping shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the WCF.  On city-owned properties, required
WCF landscaping shall be maintained by the city or its designated landscape
contractor, and the owner of the WCF shall be required to pay an annual
landscape maintenance fee to the city.



      7.   Parking.  A minimum parking space requirement for WCF is
not required, however access to WCF must be provided, and temporary
off-street parking as part of a principal use on-site may be utilized.



      8.   Signage.  Except as otherwise permitted in these
Regulations, no signage, lettering, symbols, images, or trademarks in excess
of two hundred (200) square inches shall be placed on or affixed to any part
of a WCF, antenna, equipment building, or security fencing other than as
required by FCC regulations or other applicable law.  Warning signs of "NO
TRESPASSING" and "HIGH VOLTAGE – DANGER" shall be installed at least five
(5) feet above the finished grade of the fence or wall and shall not be
obstructed by landscaping.



      9.   Lighting.  Except as otherwise permitted in these
Regulations, no signals, lights or illumination of any kind shall be
permitted on or directed toward any WCF unless required by the FCC, the FAA,
or other appropriate public authority.  Any security lighting for on-ground
facilities and equipment shall be in compliance with Chapter 4, Article VII
(Exterior Lighting Standards) of the LDR.



      10.   Generators.  Generators may not be used as a primary
electrical power source for a WCF.  Generators may be used for temporary
power prior to receipt of a CO and not to exceed thirty (30) days.  Backup
generators shall only be operated during power outages and for testing and
maintenance purposes.  Any and all generators used for WCF shall control the
noise level by use of a silencer or other device that will reduce the noise
level to no more than seventy (70) decibels.  All generators or alternators
used on-site shall use propane fuel.  Subject to the approval by the
Director of Utilities and the Director of Development, the use of diesel
powered emergency generators may be permitted where more than three (3)
providers have co-located on a WCF.



      11.   Structural Standards.  WCF and their equipment
compounds shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the Florida
Building Code, specifically Chapters 15, 16, and Section 3108 for
construction and design loads.  WCF shall be designed to resist wind loads
in accordance with TIA/EIA-222, the federal standards for Steel Antenna
Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures.  In addition, all accessory
equipment buildings, cabinets, or structures, or modifications to WCF shall
require building permits and inspections.  Design documents for towers,
antennas and other structures required to meet wind loads shall bear the
raised seal and signature of an engineer licensed and registered in the State
of Florida.



   All work such as clearing and grading, driveway construction, and
installation of WCF and enclosure shall be permitted in accordance with the
applicable sections of the LDR.



      12.   Hazardous Location.  WCF are prohibited when a proposed
or existing principal use or uses within two hundred (200) feet of a proposed
WCF includes the storage, distribution, or sale of volatile, flammable,
explosive or hazardous wastes, including but not limited to, LP gas, propane,
gasoline, natural gas, and corrosive or dangerous chemicals, unless the City
Fire Marshal determines that the proximity of the WCF does not pose any
danger or risk of explosion or fire or unless used for backup power purposes.



   C.   Attached WCF.  Attached WCF are an antenna or antenna array
that are secured to an existing building or structure with any accompanying
pole or device which attaches it to the building or structure, together with
transmission cables, and an equipment cabinet, which may be located either on
the roof or inside/outside of the building or structure, or attached to
utility poles within a right-of-way.  Attached WCF are considered to be an
accessory use to the existing principal use on a site.



      1.   Concealed Attached WCF.  Concealed attached WCF,
sometimes referred to as camouflaged facilities, are WCF, including their
ancillary structures or equipment compounds, that are not readily
identifiable as such, and are designed to be aesthetically compatible with
existing and proposed buildings and uses on a site.  Examples include, but
are not limited to the following:  screened antennas that blend with and are
incorporated into existing architectural features of a building such as a
church steeple, bell tower, clock tower, or cupola.



         a.   Height.  WCF shall only be allowed on buildings at
least forty (40) feet in height, not to exceed more than fifteen (15) feet
above the roofline.



         b.   Setbacks.  WCF shall be located within the
buildable area of the lot and not within the front, rear, or side yard
building setbacks, and subject to the setbacks of the underlying zoning
district.  When located on a nonconforming building or structure, then the
existing nonconforming setback shall apply.



         c.   Design.  Feed lines and antennas shall be designed
to architecturally match the façade, roof, wall, or structure on which they
are affixed so that they blend with the existing structural design, color,
and texture.  Existing conforming building element structures (excluding
towers) in excess of fifty (50) feet in height may, as a matter of right, be
rebuilt, if necessary, to support or contain a new antenna, provided that the
new structure is the same height and substantially the same in appearance as
the structure it replaces.



         d.   Ground Equipment.  Equipment buildings shall not
exceed a total of five hundred (500) square feet and shall not exceed eight
(8) feet in height.



         e.   Rooftop Equipment.  Rooftop equipment shall not
occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the roof area and shall comply
with the exterior building and site design standards (see Chapter 4, Article
III, Section 3.A.9.).



      2.   Non-concealed Attached WCF.  Non-concealed attached WCF
are wireless communication facilities that are readily identifiable as
such.  Examples include antennas attached to utility poles and freestanding
lighting within a public right-of-way.



         a.   Location.  WCF shall be allowed on electric
utility poles, light standards, or existing ball park light poles, where the
applicant has an agreement with the applicable utility or other authority
that exercises jurisdiction over the subject right-of-way or property,
subject to approval of the city and/or appropriate agency designee and/or the
utility company;



         b.   Height.  WCF shall only be attached to poles fifty
(50) feet or more in height, provided that the total length of any antenna
does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the height of the existing pole.  The
total height shall be determined by the highest point of any and all
components of the structure, including antennas.



         c.   Equipment Cabinets.  Equipment cabinets or
compounds for WCF under this subsection shall be designed and located in such
a manner as to not interfere with the subject right-of-way or its primary
utilization.



   D.   Freestanding WCF.  Freestanding WCF are any manned or unmanned
location for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals, or
other wireless communications, usually consisting of an antenna or group of
antennas, feed lines, and equipment cabinets, and may include an antenna
support structure. WCF include, but are not limited to the following:
stealth, monopole, guyed, or lattice antenna support structures.



      1.   Generally.



         a.   Determination of Need.  No new or mitigated WCF
shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates that no existing WCF
within applicant's coverage area can accommodate the applicant's proposed use;



         b.   Co-location.  All new or mitigated WCF up to
eighty (80) feet in height shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate
no less than two (2) antenna arrays.  All WCF between eighty-one (81) feet
and one hundred (100) feet shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate
no less than three (3) antenna arrays. All WCF between one hundred one (101)
to one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be engineered and constructed to
accommodate no less than four (4) antenna arrays.



         c.   Separation.  A minimum separation distance of
seven hundred fifty (750) feet shall be required between proposed  and
existing freestanding WCF.  A waiver or reduction of separation distance
between WCF may be approved by the City Commission based upon the inability
to co-locate on existing structures, the need to have more than one (1) WCF,
or the efficient use of available land within permitted zoning districts. The
decision shall be based upon a finding of compatibility and competent and
substantial evidence that the waiver request meets one (1) or more of the
following criteria:



            (1)   Locational requirements/limitations as
established by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) or the Public Service Commission (PSC), if
any;



            (2)   Identification of a more appropriate site
that does not meet the separation requirements above, by analysis of factors
such as distance from residential uses, existence of permanent screening and
buffering, and location within a large area of commercial or industrial use;



            (3)   To avoid the location of a tower on
environmentally sensitive land, a wilderness area, a historical site, or
other sensitive area; or



            (4)   To reduce the impact on adjacent residential
uses.



         d.   Design.  New antenna support structures shall be
configured and located in a manner that shall minimize adverse effects
including visual impacts on the landscape and adjacent properties.



         e.   Clearing and Grading.  Clearing and grading shall
be minimized and limited only to the area necessary for the new WCF and done
in accordance with city regulations.



         f.   Access.  Each site shall have access from an
improved right-of-way provided by a driveway approved by the city.  The
driveway shall extend from the street to an appropriate location on the
premises where a vehicle would need to be parked to facilitate normal
maintenance of the facility.



         g.   Height.  Maximum height shall be measured from
ground level to the highest point of the WCF, including any antenna.  Height
limit shall exclude lightning rods or lights required by the FAA that do not
provide support for antennas.



         h.   Safety.  All support structures shall comply with
the requirements of the Florida Building Code and safety standards contained
in the Electronics Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries
Association (EIA/TIA) document 222-F, "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna
Towers and Supporting Structures," as amended.



         i.   City's Option to Co-locate.  The city shall have
the option, through an agreement with the owner of the WCF, to co-locate
emergency/public safety equipment on any proposed non-concealed freestanding
WCF within the city's jurisdiction, provided that the co-location of antennas
does not interfere with the normal operation of approved WCF.  Reserved
space on new non-concealed freestanding WCF, including reserved ground space
for equipment, shall be required for future city co-location, and shall be
noted on plans.



      2.   Concealed Freestanding WCF.  Concealed freestanding WCF,
sometimes referred to as stealth facilities, are WCF (including their
ancillary structures, or equipment compounds) that are not readily
identifiable as such, and designed to blend into the surrounding environment
and be aesthetically compatible and in proportion with existing and proposed
buildings and uses on a site.  WCF sometimes have a secondary, obvious
function such as a flagpole, light pole, or tree.



         a.   Residential Districts.  In residential districts,
as indicated on Table 3-29 herein, new WCF shall only be permitted on lots
with a minimum lot size of one (1) acre, containing only non-residential
uses, including but not limited to, schools, churches, fire stations, parks,
and other public property.



         b.   Height.  Height shall be according to the zoning
district in which WCF is located.



            (1)   In all residential districts as indicated on
the tables in this section, the maximum height shall be limited to
twenty-five (25) feet above the maximum building height of the zoning
district.



            (2)   In the PU and REC districts, the maximum
height shall be limited to one hundred (100) feet.



            (3)   In all commercial districts, the maximum
height shall be limited to thirty (30) feet above the maximum building height
of the zoning district.



            (4)   In all mixed use districts, the maximum
height of concealed freestanding WCF shall be limited to the approved
building height or a total of seventy (70) feet, whichever is less.



            (5)   In industrial districts, except where
prohibited in a mixed use pod with a residential component within a PID, the
maximum height shall be limited to one hundred (100) feet, if located less
than one thousand (1,000) feet from a residential use, and one hundred fifty
(150) feet if located in excess of one thousand feet (1,000) feet from a
residential use.



         c.   Setbacks.  In all zoning districts where allowed,
WCF shall be set back one-half (1/2) the height of the antenna support
structure from all property lines.  However, in all instances, the minimum
setback distance from the property line of any residentially zoned property
or the boundary of a residential component within a mixed use pod, shall be
at least one and one-half (1.5) times the height of the entire proposed WCF
structure.



         d.   Design.  WCF shall be designed to blend into the
surrounding environment and be aesthetically compatible and in proportion
with building mass and existing features or landscaping on-site.



      3.   Non-concealed Freestanding WCF.  Non-concealed
freestanding WCF are those facilities that are readily identifiable as such,
and include, but are not limited to, the following: guyed, lattice, or
monopole antenna support structures.



         a.   Antenna Support Structure. WCF shall be limited to
monopole type antenna support structures, unless the applicant demonstrates
that such design is not feasible to accommodate the intended users.



         b.   Height.  The maximum height shall be limited to a
total of one hundred (100) feet.  However, the maximum height may exceed one
hundred (100) feet, but shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet, if the
subject WCF is located within an M-1 or PID zoning district, and located in
excess of one thousand (1,000) feet from a residential use.



         c.   Setbacks.  WCF and their equipment compounds shall
be subject to a minimum setback distance equal to the height of the proposed
antenna support structure.  However, the minimum setback distance shall be
at least two (2) times the height of the WCF structure from the property line
of any adjacent residential use.  In REC and PU districts, the minimum
setback distance shall be three (3) times the height of the WCF structure
from the property line of any adjacent residential use.



         d.   Design.



            (1)   Antenna support structures shall maintain a
galvanized gray finish or other approved compatible color, except as required
by federal rules or regulations.



            (2)   New antenna mounts shall be flush-mounted,
unless it is demonstrated through RF propagation analysis that flush-mounted
antennas will not meet the network objectives of the desired coverage area.



      4.   Mitigation of Existing WCF.  Mitigation is a
modification to an existing antenna support structure to increase the height,
or to improve its integrity, or to replace or remove one (1) or several
antenna support structures located in proximity to a proposed new antenna
support structure, in order to encourage compliance with this section or
improve aesthetics or functionality of the overall wireless network.



         a.   Determination of Need.  WCF mitigation shall
accomplish a minimum of one (1) of the following: reduce the number of WCF;
reduce the number of nonconforming WCF; replace existing WCF to reduce visual
obtrusiveness; or replace existing WCF with new WCF to promote greater
co-location opportunities or improve network functionality, resulting in
compliance with these Regulations.



         b.   Height.  The height of WCF approved for mitigation
shall not exceed the maximum height limitations of this section based on the
type of WCF and the zoning district.  Replacement WCF with an increased
height shall require City Commission approval.



         c.   Setbacks.  New WCF approved for mitigation of
existing WCF shall be constructed on-site within close proximity to existing
WCF at the same or greater setbacks than previously established.  All
proposed accessory equipment buildings shall comply with established setbacks
for existing WCF without increasing nonconformity.



         d.   Buffers.  At the time of mitigation, equipment
compounds shall be brought into compliance with the screening and buffer
requirements of this section.



         e.   Design.  Mitigated antenna support structures
shall comply with the provisions herein to reduce nonconformity and minimize
adverse effects on the landscape and adjacent properties, with specific
design considerations as to WCF type, height, scale, color, texture, and
architectural design of the buildings on the same and adjacent lots.



      5.   Antenna Element Replacement or Repair.  Any repair or
replacement of an existing antenna or antenna array with another of like size
and shape that will not alter the structural integrity of the support
structure, shall be exempted from further review provided that a notarized
certification shall be submitted by a qualified technician stating that the
replacement will not alter the structural integrity of the support structure,
and that any changes will not affect the electrical specifications.



      6.   Co-location.  Co-location means the practice of
installing and operating multiple wireless carriers, service providers,
and/or radio common carrier licensees on the same antenna support structure
or attached WCF using different and separate antenna, feed lines and radio
frequency generating equipment.



         a.   Height.  Co-located or combined WCF shall not
increase the height of an existing antenna support structure.



         b.   Setbacks.



            (1)   Ground equipment to be located in
conjunction with co-location shall comply with the setback requirements
depending on the type of WCF, and zoning district in which it is located.



            (2)   Co-location of antenna on WCF approved prior
to these Regulations may locate proposed accessory equipment buildings within
existing equipment compound enclosures, provided the minimum established
setbacks of existing WCF are met.



         c.   Design.  New antenna mounts shall be flush-mounted
onto existing WCF, unless it is demonstrated through RF propagation analysis
that flush-mounted antennas will not meet the network objectives of the
desired coverage area.



         d.   Buffers.  At the time of installation of
additional equipment to WCF, the equipment compound shall be brought into
compliance with the screening and buffer requirements of this section.



         e.   Zoning Districts and Affiliated Process (Table
3-29).



 

Zoning District
 
Concealed Attached WCF 1
 
Non-concealed Attached WCF 2
 
Concealed
Freestanding
WCF 4
 
Non-concealed Freestanding WCF 4
 
Mitigation of Existing WCF 7
 
Antenna Element Replacement
 
Co-location 8




R-1
 
 
 
 
 
CC 3
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


R-2
 
 
 
AD
 
CC 3
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


R-3
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC 3
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


R-4
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC 3
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


PUD
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC 3
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


IPUD
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC 3
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


MHPD
 
 
 
 
 
CC 3
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


C-1
 
 
 
AD
 
CC
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


C-2
 
 
 
AD
 
CC
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


C-3
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


C-4
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


CBD
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


PCD
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


REC
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
CC 5,6
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


PU
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
CC 5,6
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


SMU
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


MU-1
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


MU-2
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


MU-3
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


MU-4
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


MU-C
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
 
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


PID
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
CC
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD


M-1
 
AD
 
AD
 
CC
 
CC
 
AD
 
AD
 
AD




 



Legend:



   AD - Administrative (Staff) Approval   CC - City Commission (Public
Hearing) Approval   Blank - Not Allowed



   Footnotes:



   1   Concealed attached WCF shall only be allowed on building
features that are a minimum of forty (40) feet in height, not to exceed
fifteen (15) feet above the roofline.



   2   Non-concealed attached WCF are allowed on utility poles and
freestanding lights within a public right-of-way, subject to agreement with
the agency representative with jurisdiction over the right-of-way and/or the
utility company.



   3   Concealed freestanding WCF in residential districts shall only
be allowed on lots of one (1) acre or more that have a non-residential use
(school, church).



   4   A minimum separation of seven hundred fifty (750) feet is
required between freestanding WCF.  Requires conditional use approval.  In
industrial districts, except where prohibited in a mixed use pod with a
residential component within a PID, the maximum height shall be limited to
one hundred (100) feet if located less than one thousand (1,000) feet from a
residential use, and one hundred fifty (150) feet if located in excess of one
thousand (1,000) feet from a residential use.



   5   Only when located on city-owned property of two (2) acres or
more.



   6   Restricted to a maximum height of one hundred (100) feet.  A
setback of three (3) times the height of WCF structure required from the
property line of an adjacent residential use.



   7   Replacement WCF with increased height requires public hearing
approval.



   8    Administrative approval unless on city-owned site and the lease
requires each tenant to have a separate lease with city (each lease requires
City Commission approval as a lease amendment), or the lease requires written
consent letter (City Commission consent agenda).



 



Zoning Districts:


R-1   Single-Family Residential
 
C-1   Office Professional
 
SMU   Suburban Mixed Use


R-2   Duplex Residential
 
C-2   Neighborhood Commercial
 
MU-1   Mixed Use 1


R-3   Multi-Family Residential
 
C-3   Community Commercial
 
MU-2   Mixed Use 2


R-4   Multi-Family Residential
 
C-4   General Commercial
 
MU-3   Mixed Use 3


PUD   Planned Unit Development
 
CBD   Central Business District
 
MU-4   Mixed Use 4


IPUD   Infill Planned Unit Development
 
PCD   Planned Commercial Development
 
MU-C   Mixed Use Core


MHPD   Mobile Home Planned Development
 
REC   Recreation
 
PID   Planned Industrial Development


 
 
PU   Public Usage
 
M-1   Light Industrial




 



         f.   Maximum Heights of WCF (Table 3-30).



 


Zoning District

 

Concealed Attached WCF

 

Non- concealed Attached WCF

 

Concealed Freestanding WCF

 

Non-concealed Freestanding WCF

 

Mitigation of Existing WCF

 

Antenna Element Replacement

 

Co-location





R-1
 


 


 

55' 3,4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



R-2
 


 

2

 

55' 3,4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



R-3
 

1

 

2

 

55' 3,4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



R-4
 

1

 

2

 

55' 3,4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



PUD
 

1

 

2

 

75' 3,4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



IPUD
 

1

 

2

 

75' 3,4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



MHPD
 


 


 

55' 3,4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



 
 


 


 


 


 


 


 




C-1
 


 

2

 

55' 4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



C-2
 


 

2

 

55' 4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



C-3
 

1

 

2

 

75' 4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



C-4
 

1

 

2

 

75' 4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



CBD
 

1

 

2

 

130' 4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



PCD
 

1

 

2

 

75' 4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



 
 


 


 


 


 


 


 




REC
 

1

 

2

 

100' 4

 

100' 4, 5, 6

 

7

 

7

 

7



PU
 

1

 

2

 

100' 4

 

100' 4, 5, 6

 

7

 

7

 

7



 
 


 


 


 


 


 


 




SMU
 

1

 

2

 

70' or less 4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



MU-1
 

1

 

2

 

70' or less  4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



MU-2
 

1

 

2

 

70' or less  4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



MU-3
 

1

 

2

 

70' or less  4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



MU-4
 

1

 

2

 

70' or less 4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



MU-C
 

1

 

2

 

70' or less 4

 


 

7

 

7

 

7



 
 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PID
 

1

 

2

 

100-150' 4

 

100-150' 4

 

7

 

7

 

7



M-1
 

1

 

2

 

100-150' 4

 

100-150' 4 

 

7

 

7

 

7





 



Footnotes:



   1   Concealed attached WCF shall only be allowed on buildings that
are a minimum of forty (40) feet in height, not to exceed fifteen (15) feet
above the roofline.



   2   Non-concealed attached WCF are allowed only on utility poles and
freestanding lights that are more than forty (40) feet in height, and located
within a public right-of-way (subject to agreement with the agency
representative with jurisdiction over the right-of-way and/or the utility
company) or on existing ball park light poles that are more than fifty (50)
feet in height.  The total length of any antenna shall not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the height of the existing utility or light pole. 



   3   Freestanding WCF in residential districts shall only be allowed
on lots of one (1) acre or more that have a non-residential use (school,
church, etc.).  Maximum height is limited to twenty-five (25) feet above the
maximum building height of the zoning district.



   4   A minimum separation of seven hundred fifty (750) feet is
required between freestanding WCF.  In industrial districts, except where
prohibited in a mixed use pod with a residential component within a PID, the
maximum height shall be limited to one hundred (100) feet if located less
than one thousand (1,000) feet from a residential use, and one hundred fifty
(150) feet if located in excess of one thousand (1,000) feet from a
residential use.  In all mixed use districts height is limited to approved
building height or seventy (70) feet whichever is less.



   5   Only when located on city-owned property of two (2) acres or
more.



   6   Restricted to a maximum height of one hundred (100) feet.  A
setback of three (3) times the height of WCF structure required from the
property line of an adjacent residential use.



   7   Shall comply with maximum height per table based on WCF type and
zoning district.  Any additional height requires public hearing approval.



         g.   Setbacks and Separation Between WCF (Table 3-31).



 

Zoning District
 
Concealed Attached WCF
 
Non-concealed Attached WCF
 
Concealed Freestanding WCF
 
Non-concealed Freestanding WCF
 
Mitigation of Existing WCF
 
Antenna Element Replacement
 
Co-location




R-1
 
 
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


R-2
 
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


R-3
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


R-4
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


PUD
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


IPUD
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


MHPD
 
 
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


C-1
 
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


C-2
 
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


C-3
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


C-4
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


CBD
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


PCD
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


REC
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
4,5
 
6
 
 
7


PU
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
4,5
 
6
 
 
7


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


SMU
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


MU-1
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


MU-2
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


MU-3
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


MU-4
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


MU-C
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
 
6
 
 
7


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


PID
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
4,5
 
6
 
 
7


M-1
 
1
 
2
 
3,4
 
4,5
 
6
 
 
7




 



Footnotes:



1   Concealed attached WCF shall only be allowed on buildings that are a
minimum of forty (40) feet in height, not to exceed fifteen (15) feet above
the roofline.



2   Non-concealed attached WCF are allowed only on utility poles and
freestanding lights that are more than forty (40) feet in height, and located
within a public right-of-way (subject to agreement with the agency
representative with jurisdiction over the right-of-way and/or the utility
company) or on existing ball park light poles that are more than fifty (50)
feet in height.  The total length of any antenna shall not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the height of the existing utility or light pole. 



3   Freestanding WCF in residential districts shall only be allowed on
lots of one (1) acre or more that have a non-residential use (school, church,
etc.).  Maximum height is limited to twenty-five (25) feet above the maximum
building height of the zoning district.



4   A minimum separation of seven hundred fifty (750) feet is required
between freestanding WCF.  In industrial districts, except where prohibited
in a mixed use pod with a residential component within a PID, the maximum
height shall be limited to one hundred (100) feet if located less than one
thousand (1,000) feet from a residential use, and one hundred fifty (150)
feet if located in excess of one thousand (1,000) feet from a residential
use.  In all mixed use districts height is limited to approved building
height or seventy (70) feet whichever is less.



5   Only when located on city-owned property of two (2) acres or more.



6   Restricted to a maximum height of one hundred (100) feet.  A setback
of three (3) times the height of WCF structure required from the property
line of an adjacent residential use.



7   Shall comply with maximum height per table based on WCF type and
zoning district.  Any additional height requires public hearing approval.



   E.   Submittal Requirements.  A completed application and filing
fee with all required documents as specified on the application checklist,
including but not limited to, signed and sealed site plans, antenna support
structure elevations, and landscape plans shall be submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Division.



   F.   Approval Process.



      1.   Pre-application Meeting.  Prior to leasing or purchasing
facilities, the WCF service provider is required to meet with the Director of
Planning and Zoning or designee to determine the type of approval process,
and to review the merits of potential locations.



      2.   Administrative Approval.  The approval of WCF subject to
administrative review as identified in Table 3-29 shall be processed as a
minor site plan modification in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II,
Section 2.F.7.c.  If the Director of Planning and Zoning or designee
determines that the application and documentation fail to meet the intent of
these Regulations, the city may, in writing, deny the request.  Applicants
who have been denied a request for a WCF may formally appeal such denial to
the City Commission in accordance with Chapter 1, Article VIII.



      3.   City Commission Approval.  Approval of WCF subject to
City Commission public hearing review as identified in Table 3-29 shall be
processed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article I, Section 3.



      4.   Review Criteria.  The WCF shall comply with the
regulations and requirements of this section.  Notwithstanding compliance
with the aforementioned, for WCF applications requiring public hearings, the
City Commission shall also consider the following:



         a.   Height of the proposed WCF;



         b.   Nature of use(s) on adjacent and nearby properties;



         c.   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;



         d.   Design of the WCF, particularly with respect to
design attributes having the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness; and



         e.   Proposed ingress and egress.



      5.   Conditions of Approval.  In granting an approval, the
city may impose conditions necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed WCF on adjoining properties.



   G.   Publicly-Owned Property.



      1.   Agreements.  If an applicant requests a permit to locate
a WCF on city-owned property within a city right-of-way, the permit granted
hereunder shall not become effective until the applicant and the jurisdiction
have executed a written agreement or lease in a form acceptable to the City
Attorney setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the
permit to occupy and use the public lands of the jurisdiction will be
granted, and releasing the city from all liability regarding WCF.



      2.   Occupancy or Use.  No permit granted under this section
shall convey any exclusive right, privilege, permit, or franchise to occupy
or use the publicly-owned sites of the jurisdiction for delivery of
telecommunications services or any other purpose.



         a.   No permit granted under this section shall convey
any right, title or interest in the public lands, but shall be deemed a
permit only to use and occupy the public lands for the limited purposes and
term stated in the grant.  Further, no permit shall be construed as a
conveyance of a title interest in the property.



   H.   Interference with Public Safety WCF.  Whenever the city has
encountered radio frequency interference with its public safety
communications equipment, and it believes that such interference has been or
is being caused by one (1) or more WCF, the following steps shall be taken:



      1.   Notification.  The city shall provide notification to
all WCF service providers operating in the jurisdiction of possible
interference with the public safety communications equipment.  Upon such
notification, the owners shall use their best efforts to cooperate and
coordinate with the city and among themselves to investigate and mitigate the
interference if the WCF owner is operating outside of its FCC frequencies.



      2.   Reimbursement.  If any WCF owner is operating outside of
its assigned FCC frequencies, or if the FCC makes a determination that the
WCF is operating outside of its frequencies and causing radio frequency
interference with the city public safety communications equipment, the owner
who fails to cooperate and/or the owner of the WCF which caused the
interference due to operating outside of its licensed frequencies shall be
responsible, upon FCC determination of radio frequency interference, for
reimbursing the city for all costs associated with ascertaining and resolving
the interference, including but not limited to any engineering studies
obtained by the jurisdiction to determine the source of the interference.



   I.   Annual Registration and Certification.  WCF owners shall file
annually with the Director of Planning and Zoning or designee a declaration
as to the continuing operation (with active antennas) of their facilities
located within the city.  Said declaration shall include a listing of all
WCF users, names, and mailing addresses, and any additional information
deemed appropriate by the city.



      1.   Continued Structural Integrity.  Within sixty (60) days
following a catastrophic Act of God or other emergency that affects the
structural integrity of the antenna support structure, a certification of
continued structural integrity (i.e., a statement that a thorough and
complete inspection of WCF was conducted and WCF and ancillary facilities are
and will continue to perform as originally designed), certified by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer, shall also be filed with the
Director of Planning and Zoning or designee.



      2.   Failure to File.  Failure to timely file either the
annual declaration or the certification shall mean that WCF is deemed to be
abandoned, unused, or unsafe, thus subject to removal.



   J.   Removal of Abandoned, Unused, or Unsafe WCF.  The intent and
purpose of this subsection is to address the compelling public interest in
ensuring that WCF are promptly disassembled, dismantled, and removed once
they are no longer used.  There may be substantial risk that WCF may cease
being used in large numbers if there is a concentration or consolidation of
competitors within the industry or if even newer technologies arise,
obviating the need for antenna support structures.



   WCF that are abandoned or unused for a period of one hundred twenty
(120) days shall be removed as follows:



      1.   Notice of Abandonment.  WCF owners shall submit a copy
of the "Notice of Intent to Abandon" required by the FCC to the Director of
Planning and Zoning or designee, and remove its own equipment, including but
not limited to the antenna support structure, antennas, generators, and
service facilities or cabinets, within ninety (90) days of the cessation of
use.  WCF owners shall return the site to its natural state, or consistent
with the current use of the land at the time of removal;



      2.   Notice of Different Provider.  WCF owners shall notice
the Director of Planning and Zoning or designee that the provider's
obligations for its equipment in the right-of-way or public easement or
private property under this section have been lawfully assumed by another
provider who will make actual use of the WCF within thirty (30) days;



      3.   Proposal for Transfer to City.  WCF owners shall submit
to the Director of Planning and Zoning or designee a proposal and instruments
for transferring ownership of its equipment to the city.  If a provider
proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option:



         a.   Assume ownership of the equipment for a ten dollar
($10.00) nominal consideration to provider;



         b.   Require the provider, at provider's expense, to
remove it; or



         c.   Require the provider to post a bond in an amount
sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to be
incurred in removing the equipment.  Equipment of a provider who fails to
comply with the preceding sentence and which for six (6) months remains
unused shall be deemed abandoned. Abandoned equipment is deemed to be a
nuisance.  The city may exercise any remedies and rights it has at law or in
equity, including but not limited to, abating the nuisance, taking possession
of the equipment and restoring it to working condition, or requiring removal
of the equipment by the provider or by the provider's surety under any
maintenance bond required by the Code of Ordinances.



      4.   Exceptions.  WCF used for other purposes, including but
not limited to, light standards and power poles, may be exempt from this
provision, subject to the requirement that all equipment except the antenna
support structure itself be removed or abandoned as set forth above.



   K.   Inspection.  The city reserves the right to require additional
inspections if there is evidence that the tower has a safety problem or is
exposed to extraordinary conditions.  Inspections shall be conducted by a
registered engineer.  Based upon the results of an inspection, the Building
Official may require repair or removal of the WCF.  Should the city have
reason to believe WCF is not in compliance with applicable building and
electrical codes, the city may conduct periodic inspections of the site to
ensure structural and electrical integrity.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 16-023, passed 1-3-17; Am. Ord.
17-023, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 14.   Dogs in Outdoor Portions of Public Food Service Establishments.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent. The Dixie Cup Clary Local Control Act
grants the city the authority to provide exemptions from Florida regulations
governing food service establishments. The purpose of this section is to
allow dogs in outdoor portions of public food service establishments in a
manner consistent with state law. The procedure adopted pursuant to this
section provides an exemption, for those public food service establishments
which have applied for and received a permit, to those sections of the Food
and Drug Administration Food Code that prohibit live animals in public food
service establishments.



      2.   Terms and Definitions.  As used in this section. "public
food service establishments" shall mean eating and drinking establishments,
restaurants, and sidewalk cafes as defined by the City Code.  "Employee" or
"employees" shall include, but is not limited to, the owner or owners of the
public food service establishment.



   B.   City Approval Required.  No dog shall be in a public food
service establishment unless allowed by state law and the public food service
establishment has received and maintains an unexpired and valid permit
pursuant to Chapter 2, Article V, Section 2 allowing dogs in designated
outdoor areas of the establishment.



   C.   Standards.  Public food service establishments that receive a
permit for a designated outdoor area pursuant to this section shall require
that:



      1.   Employees shall wash their hands promptly after touching,
petting, or otherwise handling any dog(s) and shall wash their hands before
entering other parts of the public food service establishment from the
designated outdoor area.



      2.   Employees are prohibited from touching, petting or
otherwise handling any dog while serving or carrying food or beverages or
while handling or carrying tableware.



      3.   Patrons in a designated outdoor area shall be advised by
appropriate signage, at conspicuous locations, that they should wash their
hands before eating. Waterless hand sanitizer shall be provided at all tables
in the designated outdoor area.



      4.   Patrons shall keep their dogs on a leash at all times and
shall keep their dogs under reasonable control.



      5.   Employees and patrons shall not allow dogs to come into
contact with serving dishes, utensils, tableware, linens, paper products, or
any other items involved with food service operations.



      6.   Employees and patrons shall not allow any part of a dog
to be on chairs, tables, or other furnishings. Dogs must remain on the
floor/ground level and shall not be permitted in the lap of the patron.



      7.   Employees shall clean and sanitize all table and chair
surfaces with an approved product between seating of patrons.



      8.   Employees shall remove all dropped food and spilled drink
from the floor or ground as soon as possible but in no event less frequently
than between seating of patrons at the nearest table.



      9.   Employees and patrons shall remove all dog waste
immediately and the floor or ground shall be immediately cleaned and
sanitized with an approved product. Employees shall keep a kit with the
appropriate materials for this purpose near the designated outdoor area.



      10.   Employees and patrons shall not permit dogs to be in, or
to travel through, indoor or nondesignated outdoor portions of the public
food service establishment.



      11.   A sign or signs notifying the public that the designated
outdoor area is available for the use of patrons and patrons' dogs shall be
posted in a conspicuous manner that places the public on notice.



      12.   A sign or signs informing patrons of these laws shall be
posted on premises in a conspicuous manner and place as determined by the
city.



      13.   A sign or signs informing employees of these laws shall
be posted on the premises in a conspicuous manner and place as determined by
the city.



      14.   Ingress and egress to the designated outdoor area shall
not require entrance into or passage through any indoor area or nondesignated
outdoor portions of the public food service establishment.



      15.   The public food service establishment and designated
outdoor area shall comply with all permit conditions and the approved diagram.



      16.   Employees and patrons shall not allow any dog to be in
the designated outdoor areas of the public food service establishment if the
public food service establishment is in violation of any of the requirements
of this section, or if they do not possess a valid permit.



      17.   Permits shall be conspicuously displayed in the
designated outdoor area.



      18.   It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this section. Each instance of a dog on the premises of a
public food service establishment without a permit is a separate violation.
Each violation of any of the requirements of this section is considered a
separate violation.



      19.   All dogs shall wear a current license tag or rabies tag.



(Ord. 12-014, passed 9-4-12)



Sec. 15.   Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-014, passed 9-4-12)



CHAPTER 4.  SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



Article I.   Environmental Protection Standards



Article II.   Landscape Design and Buffering Standards



Article III.   Exterior Building and Site Design Standards



Article IV.   Sign Standards



Article V.   Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements



Article VI.   Parking Lot, Vehicular Use Areas, and Loading Standards



Article VII.   Exterior Lighting Standards



Article VIII.   Utility and Infrastructure Design Standards



Article IX.   Building, Construction, and Historic Preservation



Article X.   Flood Prevention Requirements



Article XI.   Excavation and Fill Regulations



ARTICLE I.  ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION STANDARDS



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Short Title.  This article shall be known and may be cited as
the "City Tree Preservation Ordinance."



   B.   Purpose and Intent.  The city recognizes the inherent value of
trees and other plant material.  Healthy vegetation aids in reducing
destructive environmental factors to real property, such as wind, noise, and
the potential for erosion to the city's soils and beaches.  Trees and shrubs
contribute towards energy conservation and management by producing oxygen and
absorbing carbon dioxide.  They have a positive effect in surface drainage,
and help to provide a beautiful and aesthetic environment for residents,
businesses, and visitors.  The purpose and intent of these Regulations,
therefore, is to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the community by
establishing rules and regulations governing the protection of trees and
vegetation, in conjunction with encouraging the installation and/or
proliferation of healthy trees in shrubs and appropriate locations and
quantities.



   C.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee shall have the authority to interpret and administer this article.



   D.   Applicability.  The provisions of this article shall apply to
all real property in the city that is intended for development or
redevelopment, and when such tree removal activity is initiated by the
property owner or agent thereof.



   E.   Exemptions.  The protection standards and permitting processes
of this article shall not apply to the following:



      1.   Single-Family Homes and Duplexes.  Individually platted
lots containing single-family homes and duplexes located within single-family
and two-family residential zoning districts are exempt from the protection
standards and permitting processes of this article, provided they do not
contain specimen trees.  Specimen trees shall be protected in accordance
with Section 3.B. below.



      2.   Community Garden.  All fruits, vegetables, nuts, and
herbs shall be exempt from the provisions of this article with respect to
those that are planted and growing on the premises in connection with a
community garden and when approved by the city pursuant to a zoning permit or
conditional use/site plan approval, whichever is applicable.



      3.   Nurseries and Tree Farms.  All licensed plant or tree
nurseries or tree farms shall be exempt from the provisions of this article
only in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises of such
licensed business, which are so planted and growing for the sale or intended
sale to the general public in the ordinary course of such business.



      4.   Public Utility Agencies.  Public utility agencies are
authorized to remove existing trees that interfere with infrastructure
located within easements or rights-of-way, or which otherwise endanger the
safety and welfare of the public, without the requirement or need to obtain a
city permit.



      5.   Emergencies.  The provisions of this article may be
waived by the Director of Development during a period of emergency, such as
during a hurricane, tropical storm, flood, or any other Act of God.



      6.   Hazardous or Diseased Trees.  No permit is required to
remove hazardous or diseased trees, provided that the subject trees are
removed under the supervision of a certified arborist in accordance with the
standards of the International Society Arboriculture (ISA).



   F.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the regulations and
standards contained herein.



   G.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of this
Code conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply, unless otherwise
stated herein.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   City Approval Required.



   No plant material or vegetation shall be cut down, moved or removed,
destroyed or effectively destroyed through damaging without first securing
the necessary city approvals and permits as provided hereunder, except in
instances when exempt from these Regulations in accordance with Section 1.E.
above.  The following processes and permits shall be available to ensure
that all clearing and grubbing activities comply with the standards of this
article:



   A.   Private Property and Public Lands.  The property owner or
agent shall file the following applications prior to commencement of any of
the aforementioned clearing and grubbing activities:



      1.   Site Plan Review.  Except for individually platted lots
containing single-family and duplex homes located within single-family and
two-family residential zoning districts, the site plan review process shall
be required and reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to the issuance of any land
development permit.  For the purpose of this subsection, the term "site
plan" is construed to include master site plan and technical site plan
applications, and to ultimately mean the process by which a landscape plan is
approved.  The City Forester may require the submittal of a tree survey,
tree management plan, Native Florida Ecosystem Survey or Inventory, or a
combination thereof, as part of the site plan application, when determined
necessary to identify specimen trees or to ensure compliance with the
preservation efforts of Section 3.B. below.



      2.   Land Development Permit.  The land development permit
process shall be required, and initiated only subsequent to the approval of a
site plan (landscape plan) application, except in those instances when site
plan review is not required.  The land development permit application shall
be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 2,
Article III, Section 3.  The City Forester may require the submittal of a
tree survey, tree management plan, Native Florida Ecosystem Survey or
Inventory, or a combination thereof, as part of the land development permit
application, when determined necessary to identify specimen trees or to
ensure compliance with the preservation efforts of Section 3.B. below.  The
issuance of a land development permit shall not relieve any party from
obtaining the necessary permits which may be required by the various federal,
state, or local government agencies. 



   B.   City Rights-of-Way.  A right-of-way permit application shall
be required for any proposal to remove plant material from a city
right-of-way in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 2,
Article III, Section 4.  The City Forester may require the submittal of a
tree survey, tree management plan, Native Florida Ecosystem Survey or
Inventory, or a combination thereof, as part of the city right-of-way permit
application, when determined necessary to identify specimen trees or to
ensure compliance with the preservation efforts of Section 3.B. below.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Preservation Principles.



   A.   High Ecological Importance. Areas that are considered to be of
high ecological importance should be given highest priority for protection.
These areas include but are not limited to the following: 1) have occurrences
of federal and state listed species of flora and fauna; 2) have biological
diversity; 3) located in aquifer recharge zones; and 4) known to inhabit
threatened and endangered species of fauna and flora. Therefore, the
following natural areas shall be protected as follows:



   B.   Easements and Rights-of-Way. Utilities, stormwater easements
and rights-of-way should avoid preserved areas.



   C.   Contiguity. Areas set aside for preservation should be
contiguous parcels of land that are interconnected and considered viable
habitat for wildlife to the extent practical. Small fragmented areas of
preservation should be avoided when possible.



(Ord. 11-019, passed 8-2-11)



Sec. 4.   Standards.



   The following standards shall be considered in order to ensure the
protection of existing vegetation:



   A.   General.  All proposed developments shall be designed to
preserve, perpetuate, and improve the existing natural character of the
site.  Existing native trees and other landscape features shall, to the
maximum extent possible, be preserved in their natural state; and additional
landscape features shall be provided to enhance architectural features, to
relate structural design to the site, and to conceal unattractive uses.  In
all instances the city's landscaping requirements and all other applicable
regulations shall be fully complied with as minimum standards.  No tree
shall be removed from any city property, lands, public park, or any areas
within a city right-of-way except in accordance with the provisions of this
article.



      High-quality areas placed in preservation shall be retained in
entirety in their current or improved natural state, and protected in
perpetuity regardless of ownership. This requirement may be negotiated to
create contiguous preservation among plant communities. During the site plan
review process, the applicant shall be required to prove that the highest
ecologically valued land is being retained first. If the preservation of the
highest ecological valued land produces undue burden on the development of
the site, it shall be the applicant's responsibility to prove such hardship
and provide an acceptable alternative for approval.



      Rights-of-way and areas determined to be future rights-of-way in
the Comprehensive Plan and utility or drainage easements shall not be allowed
as designated set-aside areas.



   B.   Preservation Efforts.



      1.   Beach Dunes.  The natural vegetative cover on beach
dunes shall be preserved in an undisturbed state of growth as a fragile
ecosystem.  No beach dune vegetation, grass, sea grape, and tree development
shall be altered, removed, or changed except in accordance with federal,
state, county, and local regulations.



      2.   Mangrove Areas.  Well-documented scientific research has
established that mangrove areas are the ecological base of the biological
food chain for many important species, including some species of fish that
are important for sport and commercial fishing.  Mangrove trees, which are
of considerable aesthetic value, also serve as protection against storm surge
as well as provide a habitat/shelter for birds and other wildlife.  For
these reasons, land development and construction thereon, shall be conserved
to the maximum extent possible and only altered in accordance with federal,
state, county, and local regulations.



      3.   Specimen Tree Designation.  The Director of Development
may, by written request to the City Manager, recommend from time to time the
official designation of certain trees located within the city as specimen
trees.  If the City Manager approves such recommendation, the matter shall
be presented to the City Commission for final determination.  The city shall
notify by certified mail the affected property owner of the proposed
hearing.  The City Commission shall accept, modify or deny the staff
recommendation.  Any proposal to remove a specimen tree shall be mitigated
in accordance with Section 2.C. below.



      4.   Environmentally Sensitive Lands.



         a.   General.  The purpose and intent of this section
is to preserve and protect the values and functions of environmentally
sensitive lands from alterations that would result in the loss of these lands
or significant degradation of their values and functions.



         b.   Applicability.  This subsection applies to all
properties that contain environmentally sensitive lands with an "A", "B", or
"C" rating as pursuant to Table 2 of the Conservation Element of the
Comprehensive Plan.



         c.   Standards.  The following standards shall promote
the preservation of natural resource sites:



            (1)   If the property proposed for development is
greater than ten (10) acres, or is a portion of a larger tract containing ten
(10) or more acres of environmentally sensitive lands designated as an "A"
rated site, the developer shall be required to preserve a minimum of
twenty-five percent (25%) of all native plant communities on the site in one
(1) unified preserve.  Habitat shall be preserved with intact canopy,
understory and ground cover.



            (2)   If the property proposed for development is
greater than ten (10) acres and has been designated as a "B" or "C" rated
site, the developer shall be required to preserve a minimum of twenty-five
percent (25%) of all native plant communities on the site.  The preserve
areas may be separated into micro preserves.  Habitat shall be preserved
with intact canopy, understory and ground cover.



            (3)   Natural resource sites identified in Table 2
of the Conservation Element of the Comprehensive Plan and that exceeds ten
(10) acres shall be subject to the twenty-five percent (25%) preserve area
set aside notwithstanding subdivision into smaller parts.



            (4)   The specific location of the preservation
area shall be determined during the review of a master plan or site plan. 
If no master plan or site plan is required, then such determination shall
occur during the review of the proposed plat.  The ultimate area to be
preserved shall be indicated on the approved plan and any corresponding
plat.  In determining the most appropriate location for the preserve area
within the site, the city shall consider factors, which include, but are not
limited to the following:  proximity of the preserve area to developed and
undeveloped property; potential for immediate or future consolidation with
environmentally sensitive lands on abutting properties; ability to maintain
the preserve area based upon surrounding development and land uses; and the
recommendations of staff or any consultants retained by the city.  The
preserve area shall be maintained in accordance with a city approved preserve
area management plan.



   C.   Mitigation of Existing Trees (Table 4-1 Mitigation of Existing
Trees).  All existing trees that are not preserved in place or relocated
on-site shall be mitigated in connection with a land development permit. 
The equivalent replacement for existing trees shall be based on caliper
dimension or type of tree as indicated in the table below:



 


Type of Existing Tree

 

Type of Replacement Tree




Canopy Tree
(< 24" Caliper)

 

Canopy Tree
(> 24" Caliper)

 

Large Palm
Tree1

 

Small & Medium
Size Palm Trees



Canopy Tree
(< 24" Caliper)
 

1 tree2

 

1 tree2

 

2 trees

 

3 trees3



Canopy Tree
(>24" Caliper)
 

1 tree2

 

1 tree2

 

4 trees

 

3 trees3



Large Palm Tree
 

1 tree

 

1 tree

 

1 tree

 

3 trees



Small & Medium Size Palm Trees
 

1 tree

 

1 tree

 

1 tree

 

1 tree




 



1   Large palm trees are those species, such as Florida Royal, Canary
Island Date, or any other palm species determined by staff to provide similar
or greater shading compared to a canopy tree.



2   The cumulative caliper inches of existing trees to be removed shall be
replaced on-site with an equal or greater number of caliper inches of a
replacement canopy tree or trees.



3   A cluster of three (3) small or medium size palm trees shall be the
equivalent replacement of one (1) canopy tree up to a size of 24 caliper
inches. One additional cluster of palm trees shall be required for each
increment of four (4) caliper inches (the common mathematical rule of
rounding shall be used when tabulating partial increments). For canopy trees
having a trunk size equal to or greater than 24 caliper inches, no more than
50% of the caliper inches of the replaced canopy tree shall be substituted
with palm species.



   D.   Forestry Practices and Procedures.



      1.   General.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee shall use "The Urban Forestry Manual (L)-Trees and Construction",
United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service, 2005 edition or
latest supplement thereof as the arboricultural standard when determining
which forestry practice or procedure to apply when reviewing the following
types of activities:  1) any proposal to relocate, replace, or remove trees
that are subject to the standards and permitting processes of this article;
2) any proposal where the grade of the site is to be raised or lowered around
an existing plant; 3) where ditching for utilities, foundations, swimming
pools, driveways or the like will severely cut root systems; 4) where large
paved areas will delete the water supply and aeration necessary for the life
of the tree or shrub; or 5) where a change in the grade or drainage of
development will seriously harm natural areas to be retained.



      2.   Land Clearing and Construction.



         a.   Vegetation that is set aside for preservation shall
be protected from all on-site construction. During the land clearing and
construction stage of development, the developer shall erect and maintain
protective barriers (to city requirements consistent with best management
practices) around all trees or groups of trees to be protected.  The
developer shall not allow the movement of equipment or the storage of
equipment, materials, debris or fill to be placed within the protective
barrier. Removal or re-grading of soils within preservation areas is
prohibited. Any damaged vegetation located within the set-aside areas shall
be replaced with vegetation equivalent to the vegetation destroyed.



         b.   During the construction stage of development, the
developer shall not allow the cleaning of equipment or material within the
drip line of any protected tree or groups of trees.  Neither shall the
developer allow the disposal of waste materials such as paint, oil solvents,
asphalt, concrete, mortar, and the like within the drip line of any tree or
groups of trees.



         c.   No attachments or wires other than those of a
protective nature shall be attached to any tree.



         d.   If more than one (1) native terrestrial plant
community is present on-site, areas representing all existing plant
communities shall be preserved on-site unless preserving more of one (1)
particular community is more ecologically beneficial.



   E.   Seeding and Mulching.  Properties shall be seeded with drought
tolerant grass or other Florida-Friendly landscape material, and mulched
within thirty (30) days after any clearing, grubbing, excavating, or filling
activity, or prior to request for inspection to close out the land
development permit, whichever occurs first, or subsequent to other major
building demolition or site work.  In the case where other site work is to
occur and seeding and mulching will not be performed, the other site
precautions, such as silt or erosion control fencing as deemed appropriate,
protection of storm drains, etc., shall be immediately implemented.  Staff
shall inspect the seeded and mulched areas to ensure that adequate ground
coverage has been obtained.  Repeated seeding and mulching may be required
until the satisfactory coverage is accomplished.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-019, passed 8-2-11; Am. Ord.
12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 5.   Hazardous or Diseased Trees.



   Any dying or dead tree the city determines poses a threat, hazard, or
danger to the public shall be removed without delay by the property owner,
without the need for obtaining a permit, provided the subject tree is removed
under the supervision of a certified arborist in accordance with the
standards of the International Society Arboriculture (ISA).  This provision
shall include diseased trees or those in a condition that could potentially
contaminate other trees, such as the lethal yellowing of coconut palm trees.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 6.   Prohibited Trees, Exotic, and Invasive Species.



   A.   General.  Plants classified as a Category I species on the
current prohibited list published by the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council
(FLEPPC) are not allowed within the city.



   B.   Tree Removal and Mitigation.  Any tree classified as a
prohibited species under this subsection shall be removed at the expense of
the property owner prior to commencement of construction in accordance with
the following:



      1.   Vacant and Undeveloped Property.



         a.   Less than Two (2) Acres.  If the parcel of
property is less than two (2) acres, no permit or review by the city is
required to remove the exotic tree species listed above.  A courtesy
inspection and identification of exotic species may be performed by staff, at
no cost to the property owner, upon request of the property owner.



         b.   Two (2) Acres or Greater.  If the parcel of
property is equal to or greater than two (2) acres, a land development permit
shall be required in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 2,
Article III, Section 3 to remove exotic and invasive species, except where
exempt under the provisions of Section 1.E. above.



      2.   Developed Property.  On properties that have valid site
plan (landscape plan) approval, no land development permit shall be required
to remove exotic or invasive trees unless the subject trees were previously
approved as part of, or contribute to landscape buffering, or to otherwise
comply with the standards of Chapter 2, Article II, Landscape Design and
Buffering Standards.  In these instances, the removal of all such trees
shall be subject to the mitigation requirements of Section 3.C. above at the
expense of the property owner.  For the purpose of this section, the term
"site plan" is construed to include master site plan and technical site plan
applications, and to ultimately mean the process by which a landscape plan is
approved.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-019, passed 8-2-11)



Sec. 7.   Appeals.



   A.   General.  Any aggrieved person may appeal a decision of an
administrative official in accordance with Chapter 1, Article VIII, Section 1.



   B.   Environmentally Sensitive Lands.  When appealing the
provisions of Section 3.B.4. above, the appellant shall address the following:



      1.   Whether the subject property is an environmentally
sensitive land or contains endangered, threatened, and rear species and/or
species of special concern in accordance with the definitions in Chapter 1,
Article II; and



      2.   Whether the conditions placed on the development
application are reasonable and represent sound environmental practices
necessary to mitigate possible harmful impacts upon the subject property and
are necessary in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of the city.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 8.   Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.  In addition,
the removal of each tree shall constitute a separate offense under this
article.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE II.  LANDSCAPE DESIGN AND BUFFERING STANDARDS



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Short Title.  This article shall be known and may be cited as
the "City Landscape Code."



   B.   Purpose and Intent.  It is the purpose of this article to
protect and improve the appearance and character of the community by
increasing the quality of landscaping visible from public or private streets
and adjacent properties; to increase the durability of landscape material in
order to withstand environmental hazards such as hurricanes; to conserve
valuable energy and water; and to ensure the quality installation and
maintenance of landscaping.  The specific objectives of this article are as
follows:



      1.   Appearance.  To improve the aesthetic appearance of
development through creative landscaping that helps to enhance the natural
and built environment;



      2.   Environment.  To improve the environment by maintaining
permeable land area essential to surface water management and aquifer
recharge; reducing and reversing air, noise, heat, and chemical pollution
through the biological filtering capacities of trees and other vegetation;
promoting energy conservation through the creation of shade; and reducing
heat gain in or on buildings or paved surfaces;



      3.   Water Conservation.  To promote water conservation by
requiring the use of native and drought tolerant landscape material;
promoting the use of water conserving irrigation practices; and requiring
adherence to landscape installation standards and maintenance procedures that
promote water conservation;



      4.   Preservation.  To encourage the preservation and
planting of native trees and vegetation as part of landscape design;



      5.   Compatibility.  To improve compatibility of land uses
through the strategic placement and quantity of landscape material;



      6.   Land Value.  To maintain and increase the value of land
by requiring landscaping that where installed and maintained properly,
becomes a capital asset.



      7.   Human Value.  To provide physical and psychological
benefits to persons and to reduce noise and glare by softening the harsher
visual aspect of development.



   C.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee shall have the authority to interpret and administer this article.



   D.   Applicability.  The provisions of this article shall be
considered the minimum standards and shall apply to new construction, major
modifications to existing sites, and newly created landscaped areas where
compliance with regulations does not decrease conformance with off-street
parking regulations.



   E.   Exemptions.  The following are exempt from the permitting
processes and standards of this article:



      1.   Single-Family and Duplex Dwelling Units.  Single-family
and duplex dwelling units located on individually platted lots within
single-family or two-family residential zoning districts, notwithstanding the
cross-visibility and safe-sight regulations of Chapter 3, Article II, Section
6.  For clarification, if a property was rezoned to a planned residential
zoning district and developed with platted lots for single-family or duplex
homes, all plant material installed or relocated within each lot shall be
exempt from the standards and permitting processes of this article, unless
such plant material was installed or relocated in connection with an approved
landscape plan;



      2.   Off-Street Parking in Garages.  Off-street parking and
circulation areas located within enclosed parking structures; and



      3.   Miscellaneous.  Public improvements, such as schools,
parks, streets, and medians, having separate design requirements regulated by
other agencies.  The improvements should be designed to meet the intent of
these standards without strict adherence thereto.



   F.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the regulations and
standards contained herein, including Florida-friendly landscaping principles.



   G.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of this
Code conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply, unless otherwise
stated herein.



   H.   Relief from Standards.  Unless described otherwise, any
deviation from the standards contained herein shall require approval of a
variance application, which is subject to review and approval by the City
Commission.  A request for a variance shall be reviewed in accordance with
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.D.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-019, passed 8-2-11)



Sec. 2.   City Approval Required.



   No landscape material or vegetation shall be installed, relocated, or
removed without first securing the necessary city approvals and permits as
provided hereunder, except in instances when exempt from these Regulations in
accordance with Section 1.E. above.  The following processes and permits are
intended to ensure compliance with the standards of this article:



   A.   Private Property and Public Lands.  The property owner or
agent shall file the following applications prior to commencement of any of
the aforementioned installation and relocation activities:



      1.   Site Plan Review.  The site plan review process shall be
required and reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter
2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to the issuance of any land development
permit.  For the purpose of this subsection, the term "site plan" is
construed to include master site plan and technical site plan applications,
and to ultimately mean the process by which a landscape plan is approved. 
The City Forester may require the submittal of a tree survey, tree management
plan, irrigation plan, Native Florida Ecosystem Survey or Inventory, or
combination thereof, as part of the site plan application, when determined
necessary to identify specimen trees or to ensure compliance with the
preservation efforts of Chapter 4, Article I, Section 4.B.



      2.   Land Development Permit.  The land development permit
process shall be required, and initiated only subsequent to the approval of a
site plan (landscape plan) application, except in those instances when site
plan review is not required.  The land development permit shall be processed
in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 2, Article III,
Section 3.  The City Forester may require the submittal of a tree survey,
tree management plan, irrigation plan, Native Florida Ecosystem Survey or
Inventory, or combination thereof, as part of the land development permit
application when determined necessary to identify specimen trees or to ensure
compliance with the preservation efforts of Chapter 4, Article I, Section
4.B.  The issuance of a land development permit shall not relieve any party
from obtaining the necessary permits which may be required by the various
federal, state, or local government agencies.



   B.   City Rights-of-Way.  A right-of-way permit application shall
be required for any proposal to install or relocate plant material within a
city right-of-way in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 2,
Article III, Section 4.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Landscape Design Principles.



   The following design principles shall be applied in conjunction with
the design and buffering standards of this article:



   A.   Natural Landscapes.  Landscape designs should preserve and
enhance existing natural landscapes, specimen trees, and native vegetation. 
Where previous landscaping has dramatically altered natural landscapes, new
designs should re-establish original landscape patterns and plantings.



   B.   Composition.  The quality of a landscape design is dependent
not only on the quantity and selection of plant materials but also on how
that material is arranged.  Landscape materials should be arranged in a
manner as to provide textured appearance and contrasting color through the
use of a variety of plant materials.  The three-dimensional form of the
landscaping should be considered, so that the final design presents a
coherent whole.



   C.   Buffering and Screening.  The use of natural landscape
materials (trees, shrubs, hedges) is preferred over the sole use of
human-made materials, such as buffer walls and fences, for buffering
differing land uses, for providing a transition between abutting properties,
and for screening the view of any parking, storage, or service areas visible
from a public street or pedestrian area.



   D.   Responsive to Local Character.  Landscape designs should build
on the unique physical characteristics of the site and general area,
conserving and complementing existing natural features.  Naturalistic design
elements such as staggered plant spacing, undulating berm contours, and mixed
proportions of plant species should be used to ensure that new landscaping
blends in and contributes to the quality of the surrounding area.



   E.   Use of Drought Resistant and Native Plants.  Landscape designs
should utilize drought tolerant plant materials to the maximum extent
feasible.  The use of drought-tolerant plants should enrich the existing
landscape character, conserve water and energy, and provide as colorful and
varied a visual appearance as plants that require more water.  Landscape
designs should feature native and/or related plant species, especially in
areas adjacent to existing native vegetation, to take advantage of the unique
natural character and diversity of the region and the adaptability of native
plants to local environmental conditions.  Where feasible, the
re-establishment of native habitats should be incorporated into the landscape
design. Plant selection should be based on the plant's adaptability to site
conditions and existing native plant communities, particularly considering
appropriate hardiness zones, soil type and moisture conditions, light, mature
plant size, desired effect, color, and texture. Plant species that are
drought-tolerant and freeze-tolerant are preferred.



   F.   Continuity and Connection.  Landscaping should be designed
within the context of the surrounding area, provided that the landscaping is
also consistent with these design principles.  Whether the design intent and
surrounding landscape is naturalistic or formal, plant materials and design
should blend well with adjacent properties, particularly where property edges
meet, to create a seamless and natural landscape. 



   G.   Enhancing Architecture.  Landscape designs should be
compatible with and enhance the architectural character, features, and scale
of the buildings on-site, and help relate the building to the surrounding
landscape.  Major landscape elements should be designed to complement
architectural elevations and rooflines, through color, texture, density, and
form on both vertical and horizontal planes. 



   H.   Energy Conservation and Sustainable Design.  Attention should
be given to locating landscape elements in a manner that supports energy
conservation.  Large tree canopies should be utilized to provide daytime
shading for buildings, reducing energy consumed for interior air
conditioning.  Landscape designs should also consider natural drainage
features and the use of pervious surfaces and areas to minimize stormwater
runoff. The use of pervious surfaces is preferred, therefore impervious
surfaces and materials within landscaped areas should be limited to borders,
sidewalks, step stones, and other similar materials. Gravel, river rock,
shell and similar materials should be used minimally because they increase
the need for herbicide use, have no habitat value, reflect rather than absorb
heat, and do no produce oxygen like plants. Finally, the solar orientation of
the project and its relationship to other properties should be considered as
this may produce microclimate exposures (e.g., sun vs. shade, southern
exposure vs. northern exposure, surrounded by heat-reflective surfaces, etc.).



   I.   Quality Pedestrian Environment.  Landscape designs should give
special attention to ensure a safe and attractive pedestrian environment. 
In high activity areas, such as commercial and workplace settings, benches,
kiosks, artwork, and other streetscape elements should be incorporated into
landscape designs.  Pedestrian access to sidewalks or buildings should be
considered in all landscape designs, with special consideration of pedestrian
sightlines, especially at crosswalks.



   J.   Pesticide Management.



      1.   Generally. All applications of pesticides, including weed
and feed products, for hire should be made in accordance with federal and
state law and with the Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for
Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries or latest supplement
thereof.



      2.   Integrated Strategy. Property owners and managers are
encouraged to use an Integrated Pest Management Strategy as currently
recommended by the University of Florida Cooperative Extension Service
Publications.



   K.   Site Preparation, Maintenance, and Cutting.



      1.   Generally. Landscape maintenance for hire should be
performed in accordance with recommendations in the Florida-Friendly Best
Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green
Industries. In no case should grass clippings, vegetative material, and/or
vegetative debris either intentionally or accidently, be washed, swept, or
blown off into stormwater drains, ditches, conveyances, water bodies,
wetlands, or sidewalks or roadways. When mowing near a shoreline, direct the
chute away from the water body. Riparian or littoral zone plants that do not
require mowing or fertilization should be planted in these areas.



      2.   Shoreline Considerations.



         a.   Grading and Design. Grading and design of property
adjacent to bodies of water shall conform to federal, state, and city
regulations, including but not limited to the use of berms and/or swales to
intercept surface runoff of water and debris that may contain fertilizers or
pesticides.



         b.   Low Maintenance Zone. A voluntary six (6) foot low
maintenance zone is recommended from any pond, stream, water course, lake,
wetland, or from the top of a seawall. A swale/berm system is recommended for
installation at the landward edge of this low maintenance zone to capture and
filter runoff. If more stringent city regulations apply, this principle does
not relieve the requirement to adhere to the more stringent regulations. No
mowed or cut vegetative material should be deposited or left remaining in
this zone or water. Care should be taken to prevent the over-spray of aquatic
weed products in this zone.



         c.   Miscellaneous. Also refer to the Florida Department
of Environmental Protection's (FDEP) "Florida Waterfront Property Owners
Guide" or the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission's "Invasive
Plant Management Section." Where water levels vary considerably, care must be
taken in the selection of these plants. Mangrove trimming shall be performed
in accordance with Florida Statutes. The Florida Waterfront Property Owners
Guide should be referred to for additional information about Florida-Friendly
shoreline practices.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-019, passed 8-2-11)



Sec. 4.   Standards.



   It is the objective of this section to provide landscaping standards
tailored to distinct geographic areas of the city to ensure that the type,
quantity, and size of required material is commensurate with the type,
intensity, scale, and location of new development and particularly consistent
with vehicular movement, streetscape design, pedestrian habits and routes,
and design relationship between projects.  The intent of these standards is
to promote a landscape design pattern that is functional, practical,
equitable, and creative.



   A.   City-Wide Standards.  The following standards shall apply to
all properties in the city, except for those exempted in Section 1.E. of this
article:



      1.   Native and Drought Tolerant Species.  Plant materials to
be used are limited to those classified as "low" and "medium" in the
publication "Waterwise South Florida Landscapes," published by the South
Florida Water Management District (SFWMD).  The maximum extent possible,
plant selection should emphasize waterwise or Florida-Friendly plants.



      2.   Prohibited Species.  Plants classified as a Category I
species on the current prohibited list published by the Florida Exotic Pest
Plant Council (FLEPPC) is not allowed within the city.  The initial
eradication and ongoing removal of prohibited plant species that have become
nuisances because of their tendency to disrupt or destroy native ecosystems
is promoted herein.



      3.   Plant Material.  All plant materials used in conformance
with provisions of this article shall conform to the Standards for Florida
No. 1 or better as given in "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants", State
of Florida, Department of Agriculture, Tallahassee, or equal thereto.  Sod
shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases.



         a.   Trees.  The caliper of all trees, except for palms
and those trees classified as a development's "signature tree" (see
subparagraph (1) below) shall be a minimum of four (4) inches at the time of
installation.  The caliper shall be measured no higher than six (6) inches
above the ground.  No minimum caliper size is required for palm trees. 
However, palm trees shall have a minimum of six (6) feet of clear wood at the
time of planting.









 



            (1)   Signature Tree.  A signature tree shall be
installed at both sides of a development's entrance (ingress).  The caliper
of a development's signature tree shall be a minimum of one (1) inch at the
time of installation.  Signature trees, if sized with a caliper of less than
four (4) inches at the time of installation, cannot count toward meeting the
minimum number of trees required on-site.  Signature trees include the
following species:



               (a)   Yellow Elder (Tecoma stans);



               (b)   Bougainvillea (Bougainvillea);



               (c)   Glaucous Cassia; (Cassia surattensis);
and



               (d)   Orange or White Geiger (Cordia
sebestena or boissieri).



         (2)   Species.  The minimum number of different species
of trees provided shall be as follows:



               (a)   Table 4-2 Tree Species;



 

Number of Trees Provided
 
Number of Required Tree Species


1-5
 
1


6-10
 
2


11-30
 
3


31-60
 
4


61-100
 
5


101 and over
 
6



 



               (b)   Signature trees, if sized with a
caliper of four (4) inches or greater at the time of installation, may count
towards meeting the minimum number of required species of trees.  The
caliper shall be measured no higher than six (6) inches above the ground; and



               (c)   Small and medium palm species, in a
cluster of three (3) trees with varying heights, shall represent the
equivalent of one (1) canopy tree or large palm tree.  For the purposes of
this subsection, large palm trees are those species, such as Florida Royal,
Canary Island Date, or any other palm species determined by staff that has
the same visual/shading effect as that of a canopy tree.



               (d)   No more than 50% of required trees on
a lot within commercial or mixed-use zoning districts shall be comprised of
palm species.



         b.   Shrubs and Hedges.  Shrubs and hedges shall be
planted a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in height, twenty-four (24)
inches in spread with tip-to-tip spacing measured immediately after planting
to form a continuous opaque landscape barrier within one (1) year.  The
minimum hedge height may be reduced to eighteen (18) inches if planted in
conjunction with a berm where the minimum combined height is thirty-six (36)
inches.



         c.   Vines.  Vines shall be a minimum of two (2) feet
in height, spaced five (5) feet apart immediately after planting.  Vines may
be used in conjunction with fences, screens and/or walls to contribute
towards meeting physical screening requirements as specified.



         d.   Lawn.  While sod/turf areas have practical
benefits in a landscape, the magnitude and location of the sod in a project
represents the majority of a site's irrigation needs. Irrigated sod/turf
areas, as opposed to non-irrigated sod/turf areas are considered to be a high
water use (hydrozone). Therefore, in all developments, including public and
private parks, the use of sod/turf shall be restricted to park and open space
areas intended for passive or active recreation purposes or when required for
drainage and stormwater management (e.g., swales, retention, detention areas)
when the use of other drought tolerant surface materials is not feasible.
Sod/turf shall be installed such that it can be irrigated using separate
zones. The intent is to promote sustainable landscaping design by reducing
water consumption and unnecessary irrigation of small, strip, or remnant
surfaces on a site. The use of drought tolerant plant material is preferred
over the use of sod for those areas of a site.



      4.   Existing Plant Material.  Existing healthy plant
material, in part or in whole, may count toward required plant material if
such use furthers the objectives of this article regarding preservation,
water conservation, and beautification.



      5.   Water Source.  To conserve water, potable water is not
to be used for irrigation purposes.  Instead, alternative sources of water
shall be used for irrigating landscaping materials such as well water, lakes,
and/or reclaimed water where available and to be used in compliance with city
and county regulations.  Where ground water is not available of the quality
necessary for irrigation purposes, and other preferable sources are not
available, potable may be used in accordance with the following requirements:



         a.   Approval is obtained from the Department of
Utilities;



         b.   The site irrigation system must be designed to only
use a restricted number of gallons per month (water bill);



         c.   The site irrigation system must be designed to
automatically remove all established trees off watering at the end of year
one (1);



         d.   The site irrigation system must be designed for
simple removal of all established trees on separate zones from watering at
the end of the first year;



         e.   All trees, shrubs, and plants (no sod) used in the
site landscape design must be identified as having low watering needs in the
South Florida Water Management District's "Waterwise" publication; and



         f.   Landscape and irrigation improvements must be
inspected annually for compliance with these requirements.



      6.   Irrigation.  All landscaped areas shall be provided with
an automatic water supply system as approved through a land development
permit (see Chapter 2, Article III, Section 3).  Irrigation systems shall be
designed as follows:



         a.   To provide the minimal water volume based on the
particular watering needs of individual plant species;



         b.   To consider soil, slope, and other site
characteristics in order to minimize water waste, including overspray, the
watering of impervious surfaces and other non-vegetative areas, and off-site
runoff;



         c.   To minimize free flow conditions in case of damage
or other mechanical failure;



         d.   To use the lowest quality water feasible. Reused
water may be required in accordance with Chapter 26, Article VIII of Part II
City Code of Ordinances if a main supply is within five hundred (500) feet of
the site and permitted by the Palm Beach County Health Department;



         e.   To include rain switches and other approved
devices, such as soil moisture sensor controllers to prevent unnecessary
irrigation;



         f.   A recommended season operating schedule and average
precipitation rates for each irrigation zone for both establishment and
maintenance conditions shall be provided by the system controller;



         g.   Provide the following minimum capabilities:



            (1)   Programmable in minutes, by day of week,
season, and time of day;



            (2)   Ability to accommodate multiple start times
and programs;



            (3)   Automatic shutoff after adequate rainfall;



            (4)   Ability to maintain time during power
outages for a minimum of three (3) days; and



            (5)   Operational flexibility to meet applicable
year-round water conservation requirements and temporary water shortage
restrictions.



         h.   Precipitation rates for sprinklers and all other
emitters in the same zone shall be matched, except that micoirrigation
emitters may be specified to meet the requirements of the individual plants;



         i.   To consider factors that maximizes uniformity such
as;



            (1)   Emitter types;



            (2)   Head spacing;



            (3)   Sprinkler pattern; and



            (4)   Water pressure at the emitter.



         j.   To correlate to the organization of each hydrozone.
All plants requiring watering during establishment. Temporary facilities may
be installed to facilitate establishment. Irrigation must be conducted in
accordance with restrictions imposed by the South Florida Water Management
District (SFWMD):



         k.   To avoid irrigation during periods of sufficient
soil moisture, automatic shut-off equipment with sensing devices shall be
required and used:



         l.   If the water supply for the irrigation system is
from a well, a constant pressure flow control device or pressure tank with
adequate capacity shall be required to minimize pump "cycling," if there is a
pressure switch in the design;



         m.   Check valves must be installed at irrigation heads
as needed to prevent low head drainage and puddling:



         n.   Nozzle precipitation rates for all heads within
each valve circuit must be matched to within twenty percent (20%) of one (1)
another;



         o.   No water spray from irrigation systems shall be
applied under roof overhangs; and



         p.   Irrigated areas shall not be less than four (4)
feet wide, except when next to contiguous property or using micro, drip, or
spray irrigation.



         q.   A regular irrigation maintenance schedule shall
include but not be limited to checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation
equipment; and resetting the automatic controller according to the season and
inspected by the city.



         r.   To maintain the original performance and design
integrity of the irrigation system, repair of the equipment shall be done
with the originally specified materials or their equivalents.



      7.   Installation.  All landscaping shall be installed in
accordance with a land development permit and in a competent manner according
to certified planting procedures with the quality of plant materials as
hereinafter described.  (All elements of landscaping shall be installed so
as to meet all other applicable ordinances and code requirements).



         a.   Vehicular Encroachment.  Landscaped areas shall
require protection from vehicular encroachment by wheel stops, curbs, and/or
decorative bollards.  All landscaped areas with trees adjacent to sidewalks
or vehicular use areas may require the use of root deflector products to
prevent damage from root growth.  All landscape areas containing trees and
vegetation shall be first filled with city inspected clean fill (soil). 



         b.   Clean Fill.  All planted areas on the site shall
first be filled with clean fill to a depth of one (1) foot from the surface
along the entire length of the green space, island, or landscape buffer.



         c.   Inspection.  The city shall inspect all clean
fill, irrigation systems, and landscape improvements prior to installation. 
No temporary certificate of occupancy will be issued until the clean fill,
irrigation, and landscaping improvements meet the requirements provided
herein or the applicant submits surety for one hundred ten percent (110%) of
the value of the incomplete clean fill/landscape/irrigation improvements. 
Surety will be released upon completion and inspection of incomplete
improvements.



      8.   Mulch (Non-living Plantings). Mulch applied and
maintained at appropriate depths promotes moisture retention, reduces weed
growth, and prevents erosion. Mulch can be used in places where conditions
are inadequate for or not conducive to growing quality ground covers. Mulches
are typically wood bark chips, wood grindings. pine straws, nut shells, small
gravel, and shredded landscape clippings. Planting areas, including those
around individual trees shall be mulched to a minimum depth of three (3)
inches at the time of inspection and maintained at this depth thereafter. Use
of byproduct or recycled mulch is recommended; however, in no instance is
cypress mulch allowed. All mulch material shall be free of seeds and weeds to
prevent tree sprouting and regrowth. Plastic sheeting and other impervious
materials shall not be used under mulched areas. Mulches should be kept at
least six (6) inches away from any portion of a building or structure, or the
trunks of trees.



      9.   Upland Buffer/Littoral Plantings.  Lake and retention
areas in excess of one-half (½) acre shall be  planted to create a habitat
that provides the optimal environment for upland and/or aquatic species. 
Lakes, ponds, and retention areas provided for new construction or major
modifications of existing projects shall be planted as follows:



         a.   To occupy a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of lake
perimeter with littoral plantings;



         b.   To occupy a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of lake
perimeter with upland plantings contiguous with the littoral plantings;



         c.   To consist of a minimum of ten (10) square feet of
littoral shelf per one (1) linear foot of shoreline, using five (5) different
native plant species (littoral plantings);



         d.   To consist of a minimum of one (1) native tree,
twenty-five (25) native shrubs using two (2) species, and ten (10) native
ferns and groundcover plant species (upland plantings); and



         e.   All vegetation installed contiguous, at a minimum
of three to one (3:1) slope, one hundred percent (100%) appropriate native
vegetation, installed with proper spacing for full coverage of littoral shelf
areas within one (1) year.  All littoral and upland plantings established
consistent with these standards shall be installed, maintained, and reported
quarterly to the Director of Planning and Zoning or designee for a period of
two (2) years by a natural areas certified contractor in accordance with a
management plan approved by the city at the time of site plan approval or
permitting.



      10.   Landscaping within Easements.  All easement locations
and specific types of easement shall be identified on the landscape plan. 
Easements may overlap a required landscape strip or perimeter buffer by a
maximum of five (5) feet.  However, detention/retention areas, drainage
easements, and sloped directional swales greater than one (1) foot below
finished grade, shall not be located in or overlap required landscaped areas,
unless otherwise approved in writing by the City Engineer and the Director of
Development, or their designee.  Where the conflict between easements and
landscape strips or perimeter buffers is unavoidable, the strips and buffers
may be separated from the property boundary by the easement, if all
requirements and objectives for screening/buffering are met. Shrub and tree
selections shall be based on root characteristics and size restrictions as
described in "Waterwise", a publication of the South Florida Water Management
District, and in "Plant the Right Tree in the Right Place," as published by
the Florida Power & Light Company.



         a.   All trees planted in or in close proximity to an
easement shall be installed consistent with the Engineering Design Handbook
and Construction Standards for Landscaping, Irrigation, and Lighting.



         b.   Landscape strips and buffers shall be required to
extend a minimum of five (5) feet beyond the easement for planting the
largest canopy tree possible as allowed by FPL and city standards.  If a
buffer wall with a continuous footer is used, a minimum of ten (10) feet
outside of the easement for planting is required.



         c.   The abutting easement shall be entirely planted
with shrubs and trees according to a design similar to the adjoining or
overlapping landscape strip or buffer.



         d.   Roots and branches of trees shall not impact
existing underground or overhead utilities and infrastructure.  Trees
planted in close proximity to easements shall be the largest possible and
selected to avoid aggressive root systems.  Root barriers shall be required
to protect nearby underground infrastructure and parking lots and curbing.



         e.   Trees shall be maintained so that the mature tree
canopy is a minimum of ten (10) feet from overhead lines.



      11.   Landscaping within Rights-of-Way.



         a.   General.  Landscaping may be planted within public
rights-of-way, subject to review and approval of the Forestry and Grounds
Manager.  No person may plant, remove, destroy, prune, set out, break, cut,
deface or in any way injure or interfere with any tree, shrub, or similar
plant on any street or alley, or upon property owned or maintained by the
city, without first obtaining a public right-of-way permit pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article III, Section 4. 



         b.   Relief from Standards.  Any deviation from the
standards of this subparagraph would require a waiver, which is subject to
review and approval of the City Engineer.  A request for a waiver shall be
reviewed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article III, Section 5.



         c.   Standards.  Limited non-invasive planting may be
allowed in swales and/or rights-of-way subject to the following conditions:



            (1)   Sod may be placed in public swale areas
provided that such sod or grass is not permitted to grow to a height in
excess of six (6) inches;



            (2)   Trees may be permitted within swale areas
and medians but must be high enough so as to provide an eight (8)-foot
clearance between the lowest hanging branch or leaf and the existing grade;



            (3)   All landscape work within the public
right-of-way shall be consistent with Florida Department of Transportation
and Palm Beach County regulations, where applicable, and must conform to the
latest edition of the Public Works Department Forestry and Grounds Manual and
the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards for Landscaping,
Irrigation & Lighting (Volume II) or latest supplement thereof;



            (4)   Planting cannot significantly interfere with
maintenance of existing utilities;



            (5)   If planting is allowed and installed within
swales and/or rights-of-way, the adjacent property owner assumes total
responsibility for repairing/ restoring the swale/right-of-way to its
original condition if the swale/right-of-way is disturbed for installation
and/or repair of utilities either already in place or constructed in the
future.  The property owner also assumes the maintenance responsibility for
the swale/right-of-way.



            (6)   Also see Section 4.B.5. below for additional
"streetscape design" requirements.



      12.   Landscaping within Off-Street Parking Lots.  The intent
of this subsection is to encourage landscape design that will facilitate the
optimal growth of hardy trees, prevent future damage to off-street parking
areas from tree root systems, and to enhance and screen off-street parking
areas.  Off-street parking and vehicular use areas shall include landscape
islands designed as follows:



         a.   Required Landscaping.  Off-street parking areas,
excluding those spaces located within parking garages, shall have at least
twenty-five (25) square feet of parking lot landscape islands (e.g., green
space) per parking space, including those on-street parking spaces allowed in
accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Section 4.C.;



         b.   Tree Size and Type.  Parking lot landscape islands
shall be designed to correspond with the size and growing characteristics of
the intended tree species.  Types of required trees exclude palm species,
and tree sizes proposed within each island shall directly correspond with the
size descriptions included in the South Florida Water Management District
publication, "Waterwise";



         c.   Large Islands.  Landscape islands sized greater
than two hundred twenty-four (224) square feet in area are defined as "large
islands" and shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in width in any
dimension.  Each large island shall contain a minimum of one (1) tree,
classified as a large tree (see paragraph b. above for description of a large
tree).  A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the landscape islands
shall be large islands within developments that are required to have up to
two hundred forty-nine (249) parking spaces.  A minimum of eighty-five
percent (85%) of the landscape islands shall be large islands within
developments that are required to provide two hundred fifty (250) or more
parking spaces;



         d.   Small Islands.  The remaining required green space
within off-street parking areas shall be allocated to "small islands", which
are defined as landscape islands sized at least one hundred fifty (150)
square feet in area and no less than ten (10) feet in width in any
dimension.  Each small island shall contain one (1) tree classified as a
"small" tree;



         e.   Plantings.  All landscape islands shall be
entirely planted with shrub species;



         f.   Cross Visibility.  All plant material proposed
within each landscape island shall maintain unobstructed cross-visibility at
a level between thirty (30) inches and eight (8) feet above pavement to avoid
traffic hazards.  Canopy or palm trees shall not have limbs and/or foliage
that extend into this cross-visibility area.  Plant selection should be
based on the growing characteristics as described in the publication
"Waterwise" to best conform to the visibility requirements stated above and
to allow for proper maintenance without degrading the quality and appearance
of established plant species; and



         g.   Lighting.  Lighting fixtures within off-street
parking areas shall be strategically located to avoid future conflicts with
mature tree canopies.



         h.   Entrances/Exits.  Design emphasis shall be given
to the entrances and exits to parking areas through the use of landscaping
unless otherwise determined by staff to be contrary to the design objectives
and principles of this article and/or Chapter 4, Article III.



      13.   Maintenance.



         a.   General.  The property owner shall be responsible
for the maintenance of all irrigation and landscaping which shall be
maintained in a certified condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and
orderly appearance free from refuse and debris.  All newly landscaped
properties shall receive an initial clean fill/landscape/irrigation
inspection and thereafter a semi-annual inspection for compliance with these
Regulations.  All conflicts between landscape improvements and site signage,
parking lot light fixtures, or vehicular safety movements will be corrected
as part of the semi-annual inspection process.



         b.   International Arborist Association (IAA)
Standards.  All plantings, including trees, must not be trimmed or sheared
of foliage during the first growing year and must be maintained to continue
the buffering/screening objective of these Regulations.  All existing and
newly installed trees must be trimmed under the supervision of a certified
arborist in accordance with the standards of the International Arborist
Association (IAA).  All existing and newly installed materials not pruned in
accordance with the IAA standards must be removed and replaced on the site. 
The total diameter inches of the new trees must equal the total number of
diameter inches of the improperly pruned tree(s).  Any trees removed in
violation with these Regulations will be replaced in compliance with this
section.  Site maintenance shall not alter screening or barrier below the
intended requirements of these Regulations.



         c.   Appearance and Maintenance.  Also see City Code of
Ordinances Part II, Chapter 15, Article IX, Section 15-120 for minimum
standards regarding general appearance and maintenance of landscaping on
public and private property.



      14.   Cross-Visibility and Safe-Sight.  The purpose of this
subparagraph is to promote the creative and efficient design of landscaped
areas within off-street parking areas and other vehicular use areas, or near
rights-of-way.  The intent is to create functional and quality pervious
surfaces for drainage/storm water management, in conjunction with increasing
the visual enhancement of off-street parking areas.  Landscape design shall
provide safe and unobstructed views for pedestrians and motorists moving
throughout the project:



         a.   Visibility at Corners of Rights-of-Way.  Landscape
material, within a triangular-shaped area of property formed by the
intersection of two (2) rights-of-way, shall maintain unobstructed
cross-visibility at a level between thirty (30) inches and eight (8) feet
above the pavement to avoid traffic hazards pursuant to Chapter 4, Article
VIII, Section 3.C.4.u.  Canopy or palm trees shall not have limbs and/or
foliage that extend into this cross-visibility area.  Landscape material,
except low growing shrubs, shall be located at least three (3) feet from the
edge of a sidewalk.  The size of this triangular-shaped area shall be
designed in accordance with the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction
Standards.



         b.   Driveway Openings along Rights-of-Way. 
Landscaping on both sides of each project entrance along rights-of-way shall
contain a signature tree in accordance with Section 4.A.3.a.(1) above and a
minimum of two (2) colorful and/or flowering shrub species (three (3)
different species if sufficient space is available).  Design emphasis shall
be placed on clear understory and low-growing or dwarf varieties of landscape
material with a maximum height of thirty (30) inches, in order to comply with
visual obstruction regulations (see Engineering Design Handbook and
Construction Standards and Chapter 4, Article VIII, Section 3.C.4.u.).  The
plant material required in this subparagraph may also count towards meeting
the minimum requirements for landscape strips abutting rights-of-way (see
Section 4.B.2. and Section 4.C.2. below).



         c.   Driveway Openings (and Cross-Access) Between
Properties.  Landscaping on each side of a driveway opening that connects
abutting properties shall be designed with an emphasis on clear understory
with low-growing or dwarf varieties of plant material.  All plant material
proposed shall maintain unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between
thirty (30) inches and eight (8) feet above pavement.  Canopy or palm trees
shall be trimmed up eight (8) feet so that limbs and/or foliage does not
create a traffic hazard.



      15.   Raised Planters.  Raised planters shall be allowed,
contingent upon the following:



         a.   A minimum setback of three (3) feet is required
from all property lines;



         b.   No planter shall exceed a maximum height of six (6)
feet;



         c.   All planters shall contain clean fill; and



         d.   Planters shall be located to comply with
cross-visibility and safe sight regulations of Section 3.A.14. above.



      16.   Maximum Height of Hedges.  The maximum height of hedges
shall be eight (8) feet above finished grade, except as described below:



         a.   Multi-Family and Townhouse Developments.  Hedges
shall be a maximum of six (6) feet in height when located within landscape
strips abutting rights-of-way for all developments that have less than four
hundred (400) feet of frontage on typical city streets.  However, the
maximum height of hedges (located within the landscape strip abutting
rights-of-way) may be increased to eight (8) feet when in compliance with the
following:



            (1)   The street frontage of the development is at
least four hundred (400) feet in length;



            (2)   The development has no more than one (1)
parking lot driveway opening or access point along said street frontage; and



            (3)   The placement of the hedge shall not cause
any traffic line-of-sight obstruction and must comply with the visibility
requirements of Chapter 4, Article VIII, Section 3.C.4.u., "Visual
Obstructions of Intersections".



         b.   Miscellaneous.  Where adjacent to golf courses,
golf driving ranges, Interstate 95, railroad rights-of-way, along property
lines where residential abuts commercial or industrial uses, and along
property lines where residential abuts parks (public or private):  ten (10)
feet, other than within the front yard setback.



      17.   Soils. Existing horticulturally suitable topsoil shall
be stockpiled to be equal to two times (2x) the amount of top soil needed for
that particular site, and re-spread during final site grading. Any new soil
required shall be similar to the existing soil in pH, texture, permeability,
and other characteristic, unless convincing evidence is provided that a
different type of soil amendment is justified. The use of solid waste compost
as a soil amendment is encouraged where it is appropriate.



      18.   Pesticides. When using pesticides, all label
instructions of federal and state law must be adhered to.



      19.   Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED).
See Chapter 4, Article III, Section 5.B. for additional regulations regarding
landscaping and CPTED guidelines.



      20.   Non-Conforming Lots.  All developed or redeveloped lots
zoned M-1 or C-4 and determined to be valid nonconforming lots relative to
minimum lot area standards shall provide landscaping on-site that meets the
intent of the urban landscape code of Section 4.B below to the maximum extent
feasible.



   B.   Urban Landscape Code.



      1.   General.



         a.   Applicability.  The "urban landscape code" shall
apply to all properties currently zoned central business district (CBD), any
properties located within the mixed use (urban) districts (see Chapter 3,
Article III, Section 5), the infill planned unit development (IPUD) district
(see Chapter 3, Article III, Section 2.G.), or any commercially-zoned
properties located within the Urban Commercial District Overlay Zone (see
Chapter 3, Article III, Section 8).  All developed or redeveloped lots zoned
M-1 or C-4 and determined to be valid nonconforming lots relative to minimum
lot area standards shall provide landscaping on-site that meets the intent of
the urban landscape code to the maximum extent feasible.



         b.   General Rules.  Properties which are not subject
to the urban landscape code shall be regulated in accordance with the
"suburban landscape code," pursuant to Section 4.C. below.



      2.   Landscape Strip Abutting Rights-of-Way.  A landscape
strip (e.g., planted area) shall be required within the front and side corner
yards of a property where it abuts a road right-of-way.  The strip shall be
removed of all construction debris and backfilled with clean fill to a depth
of one (1) foot.  The requirements for this strip vary, depending upon the
location of buildings, off-street parking, and vehicular use areas.  The
location of off-street parking lots and vehicular use areas are discouraged
within the front and side corner yards.  Their preferred locations are
behind buildings and structures to allow for screening from public and
private streets (see subparagraph c. below).  However, there are certain
instances where this type of design is impractical or unfeasible.  In such
circumstances, it is the intent of these Regulations to require a landscape
strip that is entirely planted and comprised of two (2) layers, namely an
inside and outside portion, designed as follows:



         a.   Off-Street Parking Areas Abutting Roadways.  The
landscape strip, intended to screen off-street parking lots located within
front and side corner yards, shall be at least seven (7) feet in width and
comply with the following:



            (1)   The inside portion of the landscape strip
shall consist of a continuous hedge, installed at a minimum of twenty-four
(24) inches in height above finished grade and one (1) tree spaced a maximum
of twenty-five (25) feet apart.  A berm is optional.  Tree spacing may be
modified by factors such as the location of utility poles, driveway openings,
cross-visibility, and safe-sight requirements.  However, tree spacing may be
reduced for vehicle-intensive or other unsightly areas;



            (2)   The remaining outside portion of a landscape
strip shall consist of a minimum of three (3) shrub species, two (2) of which
shall be flowering species, planted in continuous rows or clusters.  Plant
selection and planting patterns that optimize the display of plant texture
and color are encouraged;



            (3)   In no case shall vehicles be allowed to
protrude into the strip (see Chapter 4, Article VI, Section 3.B.7.); and



            (4)   Vehicular access points along the abutting
right-of-way shall comply with Section 4.A.14.b. above.



            (5)   See Section 6.J. for additional regulations
regarding the required width of the landscape strip abutting the right-of-way
for large non-residential (big box) developments.



         b.   Vehicular Use Areas (Other than Off-Street Parking)
Abutting Roadways.  The landscape strip intended to screen other vehicular
use areas, located within front and side corner yards shall be designed as
follows:



            (1)   Each landscape strip shall be a minimum of
five (5) feet in width;



            (2)   Each landscape strip shall consist of a
continuous hedge, installed at a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in height
above finished grade and one (1) tree spaced a maximum of twenty-five (25)
feet apart.  Tree spacing may be modified by factors such as the location of
utility poles, driveway openings, cross-visibility, and safe-sight
requirements.  However, tree spacing may be reduced for vehicle-intensive or
other unsightly areas;



            (3)   In no case shall vehicles be allowed to
encroach or protrude into or over the strip (see Chapter 4, Article VI,
Section 3.B.7.); and



            (4)   Vehicular access points along the abutting
rights-of-way shall comply with Section 4.A.14.b. above.



         c.   Buildings or Structures Abutting Roadways.  This
subparagraph represents the preferred site design in urban areas where
building setbacks are reduced along front and side corner property lines and
off-street parking and vehicular use areas are not visible from abutting
rights-of-way.  In such circumstances, a landscape strip is required but
only in the absence of buildings, structures, pedestrian areas, and
sidewalks.  When a landscape strip is provided, it shall be of varying width
and designed as follows:



            (1)   Foundation landscaping and trees shall be
installed within the reduced building setback areas, between the building(s)
and property line(s).  Tree spacing may be modified by factors such as the
location of utility poles, driveway openings, cross-visibility, and
safe-sight requirements.  However, tree spacing may be reduced for
vehicle-intensive or other unsightly areas;



      Where practical, areas in front of buildings shall be enhanced
with colorful plants or flower containers containing blooming annuals or
perennials;



            (2)   Trees are not required in areas where
awnings or canopies encroach or protrude into the landscape strip.  However,
an alternative means of providing landscaping, such as foundation plantings
and/or potted plants shall be required;



            (3)   Tree species within the landscape strip
shall be consistent with the established theme of the street where
appropriate.  The Planning and Zoning Division shall coordinate with the
Engineering Division of Public Works regarding the species, caliper size, and
quantity of trees; 



            (4)   Trees and plant material within the
landscape strip shall not impede pedestrian movement on nearby sidewalks;



            (5)   Tree guards, fabricated to city
specifications, shall be placed adjacent to the curb, where feasible.  Tree
guards are to protect street trees (those located within the right-of-way)
and trees planted within the landscape strip abutting the right-of-way;



            (6)   The City Engineer shall review and approve
all street trees and plant material proposed within the sidewalk areas of
abutting rights-of-way.  All plant material shall be installed in accordance
with the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards for
Landscaping, Irrigation, and Lighting.  Trees normally required within the
landscape strip may not be necessary if street trees located within the
abutting sidewalk meet the intent of this section; and



            (7)   See "Streetscape Design" in Section 4.B.5.
below for additional regulations.



         d.   Certificate of Conformity.  All lots subject to
eminent domain proceedings must provide landscape material within landscape
strips abutting rights-of-way in conformance with Chapter 3, Article V,
Section 11.G.4.



      3.   Perimeter Landscape Buffers.



         a.   General.  Perimeter landscape buffers, where
required, shall be provided along side interior and rear property lines. 
The type of landscape buffer required may vary upon the zoning districts,
uses, densities, intensities, and building height(s) of the subject property
and abutting and/or adjacent property.  The requirement for perimeter
landscape buffers along front and side corner property lines shall be met
through the provision of a "landscape strip" along street rights-of-way
pursuant to Section 4.B.2. above. 



         b.   Performance Standards.  Required landscape buffers
shall meet the following performance standards:



            (1)   Appropriate screening and buffering will be
required.



            (2)   Such screening must shield neighboring
properties from any adverse effects of the proposed development.



            (3)   Screening and buffering is intended to
shield the proposed development from the negative impacts of adjacent uses.



            (4)   Special emphasis should be placed on
screening the intrusion of automobile headlights on neighboring properties
from parking areas and driveways.



         c.   Design Standards.  Perimeter landscape buffers
shall be applied and designed as follows:



            (1)   Table 4-3.  Urban Landscape Buffer (Type 1).



 

Urban Landscape Buffer (Type 1)*


Description:
 
Required along the perimeter of off-street parking lots where parking areas
are not separated from side interior or rear property lines by an intervening
building or structure, in order to provide a visual screen of at least three
(3) feet in height, comprised of trees, and shrubs.


Requirements:
 
1.   Minimum buffer width of five (5) feet;


2.   One (1) tree spaced every thirty (30) linear feet on center;


3.   Shrubs planted tip-to-tip to provide a continuous hedge three (3)
feet in height; and


4.   * See (4) Notes below for additional regulations.



 









 



            (2)   Table 4-4.  Urban Landscape Buffer (Type 2).



 

Urban Landscape Buffer (Type 2)*


Description:
 
Required between residential projects with contrasting densities or between
incompatible zoning districts, to provide a continuous solid, opaque, visual
screen of at least six (6) feet in height comprised of trees, hedges, and
shrubs, in combination with a buffer wall.


Requirements:
 
1.   Minimum buffer width of twelve (12) to fifteen (15) feet, depending
on degree of incompatibility, mulched (no sod);


2.   One (1) tree spaced every twenty (20) to thirty (30) linear feet on
center, depending on degree of incompatibility;


3.   A continuous hedge of three (3) feet in height located on the outside
of buffer wall;


4.   A six (6)-foot tall masonry buffer wall; and


5.   * See (4) Notes below for additional regulations.



 









 



            (3)   Table 4-5.  Urban Landscape Barrier.



 

Urban Landscape Barrier*


Description:
 
Required between incompatible uses and zoning districts; or where there are
differences in density, intensity, or building heights; or for those certain
uses requiring additional screening in order to provide a continuous solid,
opaque, visual screen of at least six (6) feet in height comprised of a
variety of densely planted trees, hedges and shrubs, in combination with an
optional buffer wall and/or berm.


Requirements:
 
1.   Minimum buffer width variable, depending on degree of incompatibility
and necessary planting area, mulched (no sod);


2.   One (1) tree spaced every twenty (20) linear feet or less, with
staggered understory trees between, as needed to provide opaque screening;


3.   Two (2) staggered rows of shrubs as needed to provide opaque
screening;


4.   An optional six (6)-foot tall masonry (concrete block) buffer wall
and/or a berm (earthen embankment) with a minimum 3:1 slope may be used with
plantings to achieve the necessary screening height; and


5.   * See (4) Notes below for additional regulations.



 









 



   (4)   Notes.  * Minimum buffer and barrier requirements, including
caliper of trees, may be increased as warranted by development
characteristics such as use, density, intensity, or building height; to
mitigate impacts upon abutting or adjacent properties; or to further the
beautification objectives of this article.  Also, buffer requirements may be
decreased due to existing buffers and screening on abutting or adjacent
properties, or when projects are designed for interconnectivity, unified
control, or master planned.  Refer to the use matrix, notes, and
restrictions (Chapter 3, Article IV, Section. 3.E.) for additional landscape
requirements that may apply to certain specific uses.



         d.   Exceptions (Cross Access).  The landscape buffer
requirements may be fully or partially waived where accommodating existing or
future shared vehicular use areas, driveways (access), and/or parking stalls
between properties.  Vehicular access points between properties shall comply
with the cross-visibility and safe sight requirements of Section 4.A.14.
above where shared parking and vehicular use areas are utilized.



         e.   Along Florida East Coast Railroad.  Properties
adjacent to the F.E.C. Railroad right-of-way are required to have a landscape
buffer along the right-of-way.  The landscape buffer shall meet the
following minimum requirements:



            (1)   Landscaped buffer shall be at least five (5)
feet wide.



            (2)   Living plant materials shall cover at least
seventy percent (70%) of the required landscaped area, and shall include
trees, shrubs and ground cover, but not sod.



            (3)   Small trees shall be planted no greater than
fifteen (15) feet on center along the landscape buffer.



            (4)   Shrubs shall be planted to form a continuous
dense screen hedge.  The shrubs shall be maintained to grow to their full
natural height.



            (5)   Shade trees shall be planted no closer than
twenty (20) feet to the railroad right-of-way or as otherwise required by the
authority having jurisdiction over the railroad right-of-way.



         f.   Miscellaneous.  No vehicles may encroach or
protrude into the required landscape buffer (see Chapter 4, Article VI,
Section 3.B.7.).



      4.   Interior Open Space.  See usable open space requirements
of the infill planned unit development (IPUD) zoning district in Chapter 3,
Article III, Section 2.G.



      5.   Streetscape Design.  The "Urban Landscape Code" contains
special landscape standards related to streetscape design. 



         a.   Applicability.  This subparagraph shall apply to
the following:



            (1)   All properties currently zoned central
business district (CBD);



            (2)   Any property located within the mixed use
(urban) districts (see Chapter 3, Article III, Section 5);



            (3)   Any property located within the Ocean Avenue
Overlay Zone (see Chapter 3, Article III, Section 8.D.);



            (4)   Any commercially-zoned property located
within the Urban Commercial District Overlay Zone (see Chapter 3, Article
III, Section 8);



            (5)   Any property zoned infill planned unit
development (IPUD) with frontage along Federal Highway (US1).



         b.   General Rules.  The "streetscape" is generally
considered to be the area located within the reduced building setback area in
front and side corner yards in conjunction with the sidewalk area within
abutting rights-of-way.  Therefore, streetscape design encompasses both the
private and the public domain. Trees located within sidewalk areas of public
and/or private rights-of-way are considered "street trees." 



         c.   Standards.  The following standards are applicable
to streetscape design and landscape material must comply with the following:



            (1)   Trees.  All new construction shall include
shade trees in the streetscape. The trees selected shall be consistent with
the established theme of the street, where appropriate.  Trunks shall be a
minimum four (4)-inch caliper and provide eight (8) feet of vertical
clearance for cross-visibility and safe sight requirements.  In instances
where canopies or overhangs make it infeasible to plant trees, alternative
means of providing landscaping for the sidewalk shall be utilized.



            (2)   Tree Spacing.  Trees shall be regularly
spaced between twenty (20) - twenty-five (25) feet on center.  Spacing may
be modified by factors such as the placement of utilities, by property access
points, sight lines at corners or by corner conditions. Tree placement shall
match the existing pattern, where appropriate.  Tree guards, fabricated to
city specifications, shall be placed adjacent to the curb, where feasible.



            (3)   Flower Containers.  Where practical, areas
in front of buildings shall be enhanced with colorful plants or flower
containers containing blooming annuals or perennials.  Window boxes and
entry walk plantings shall be incorporated into the overall landscape design
theme. See Section 6.B. for additional regulations regarding foundation
landscaping areas.



            (4)   Any property owner requesting a change of
use would be required to meet the minimum landscape requirements to the
maximum extent feasible.  Where deficiencies occur, other methods of
landscaping (e.g., landscape cut-outs; planter pots; hanging baskets; etc.)
shall be incorporated into the design.









 



         d.   Miscellaneous.  The landscape material proposed
within the right-of-way must comply with Section 4.A.11. above (within
rights-of-way) and with cross visibility and safe sight requirements of
Section 4.A.14. above and Chapter 3, Article II, Section 6.



   C.   Suburban Landscape Code.



      1.   General.



         a.   Applicability.  The "suburban landscape code"
shall apply to all properties that have a conventional or planned
residential, commercial, industrial, or miscellaneous zoning district, and
including the suburban mixed-use (SMU) district, all of which are identified
in Chapter 3, Article III of these Regulations.



         b.   General Rules.  All areas used for the outdoor
display and/or parking of vehicles, boats, construction equipment, or the
like shall conform to the minimum landscaping requirements as provided
herein.  This includes vehicle-intensive uses, such as auto dealers and
automotive repair.



      2.   Landscape Strip Abutting Rights-of-Way.  A landscape
strip (i.e. planted area) shall be required within the front and side corner
yards of a property where it abuts a road right-of-way, in order to beautify
the corridor and screen off-street parking lots and other vehicular use
areas.  The strip shall be removed of all construction debris and backfilled
with clean fill to a depth of one (1) foot.  The requirements for this strip
vary, depending upon the abutting roadway classification and the location of
off-street parking lots or vehicular use areas.  However, in no case shall
vehicles be allowed to protrude into or over the strip (see Chapter 4,
Article VI, Section 3.B.7.).




















 



   It is the intent of these Regulations that this strip of land be
entirely planted and designed with two (2) layers of plant material, namely
an inside and outside portion, and in accordance with one (1) or more of the
following requirements:



         a.   Parking/Vehicular Use Areas Abutting Arterial or
Collector Roadways.  This landscape strip shall be at least ten (10) feet in
width or wider as necessary to provide adequate screening.



            (1)   The inside portion of the landscape strip
shall include a berm, designed at a slope of three to one (3:1), and a
continuous hedge.  The berm and hedge shall total a minimum of thirty-six
(36) inches in height at the time of planting, but in no instance shall the
hedge material be installed at less than eighteen (18) inches in height. 
One (1) tree shall be planted at a maximum spacing of thirty (30) feet
apart.  Tree spacing may be reduced for vehicle-intensive or other unsightly
areas;



            (2)   The remaining outside portion of a landscape
strip shall consist of a minimum of three (3) shrub species, two (2) of which
shall be flowering species, planted in continuous rows or clusters.  Plant
selection and planting patterns that optimize the display of plant texture
and color are encouraged; and



            (3)   Visibility and clear sight at the vehicular
access points along the abutting right-of-way shall comply with Section
4.A.14.b. above.



            (4)   See Section 6.J. for additional regulations
regarding the required width of the landscape strip abutting the right-of-way
for large non-residential (big box) developments.



         b.   Parking/Vehicular Use Areas Abutting Streets other
than Arterial or Collector Roadways.  The landscape strip, intended to
screen off-street parking lots and other vehicular use areas located within
front and side corner yards, shall be at least seven (7) feet in width and
designed as follows:



            (1)   The inside portion shall consist of a
continuous hedge, installed at a minimum of twenty- four (24) inches in
height above finished grade and one (1) tree spaced a maximum of thirty (30)
feet apart.  A berm is optional.  Tree spacing may be reduced for
vehicle-intensive or other unsightly areas;



            (2)   The remaining outside portion shall consist
of a minimum of three (3) shrub species, two (2) of which shall be flowering
species, planted in continuous rows or clusters.  Plant selection and
planting patterns that optimize the display of plant texture and color are
encouraged; and



            (3)   Visibility and clear sight at the access
points along the abutting right-of-way shall comply with Section 4.A.14.b.
above.



            (4)   See Section 6.J. for additional regulations
regarding the required width of the landscape strip abutting the right-of-way
for large non-residential (big box) developments.



         c.   Buildings or Structures Abutting Roadways.  A
landscape strip of varying width shall be required where building(s),
pedestrian areas, and/or sidewalks abut any classification of roadway.  This
necessary planting strip shall consist of trees, spaced a maximum of thirty
(30) feet apart, and shrubs and colorful ground cover installed at the
base.  The "inside" and "outside" portions of the landscape strip as
described in Section 4.C.2.a. or Section 4.C.2.b. are not required under
these circumstances.  However, landscape material and planting patterns
shall be consistent with the landscape strip required as noted in the
sections above and also with foundation planting requirements of Section
4.F.  Landscape material, except low growing shrubs, shall be located at
least three (3) feet from the edge of a sidewalk.



         d.   Certificate of Conformity.  All lots subject to
eminent domain proceedings must provide landscape material within landscape
strips abutting rights-of-way in conformance with Chapter 3, Article V,
Section 11.G.4.



      3.   Perimeter Landscape Buffers.



         a.   General.  Perimeter landscape buffers, where
required, shall be provided along side interior and rear property lines. 
The type of landscape buffer required may vary upon the zoning districts,
uses, densities, intensities, and building height(s) of the subject property
and abutting and/or adjacent property.  The requirement for perimeter
landscape buffers along front and side corner property lines shall be met
through the provision of a "landscape strip" along street rights-of-way
pursuant to Section 4.C.2. above.



         b.   Standards.  Perimeter landscape buffers shall be
applied and designed as follows:



            (1)   Table 4-6.  Suburban Landscape Buffer (Type
1).



 

Suburban Landscape Buffer (Type 1)*


Description:
 
Required between compatible uses and similar zoning districts, such as a
commercial use abutting a commercial zoning district, to provide a visual
screen of at least three (3) feet in height comprised of trees, and shrubs.


Requirements:
 
1.   Minimum buffer width of five (5) feet;


2.   One (1) tree spaced every thirty (30) linear feet on center;


3.   Shrubs planted tip-to-tip to provide a continuous hedge three (3)
feet in height; and


4.   * See (5) Notes below for additional regulations.



 









 



            (2)   Table 4-7.  Suburban Landscape Buffer (Type
2).



 

Suburban Landscape Buffer (Type 2)*


Description:
 
Required between incompatible uses and zoning districts, such as a commercial
or industrial use abutting a residential zoning district, to provide a
continuous solid, opaque, visual screen of at least six (6) feet in height
comprised of trees, hedges, and shrubs, in combination with a buffer wall.


Requirements:
 
1.   Minimum buffer width of twelve (12) to fifteen (15) feet, depending
on degree of incompatibility, mulched (no sod);


2.   One (1) tree spaced every twenty (20) to thirty (30) linear feet on
center, depending on degree of incompatibility;


3.   A continuous hedge of three (3) feet in height located on the outside
of buffer wall;


4.   A six (6)-foot tall masonry buffer wall; and


5.   * See (5) Notes below for additional regulations.



 









 



            (3)   Table 4-8.  Suburban Landscape Buffer (Type
3).



 

Suburban Landscape Buffer (Type 3)*


Description:
 
Required around perimeter property lines of a planned commercial development
(PCD) when abutting a single-family residential zoning district; and required
for suburban mixed use (SMU) and planned industrial development (PID) zoning
districts, to provide a continuous solid, opaque, visual screen of at least
six (6) feet in height comprised of trees, hedges, and shrubs in combination
with a buffer wall.


Requirements:
 
1.   Minimum buffer width of twenty-five (25) to forty (40) feet,
depending on degree of incompatibility, mulched (no sod);


2.   One (1) tree spaced every twenty (20) linear feet on center;


3.   A continuous hedge of three (3) feet in height on outside of buffer
wall;


4.   A six (6)-foot tall masonry buffer wall (optional for PID); and


5.   * See (5) Notes below for additional regulations.



 









 



            (4)   Table 4-9.  Suburban Landscape Barrier.



 

Suburban Landscape Barrier*


Description:
 
Required between incompatible uses and zoning districts; or where there are
differences in density, intensity, or building heights; or for those certain
uses requiring additional screening in order to provide a continuous solid,
opaque, visual screen of at least six (6) feet in height comprised of a
variety of densely planted trees, hedges and shrubs, in combination with an
optional buffer wall and/or berm.


Requirements:
 
1.   Minimum buffer width varies, depending on degree of incompatibility
and necessary planting area, mulched (no sod);


2.   One (1) tree spaced every twenty (20) linear feet or less, with
staggered understory trees between, as needed to provide opaque screening;


3.   Two (2) staggered rows of shrubs as needed to provide opaque
screening;


4.   An optional six (6)-foot tall masonry (concrete block) buffer wall
and/or a berm (earthen embankment) with a minimum three to one (3:1) slope
may be used with plantings to achieve the necessary screening height; and


5.   * See (5) Notes below for additional regulations.



 









 



            (5)   Notes.  *Minimum buffer and barrier
requirements, including caliper of trees, may be increased as warranted by
development characteristics such as use, density, intensity, or building
height; to mitigate impacts upon abutting or adjacent properties; or to
further the beautification objectives of this article.  Also, buffer
requirements may be decreased due to existing buffers and screening on
abutting or adjacent properties, or when projects are designed for
interconnectivity, unified control, or master planned.  Refer to the use
matrix, notes, and restrictions (Chapter 3, Article  IV, Section 3.E.) for
additional landscape requirements that may apply to certain specific uses.



         c.   Exceptions (Cross Access).  The landscape buffer
requirements may be fully or partially waived where accommodating existing or
future shared vehicular use areas, driveways (access), and/or parking stalls
between properties.



         d.   Along Florida East Coast Railroad.  Properties
adjacent to the F.E.C. Railroad right-of-way are required to have a landscape
buffer along the right-of-way.  The landscape buffer shall meet the
following minimum requirements:



            (1)   Landscaped buffer shall be at least five (5)
feet wide.



            (2)   Living plant materials shall cover at least
seventy percent (70%) of the required landscaped area, and shall include
trees, shrubs and ground cover, but not sod.



            (3)   Small trees shall be planted no greater than
fifteen (15) feet on center along the landscape buffer.



            (4)   Shrubs shall be planted to form a continuous
dense screen hedge.  The shrubs shall be maintained to grow to their full
natural height.



            (5)   Shade trees shall be planted no closer than
twenty (20) feet to the railroad right-of-way or as otherwise required by the
authority having jurisdiction over the railroad right-of-way.



         e.   Miscellaneous.  No vehicles may encroach or
protrude into the required landscape buffer (see Chapter 4, Article VI,
Section 3.B.7.).



      4.   Interior Open Space.  Adequate landscaped open space
shall be provided to meet the particular needs and demands of each
development.  The type and distribution of all open space shall be
determined by the character, intensity and anticipated residential or user
composition of the corresponding development.



         a.   Multi-family and Planned Developments.  Landscaped
open space shall be provided to meet the particular needs of the subject
development.  The provision and design of such open space shall be a factor
of project size, density, and anticipated user composition of the
development.  It is the intent of this subparagraph to require pervious
space within common areas that enhances development with a combination of
passive or open play areas, and areas with cooler micro-climates created by
extensive tree canopies, cool ground surfaces, and proper building massing
and orientation for air flow.  In addition to the landscaping required by
other sections of this article, the following requirements specifically apply
to multi-family developments, town homes and planned developments, such as
within a PUD or SMU district:



            (1)   The project shall include one (1) tree for
every one thousand, four hundred (1,400) square feet (or fraction thereof) of
developed areas as represented by principal and accessory buildings.  Trees
required along street frontages shall not count toward this requirement. 
However, credit shall be given toward this requirement for those trees that
are preserved on-site and deemed healthy by staff or a certified arborist. 
The use of canopy trees should be emphasized in order to maximize shading;



            (2)   Except for recreational settings for
open-play and areas used principally for drainage and storm water management
purposes, the use of sod should be replaced with fully planted areas, and
mulch or alternative natural covers such as pine needles from the
concentration of slash pine trees or comparable species.  Hard surfaces used
in these areas should be avoided, except for the minimal use of pavers or
other pervious, or partially-pervious materials; and



            (3)   Larger open areas should be located central
within the project, to minimize distance to all units.  The open areas can
be designed in conjunction with active play areas such as swimming pools and
hard court game areas; however, such impervious areas shall not count towards
this requirement for interior open space.



         b.   SMU  Suburban Mixed Use District.  See usable
open space requirements of the suburban mixed use (SMU) district in Chapter
3, Article III, Section 4.



         c.   PID  Planned Industrial District.  Each
development shall contain a minimum of twenty percent (20%) unobstructed,
non-vehicular open space.  Areas designed to meet this requirement shall
have adequate grading and drainage, and shall be continuously maintained in a
dust-free condition by suitable landscaping with trees and shrubs. 
Preserved or re-established natural landscaped areas or habitats within a PID
may count towards this open space requirement without having to meet the
requirements regarding grading, drainage, and dust-free condition.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-002, passed 3-1-11; Am. Ord.
11-019, passed 8-2-11; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 5.   Alternate Compliance.



   A.   General.  Unique conditions associated with individual sites
may justify the review and approval of alternative landscape designs that do
not specifically comply with the landscaping requirements of this article. 
A different design proposal may offer superior results or maximum achievement
of the city's objectives which can only be accommodated through the
provisions and requirements of this section. This section allows alternate
landscape designs that may deviate from the standards of this article that
regard, but are not limited to, plant species and spacing, and the locations
and widths of landscaping buffers and strips.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  Alternative compliance is intended
to allow for flexibility in landscape design in order to consider unique site
characteristics and adjacent uses; maximize preservation of natural
amenities; and to accommodate current desirable trends in landscape design
and plant selection, and creative design techniques.



      2.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee shall have the authority to coordinate, interpret, and administer
this section.



      3.   Applicability.  Any application for site plan approval
may be eligible for alternate compliance pursuant to the alternative
landscape plan (ALP). 



      4.   Nonconforming Lots.  All developed or redeveloped lots
zoned M-1 or C-4 and determined to be valid nonconforming lots relative to
minimum lot area standards shall provide landscaping on-site that meets the
intent of the urban landscape code of Section 4.B above to the maximum extent
feasible.  An Alternative Landscape Plan (ALP) may be utilized to consider
spatial limitations, limited visibility by the general public, and use
characteristics of the subject and adjacent properties.  Landscape design
should emphasize canopy trees along the perimeter of the site with hedge and
groundcover plantings only required between the building and any street
right-of-way.  However, lots with a side corner yard abutting an improved
right-of-way and those abutting residentially zoned property will be required
to screen off-street parking and storage areas with understory plantings in
addition to the canopy trees (the need for understory plantings may be
eliminated if adequate buffering is achieved with an enhanced buffer wall, or
where a wall would limit access and prevent proper maintenance of landscaping
materials).  On lots abutting the Florida East Coast (FEC) Railroad
right-of-way, landscaping in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4,
Article II, Section 4.B.3.c shall be provided.  Where deficiencies occur due
to site constraints, other methods of landscaping (e.g., landscape cut-outs,
planter pots, hanging baskets, etc.) may also be incorporated into the design
to achieve site buffering as intended by City standards.



   B.   Alternative Landscape Plan (ALP).  An ALP must meet the
following general requirements:



      1.   General Requirements.



         a.   The contents and minimum information required on
the ALP shall be in compliance with a "standard" landscape plan pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F.



         b.   The ALP shall include a narrative and any
supporting documentation that clearly details and demonstrates compliance
with the purpose and intent of Section 1 and the landscape design principles
of Section 2 of this article.



         c.   An ALP may be submitted in order to provide a
variety of plant materials in excess of the minimum requirements with a
greater degree of compatibility with surrounding uses than a standard
landscape plan.



      2.   Review Criteria.



         a.   Unique Characteristics.  An ALP shall only be
accepted for review if in compliance with the purpose and intent of this
section.



         b.   Meets or Exceeds Minimum Standards.  The ALP
exceeds the minimum standards and furthers the design principles of this
article.



         c.   Consistency and Compatibility.  The proposed ALP
is consistent with desirable landscaping materials and designs on adjacent
projects.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 6.   Community Design.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this section is to
provide additional landscaping necessary to further the design objectives and
principles of this article.



      2.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee shall have the authority to coordinate, interpret, and administer
this section.



      3.   Applicability.  The provisions of this section shall
apply to all new construction and major modifications to existing sites,
excluding single-family and duplex dwelling units on individually platted
lots within single-family or two-family residential districts.  This section
shall not apply to newly created landscaped areas where compliance with
regulations does not decrease conformance with parking regulations.



      4.   Relief from Standards.  Any deviation from these
landscape standards shall require a community design appeal (CDPA), which is
subject to review and approval by the City Commission.  A request for a CDPA
shall be reviewed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.B.



   B.   Foundation Landscaping Areas.



      1.   Applicability.  The requirement for foundation
landscaping areas (shrubs and trees) shall apply to all front and side
elevations of multi-family residential and non-residential buildings.  These
provisions are expanded to include rear elevations where buildings are
visible from adjacent rights-of-way, residential zoning districts, or where
otherwise recommended by staff.



      2.   Rules.  Foundation landscaping areas are not required in
those particular locations within a site where vehicular use areas or
pedestrian/covered walkways would conflict (i.e in front of loading docks,
underneath covered walkways, within streetscape design).



      3.   Standards.



         a.   Maximum Distance from Façade.  Foundation
landscaping areas shall be planted abutting the building façade.  It may be
placed within separate planter areas, a maximum of fifteen (15) feet from the
building wall provided that the added distance allows for the accommodation
of enhanced pedestrian features and/or allows greater space for the planting
of trees that will exceed the minimum specifications of the landscape code.



         b.   Minimum Width.  Foundation landscaping areas shall
be installed within a strip of land not less than five (5) feet in width,
unless designed as part of the streetscape design (see Section 4.B.5.
above).  For large non-residential (big box) buildings greater than forty
thousand (40,000) square feet in size, the location and dimensions of the
foundation landscaping area shall be designed as follows:



            (1)   Building façades less than forty-five (45)
feet in height:  The foundation landscaping area along the front and side
façades shall be at least fifteen (15) feet in width or fifty percent (50%)
of the façade height, whichever is greater.



            (2)   Building façades forty-five (45) feet in
height or greater:  The foundation landscaping area along the front and side
façades shall be proportional to the size and growing characteristics of
intended plants and tree species, as promoted by the objectives of this
article.



         c.   Shrubs.  Foundation landscaping shall consist of
shrubs installed in a continuous row or within ten (10)-foot wide clusters
spaced a maximum of fifteen (15) feet apart.  The selection of shrub species
should be compatible with the required plantings of perimeter landscape
buffers and landscape strips along the abutting rights-of-way.



         d.   Trees.  Tree sizes within foundation landscape
strips shall be proportional to building heights and massing; planted no less
than one-half (½) the building height when buildings are forty-five (45)
feet in height or less.  For large non-residential (big box) buildings
greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in size, the following shall
apply:



            (1)   At least fifty percent (50%) of the required
trees within the foundation landscaping area shall be a minimum two-thirds
(2/3) of the height of the building. 



            (2)   One (1) canopy tree or a cluster of three
(3) palm trees shall be installed within the foundation planting area every
twenty (20) feet on center along each façade.  Canopy and palm trees shall
be distributed along the entire façade where foundation landscaping areas
are required.



      4.   Miscellaneous.  Sidewalks may traverse through the
foundation landscaping areas.  However, the width of the sidewalk can be no
wider than fifty percent (50%) of the required foundation landscaping area or
seven and one-half (7-½) feet, whichever is greater.  In addition, the
minimum width of the area to be planted must be maintained in accordance with
the standards of Section 5.B.3. above.



   C.   Plazas.  Plazas shall contain paved, open, and landscaped
areas.  At least one (1) tree shall be planted for each nine hundred (900)
square feet of plaza area.  Shade trees shall be planted within the plaza
area or along the periphery.  See Chapter 4, Article III, Section 7. for
additional regulations regarding plazas and open space.



   D.   Drive-through Facilities.  Pursuant to Chapter 4, Article III,
Section 3.J., drive-through facilities shall not be allowed on any building
façade that directly faces a public or private right-of-way.  Landscape
material may be used to provide additional screening to ensure that said
facilities, located on eligible building façades, are not visible from
abutting properties or rights-of-way (pubic and private).  This landscape
screen shall consist of trees, shrubs, a berm, or a combination thereof,
necessary to achieve the desired buffering effect.



   E.   Service Areas.  Additional screening is required where
off-street unloading and loading areas are visible from abutting/adjacent
rights-of-way or residential properties.  Such screening is comprised of
shrub and tree species possessing dense foliage and planted of a size to form
an opaque screen.



   F.   Mechanical Equipment.  If feasible, all above ground
mechanical equipment such as exterior utility boxes, meters, and transformers
shall be visually screened.  Back-flow preventers shall be painted to match
the principal structure.  See Chapter 4, Article III, Section 3.I. for
additional regulations regarding the screening of mechanical equipment.



   G.   Dumpster Enclosure.  All dumpsters and recycling receptacles
are required to be screened in accordance with Chapter 4, Article VI, Section
4.C.  Landscape material shall be installed along three (3) sides of the
enclosure walls at a minimum of one-half (1/2) the wall height at time of
planting.  However, within industrial developments, the landscape material
may be unnecessary where the dumpster enclosure is located within the
vehicular use/loading areas and not visible from adjacent road
rights-of-way.  Also see enclosure wall requirements Chapter 4, Article VI,
Section 4.C.



   H.   Lift Stations.  The walls of an enclosure containing a lift
station shall have landscape material planted around the perimeter, at a
minimum of one-half (1/2) the wall height at time of planting.



   I.   Base of Signs.  The base of a sign shall be enhanced with a
minimum of two (2) colorful shrub species, selected for entrance
compatibility not less than two (2) feet in width and placed around no fewer
than three (3) sides.  The appropriate selection of species and design shall
ensure visibility to low monument signs at plant maturity.  Landscaping of
signs within plazas and shopping centers shall also include a minimum of one
(1) signature tree.  Annuals and other flower species may supplement but not
substitute the required shrub plantings.



   J.   Landscape Standards for Specific Uses.



      1.   Exterior (Outdoor) Storage.  Outdoor storage areas,
including where boat repair is allowed, shall be entirely screened from
public and private rights-of-way and adjacent properties by a landscape
"barrier".  Landscape barrier requirements include a landscape strip
containing a six (6)-foot tall buffer wall, trees of varying heights, and
shrubs planted tip-to-tip.  The buffer wall is not required where the
subject property abuts the light industrial (M-1) zoning district.  A taller
wall (up to eight (8) feet in height) and a berm may be recommended in order
to achieve the desired screening effect.  Less planting requirements may be
allowed depending on the lack of visibility, or based on the adjacent uses
and/or zoning districts.  See additional regulations regarding the exterior
storage of merchandise in supplemental zoning regulations pursuant to Chapter
3, Article V, Section 8.



      2.   Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF).  At minimum, a
WCF shall require an urban landscape buffer (Type 1) or suburban landscape
buffer (Type 1), whichever is applicable.



      3.   Group B Satellite Dish Antennae.  All Group B satellite
dish antennae shall be screened on three (3) sides with landscape
materials.  If a buffer wall is used for screening purposes, shrubs or other
species shall be planted along the base of the wall for visual enhancement.



      4.   Large Non-Residential (Big Box) Development
Regulations.  If more than fifty percent (50%) of the required off-street
(surface) parking is located between the building and a public street, with
no intervening buildings that screen the view into the parking area, the
landscape strip abutting the right-of-way shall be a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet in width, including a minimum three (3) foot high berm.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 7.   Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE III.  EXTERIOR BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of this article is
to provide important community design standards to ensure that the site
layout, design, building orientation, materials, and appearance of new
development or redevelopment promotes an exterior design pattern that is
functional, practical, equitable, creative, of an aesthetic quality, and
furthers the objectives of this section and design principles of Section 2. 
Through enforcement of this article, the local appointed and elected
officials shall determine the basic aesthetic character to be achieved in the
development of the community.  The specific objectives of this article are
as follows:



      1.   Sense of Place.  Create a sense of permanence and place
by promoting development which respects and contributes to the positive image
of the city as a whole;



      2.   Focal Points.  Establish visual interest through
landmarks or focal points near major intersections, points of interest,
activity nodes, and/or prominent gateways to the city;



      3.   Versatility.  Allow for buildings to be adaptively
reused without the need for extensive remodeling or demolition, by designing
them according to classic architectural styles and principles, as opposed to
unique corporate themes, images, marketing strategies, or "disposable"
prototypes;



      4.   Desirability.  Sustain the comfort, health, tranquility,
and contentment of residents and attract new residents by contributing to a
desirable built environment;



      5.   Property Value.  Minimize incompatible surroundings and
visual blight which prevent orderly community development and reduce
community property values;



      6.   Amenities.  Encourage and promote development with
amenities and various types of structures that provide comfort, recreation,
aesthetics, and protection from the elements;



      7.   Sense of Community.  Foster civic pride and community
spirit by maximizing the positive contribution of development to community
attractions, gathering places, and streetscape; and



      8.   Sustainability.  To promote sustainable or "green"
building practices that conserve energy, water and other natural resources,
preserve local and global environmental quality, strengthen the local
economy, promote human health and safety, create higher quality enduring
structures, and offer cost reductions in maintenance, solid waste disposal,
and energy.



   B.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning shall
have the authority to interpret and administer this article.



   C.   Applicability.  The provisions of this article shall apply to
all new construction, major modifications to existing sites in connection
with site plan review (Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F.), and minor
modifications to building or site elements that are regulated by this
article, excluding those buildings and site improvements exempted in Section
1.D. below.



   D.   Exemptions.  The following building and site improvements
shall be exempt from the standards of this article:



      1.   Interior renovations to existing buildings and structures;



      2.   Construction of a single-family or duplex dwelling unit
on an individually platted lot within single-family or two-family residential
districts; and



      3.   Buildings exempt from local building permits or
government review pursuant to State of Florida or federal statutes.



   E.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the regulations and
standards contained herein.



   F.   Rules.  The regulations and provisions of this article shall
be interpreted to represent the minimum requirements adopted for the
protection and promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience,
order, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare.



   G.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of this
code conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply, unless otherwise
stated herein.



   H.   Relief from Standards.  Any deviation from the exterior
building and site design standards contained herein requires the approval of
a community design appeal application, which is subject to review and
approval by the City Commission.  All applications shall be reviewed in
accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.B.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   Design Principles.



   This article is intended to promote imagination, innovation, and
variety by focusing on design principles and encouraging creative solutions
which serve the following purposes:



   A.   Efficiency and Safety.  The design and layout of the proposed
development, as well as all new and existing buildings should provide an
efficient arrangement of land uses.  Particular attention should be given to
safety, crime prevention, relationship to the surrounding neighborhood,
impact on abutting and adjacent properties, pedestrian sight lines and view
corridors.



   B.   Compatibility.  Buildings, structures and site elements are
not required to match surrounding existing developments, but should be in
visual harmony with surrounding developments.  Likewise, buildings or
structures located on separate parcels or part of a present or future
multi-building complex, should achieve visual unity of character and design
concepts through the relationship of building style, texture, color,
materials, form, scale, proportion, and location.  Additions and expansions
should be designed, sited, and massed in a manner which is sensitive to and
compatible with the existing improvement(s).  When a distinct development or
architectural style exists within a surrounding two (2) block area,
consistency or compatibility with that style should be encouraged.



   The proportions and relationships of the various architectural
components of the buildings should be utilized to ensure compatibility with
the scale of other development in the vicinity.  The buildings should not
detract from or dominate the surrounding area.



   Design of projects should be tailored to the specific site and take
into consideration the protection and enhancement of natural features
adjacent to the site as an element in the overall design.



   C.   Building Location and Appearance.  All buildings and
structures should be located and designed in such a manner as to enhance,
rather than detract from, the overall quality of the site and its immediate
environment.



      1.   Location.



         a.   Buildings should be designed and sited to fully
utilize the site and avoid unusable or inaccessible open space or parking
spaces.



         b.   Siting and orientation of buildings must consider
the pedestrian and/or vehicular nature of the street on which it is located.



      2.   Appearance.



         a.   All façades of a building that face or are visible
from public or private streets should be designed to be as attractive in
appearance as the front of the building.  Likewise, building façades
exposed to internal parking areas or adjacent residential or commercial
properties should be visually attractive through the use of a combination of
roof design, architectural detail, or recessed wall lines, and landscaping.



         b.   Building design of non-residential uses located
within single-family and two-family residential zoning districts should be
consistent with surrounding residential styles.



      3.   Human Scale.  All building designs should achieve a
sense of human scale through use of insets, balconies, window projections and
other building elements in the design of a structure.  All portions of a
project fronting a street or sidewalk should incorporate an architecturally
appropriate amount of transparency at the first level of commercial and
mixed-use developments in order to achieve pedestrian compatibility and
adequate visual interest.








 



   D.   Sustainable Development.  All developers are encouraged to
incorporate the applicable provisions of the United States Green Building
Council (USGBC), Florida Green Building Coalition (FGBC) standards, or
better, for green buildings and developments.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   General Design Standards for Exterior Buildings.



Building design approval shall be based on the use of the structure, its
relationship to the site, and its compatibility with the surrounding natural
and built environment.  All buildings, structures, and site improvements
required under this section shall comply with the following community design
standards:



   A.   Architectural Enhancements. Facade articulation adds
architectural interest and variety to the massing of a building and prevents
a plain, monotonous facades. A variety of features must be incorporated into
the design of the buildings to provide sufficient articulation of the
facades.  This may be achieved by incorporating the use of vertical and/or
horizontal reveals, stepbacks, modulation, projections, roof detailing, and
three dimensional details between surface planes to create shadow lines and
break up flat surface areas.



   A minimum of three (3) of the following architectural enhancements or
other similar treatments shall be integrated into all applicable building
facades to avoid the appearance of a blank wall:



      1.   Columns or pilasters;



      2.   Decorative cornices;



      3.   Horizontal banding;



      4.   Arches;



      5.   Decorative vents or louvers;



      6.   Moldings and trims;



      7.   Decorative shutters;



      8.   Bay windows;



      9.   Faux windows;



      10.   Art elements; and



      11.   Canopies, balconies, overhangs, and other horizontal
projections.  In addition, multi-story buildings shall incorporate these
design features in conjunction with the architectural enhancements listed
above within this subsection.



   B.   Exterior Treatment and Finishes. Exterior building finishes
shall be limited to:



      1.   Brick or brick veneer;



      2.   Stone or stone veneer;



      3.   Stucco; and



      4.   Split face (accent only), pre-formed, or textured masonry
block.



   C.   Symbols. Buildings, which are of symbolic design for reasons of
advertising, unless otherwise consistent with the criteria herein, shall not
be allowed.



   All permanent outdoor identification features which are intended to
call attention to a proposed development and/or structures shall be designed
and located in such a manner as to be an integral part of the development.



   D.   Building Paint Color(s).



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this subparagraph is
to enhance the unique architectural environment of the City by establishing
general standards for the choice of colors for the exterior surfaces of 
buildings and structures, including courtyards accessible to the public.



      2.   Applicability.  The painting of all public and private
development, but not limited to, new buildings, structures, additions,
alterations, roof tiles or roof finishes, and the repainting of existing
buildings and structures.  This subparagraph also includes the reflectance,
tinting, and coloration of glass on the elevations of a building or structure.



      3.   Standards.



         a.   A minimum combination of three (3) complimentary
building colors shall be used for each development.  Painted surfaces
include the wall, trim, and accents.



         b.   Color(s) shall be compatible with the surrounding
area and used to complement the development;



         c.   Paint color should be used to highlight
architectural forms and details but not to create them. Architectural murals
may be appropriate for a particular building and may be considered on a
case-by-case basis;



         d.   When a non-residential building contains more than
one (1) storefront, the building colors shall not be different to distinguish
between each storefront; and



         e.   Stone or tile surfaces shall not be painted unless
complimentary to the development.



   E.   Awnings and Canopies. The following design standards shall be
applied to awning and canopies within all districts:



      1.   Function.  Awnings shall be of adequate height and depth
to provide protection to pedestrian from the elements and used in a manner
that accentuates architectural features and embellishments; and



      2.   Size.  The size of an awning should be proportional to
the scale of the host building and the surrounding streetscape.



      3.   Appearance and Color.



         a.   The appearance and color(s) of awnings shall
enhance the overall design of the building and be compatible with the
selected building material(s) and color(s); and



         b.   All awnings shall incorporate uniformity in their
design (including valances).  Scalloped valances may be permitted provided
that their appearance and color is compatible with the type and shape of
awning being used as well as with the architecture and materials of the
building.



         c.   No awnings, valances, or support structures
(including signage attached thereto) shall be internally-illuminated or
backlit.



      4.   Miscellaneous.



         a.   Within Right-of-Way.  Awnings may extend over a
public sidewalk within a right-of-way.  The applicant shall obtain all
necessary approvals and permits for those canopies or awnings that extend
into the public right-of-way, prior to the issuance of a permit.



         b.   Maintenance.  See Section 11 below for additional
regulations regarding the maintenance of awnings and canopies.



   F.   Monotony Restrictions. In order to enhance a desired character
or appearance and to promote a variety of architectural structures, project
may be required to include a diversity of floor plans and/or elevations, or a
variety of residential housing models and/or architectural styles, including
but not limited to floor plans, elevations, building scale, building massing,
building proportion, architectural trim and architectural details, within a
development.  For example, the City may require any number of different
floor plans of a particular architectural style within a development, and may
require as a condition of approval that a certain number of lots on either
side or on the same side of the street be constructed with any number of
different floor plans or housing model types.  For purposes of this section,
"monotonous" means houses with identical floor plans or elevations.



   See Section 10.A.3 below for additional monotony restrictions for wall
and fences.



   G.   Overhead Doors. Due to the high degree of visibility of
buildings located on Hypoluxo Road, Miner Road, Congress Avenue, Lawrence
Road, Gateway Boulevard, Quantum Lakes Drive, Old Boynton Road, Knuth Road,
Woolbright Road, Boynton Beach Boulevard, Winchester Park Boulevard, High
Ridge Road, Seacrest Boulevard, Golf Road, Ocean Avenue, Federal Highway, Old
Dixie Highway, N.E. 10th Avenue and S.E. 36th Avenue, which include entrances
to the City, the following exterior design requirements apply:



      1.   Overhead doors shall not be located on a building
facade(s) visible from any of the above public or private rights-of-way; and



      2.   Building facades that are visible from any of the
roadways listed above shall be designed in such a manner as to enhance and
disguise the appearance of a warehouse and/or service area.



   H.   Downspouts. External downspouts shall be enclosed within the
building structure on any building elevation visible from areas within the
property accessible by the public, from adjoining properties within the same
master development (including drive aisles and parking facilities), and from
public rights-of-way.  Downspout enclosures shall be incorporated into the
design of the building and be complimentary to architecture.  For example,
downspouts may be enclosed in columns or pilasters if such features are used
elsewhere on the building, or are consistent with the building's
architectural style.



   I.   Mechanical Equipment. Lack of or inadequate screening of
mechanical equipment can have negative visual impacts on the City's
streetscape, ambient landscape, or community image.  Mechanical equipment
can further negatively impact the surrounding properties because of the noise
that may be  produced.  Such impacts shall be minimized through compliance
with the following requirements:



      1.   Rooftop.  Rooftops will be treated as part of the
building elevation. Buildings shall have an appropriate and fully integrated
rooftop architectural treatment which substantially screens all mechanical
equipment, stairs, and elevator towers.  All rooftop equipment must be
completely screened from view at a minimum distance of 600 feet.  Where
feasible, rooftop mechanical equipment shall be located within the area of
the roof surface that is farthest away from adjacent residential uses or
residential zoned property.



      2.   At-Grade.  Exterior utility boxes, meters, transformers,
etc. shall be screened from public view either by a buffer wall in accordance
with Chapter 3, Article V, or by a continuous vegetative buffer as required
by Chapter 4, Article II.  The intent is to create an opaque barrier
constructed of compatible materials matching the building in color, or its
equivalent in the form of landscaping, to a height at least equal to the
highest point of the equipment.  Structural screening shall be
architecturally integrated into the overall project design and shall be
compatible, in terms of style, construction materials, colors, and finish,
with the principal structure(s).  Where feasible, on site mechanical
equipment shall be located as far away from adjacent residential uses or
residential-zoned property as is feasible.



   J.   Drive-Through Facilities and/or Walk-up Windows. Walk-up
windows and drive-through facilities shall not be allowed on any building
facade that directly fronts on a public or private right-of-way.  On
eligible building facades (sides and/or rear) the following design standards
are required where windows for drive-through facilities are proposed:



      1.   The building facade shall have windows that occupy no
less than 25% of the facade and that are located at the pedestrian level.  A
maximum of 10% of this 25% may be non-transparent windows.



      2.   The building facade shall be modulated and divided into
smaller identifiable pieces to articulate the plane of the facade.



      3.   The building facade shall have at least one offset having
a pitched roof.



      4.   Additional landscaping for the screening of drive-through
facilities is required in accordance with Chapter 4, Article II, Section 6.D.



(Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 4.   Design Standards for Multi-family and Non-Residential Uses
Adjacent to Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  These standards are intended to
protect lower intensity land uses from higher intensity land uses by
requiring the higher intensity land uses to be designed and maintained to
reduce impacts upon the lower intensity land uses through appropriate project
orientation, additional setbacks for taller structures and recreational
facilities, compatible architectural treatments, and proper location and
orientation of signs and lights.



      2.   Applicability.  When a new development, other than a
single-family or two-family dwelling unit abuts or is adjacent to a
single-family residential zoning district due to an intervening local
roadway, the following design standards in Section 4.B below shall apply:



   B.   Standards.



      1.   Generally.  All buildings and structures shall be
designed and oriented in a manner ensuring maximum privacy of adjacent
residential uses.



      Compatibility shall be evaluated based upon how well the proposed
development fits within the context of the neighborhood and abutting
properties.



      Single-family homes located within planned districts,
multi-family homes, mixed-use projects, and all non-residential uses, where
abutting or adjacent to single-family residential zoning, shall be designed
to avoid a reduction in privacy of the abutting or adjacent properties. This
requirement may be achieved through measures, such as but not limited to,
additional landscaping, orientation of windows and balconies, and layout of
units of upper floors.



      2.   Standards for Planned Residential Districts (IPUD and
PUD).  Any IPUD or PUD located adjacent to single-family residential zoning
must locate structures of the same unit type or height.  However, if
vegetation, screening or other barriers and/or creative design on the
perimeter of an Infill Planned Unit Development (IPUD) or Planned Unit
Development (PUD) district achieve compatibility with adjacent uses, the city
may grant some relief from the following two requirements:



         a.   Any IPUD or PUD located adjacent to an existing
single-family residential development(s) must locate structures of the same
unit type or height allowed by the adjacent zoning district(s); and



         b.   Additional setbacks are required for structures in
excess of 30 feet in height pursuant to Chapter 3, Article III, Section 2.



(Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 5.   Design Standards for Specific Uses in the Use Matrix (Table
3-28).



The following uses, which correspond with the Notes and Restrictions of
Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 3.D, contain special standards related to
exterior building and site design:



   A.   Group Home Type 1 and Type 2.  For new construction, the
facility shall have building elevations that are residential in character and
similar in appearance to the surrounding neighborhood.  They shall not be
institutional in appearance.



   B.   Auto Dealer, New.  Within the MU-3 and MU-C districts, the
following shall apply: Overhead doors shall not be visible from any major
roadway frontage.



   C.   Auto Dealer, Used.  Within the MU-3 and MU-C districts, the
following shall apply: Overhead doors shall not be visible from any major
roadway frontage.



   D.   Gasoline Stations.  All Gasoline Stations located on
designated out-parcels to shopping centers, business centers, or other
planned commercial developments shall conform in design to the approved
design plan of the principal center.



   E.   Automobile Rental.  Within the MU-3 and MU-C districts, the
following shall apply: Overhead doors shall not be visible from any major
roadway frontage.  See Section 3.G above for additional regulations
regarding overhead doors.



   F.   Marina, Including Yacht Club.



      1.   Architectural integration shall be encouraged through the
choice of building materials, architectural style, extensive use of windows,
and choice of soft, muted colors.



      2.   All buildings shall incorporate 360° architecture, a
variety of massing and building heights, and stepping roof lines.



      3.   The use of standardized "corporate" architectural styles
associated with chain-type businesses is prohibited.



      4.   To contribute to physical compatibility and minimize
impacts on the residential fabric of adjacent neighborhoods, projects
adjacent to residential zoning districts shall be designed with residential
character, unless a superior, non-residential design can be demonstrated. 
Residential designs shall include, but not be limited to, a combination of
actual and faux windows, balconies, porches, awnings and related
architectural details.  The character shall either match or compliment
established architectural themes in the vicinity.



      5.   All building facades shall include a repeating pattern
that shall include no less than three (3) of the following elements: color
change, texture change, material module change, or a change in plane of at
least two (2) feet in depth.  At least one of these elements shall repeat
horizontally.  All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than 30
feet, either horizontally or vertically, unless a superior design can be
demonstrated at greater intervals.  Recesses and projections shall be from
finished grade to roofline, and be a minimum of 10 feet in width.



      6.   As an alternative to the required facade offsets noted
above, decorative and substantive roofline changes, when coupled with
correspondingly aligned facade material changes, may substitute.



      7.   A minimum of two different types of building materials
shall be used, with a 70 percent-30 percent ratio.  A change in stucco or
use of windows will not count toward meeting this requirement.



      8.   Articulation in parapet wall shall be required with a
minimum of five (5) feet for front and side facades, and any facade oriented
towards a street; and, two and one-half (2½) feet for rear facades.



      9.   Parapet walls shall feature three dimensional cornice
treatments, to provide a finished look from any angle.  Additionally, a
parapet return is required with a length equal to or exceeding the required
parapet articulation.



      10.   All customer entrances to the building shall be the
focal point of design.  Architectural elements shall include some
combination of the following improvements: pediments, lintels, columns,
pilasters, porches, balconies, railings, balustrades, and ornate moldings.



      11.   On any retail or office building within a
marine-oriented or water dependent project, or any portion of a building
devoted to such use, windows shall be of pedestrian scale, recessed and
vision glass without obstruction.



      12.   On any retail or office building within a
marine-oriented or water dependent project, on any facade on which a customer
entrance to the building is located, a minimum of 1.6 square foot of vision
glass is required for each one (1) lineal foot of facade.



      13.   On any retail or office building within a
marine-oriented or water dependent project, on any other facade facing a
public street, a minimum of 0.8 square foot of vision glass is required for
each one (1) foot.



   G.   Day Care.  Within all residential districts, the following
shall apply: Building design shall be consistent with surrounding residential
styles.



   H.   Storage, Self-Service.  For all Self-Service Storage
facilities adjacent to or visible from any arterial right-of-way roadway, the
following shall apply:



      1.   The exterior colors, facades, windows, roof, and building
materials shall be compatible with the character of, or vision for the
surrounding.  Self-service Storage facilities shall incorporate design
elements to achieve the effect of office structures.



      2.   All facades visible from arterial roadways shall provide
variety and interest in the facade(s).  These facades shall not exceed 50
feet in length without visual relief by means of a vertical reveal at least
one (1) foot in depth and 10 feet in width, a perceptible change in wall
angle, or a corner. Other design attributes shall include, roof slope and
materials, windows, awnings, fencing and other aesthetic elements.



      3.   Within the SMU, MU-1, MU-2, and MU-3 districts, the
following shall apply: Buildings shall be designed to have the appearance of
a multi-story retail, office, and/or residential structure through the use of
similar windows, shutters, and appropriate building elements on the upper
floors.



(Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord. 17-023, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 6.   Design Standards for Development in Urban Areas.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The location of
buildings/structures and off-street parking areas proposed for a development
can directly impact the aesthetic fabric and quality of life for surrounding
properties and the community as a whole. It is the purpose of this section to
provide design standards that are tailored to distinct geographic areas of
the City to ensure that the location and appearance of buildings/structures
and off-street parking areas are appropriate with the type, intensity, scale,
and location of redevelopment and new development.  The intent of this
section is to promote standards that are functional, practical, equitable,
and creative.



      2.   Applicability.  Unless otherwise specified, these
standards shall apply to new projects and major modifications to existing
developments located in the following:



         a.   All properties currently zoned:



            (1)   Central Business District (CBD); or



            (2)   Any "Mixed-Use (Urban)" district.  For the
purpose of this section, Mixed-Use (Urban) districts shall include the Mixed
Use 1 (MU-1), Mixed Use 2 (MU-2), Mixed Use 3 (MU-3), and Mixed Use Core
(MU-C) district.



         b.   Any commercially zoned property located:



            (1)   Along Boynton Beach Boulevard, east of
Interstate 95 and west of the Florida East Coast (FEC) Railroad right-of-way;



            (2)   Within the Urban Commercial District Overlay
Zone (UCDOZ); and



            (3)   Within the Martin Luther King Junior
Boulevard Overlay Zone (MLKBOZ).



   B.   Building Location. 



      1.   General.  The revitalization of urban places depends on
safety and security, with building/street design having a symbiotic
relationship.  The location of a building and its proximity/interaction with
the public realm is paramount when trying to create urban areas that have a
"sense of place" that is consistent with smart growth principles and
neo-traditional planning efforts.  Development must adequately accommodate
automobiles, but in ways that respect pedestrians and the forms of public
space and gathering areas.



      2.   Standards.



         a.   Each building shall meet the build-to line and
reduced setback areas of the respective zoning district or Overlay Zone,
whichever is applicable.  The location of off-street parking areas is
strongly discouraged between buildings and rights-of-way.  However, in
certain instances, this type of design may be impractical, and strict
adherence may deter incremental improvements or upgrades to individual
properties, which therefore, perpetuates the blighted conditions of the
redevelopment areas.  In these circumstances, deviations from the build-to
line and reduced setback area requirements may be allowed, but only
contingent the submittal of a Community Design Appeal application that
satisfactorily addresses the evaluation criteria and when such application is
approved by the City Commission.



         b.   Within mixed-use and non-residential developments,
structures proposed along arterial roadways shall be required to occupy the
entire length of the street frontage, notwithstanding adjustments for
cross-visibility, and open areas devoted to public gathering or pedestrian
circulation.  This building location requirement along the arterial roadway
only applies to new construction or major site plan modifications to existing
developments.  Also see Chapter 4, Article II, Section 4.B.5. for additional
streetscape design requirements.



         c.   For properties fronting on arterial and collector
roadways within Downtown Transit-Oriented Development District Overlay Zone
(the Station Area), building location and design shall contribute to a
"streetwall" of pedestrian scale, so as to prevent any interruptions to
building massing, except in limited circumstances to promote project
functionality as determined by the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
Interruptions in the streetwall shall be limited to those necessary to
accommodate pedestrian pass-throughs, public plazas, entry forecourts, and
permitted vehicular access driveways when access is not available from a
local street.



   C.   Shade and Shelter Standards. 



      1.   General.  This region's climate requires shade and
shelter amenities in order to accommodate and promote pedestrian activity. 
These amenities will provide greater connectivity between sites and allow for
a more continuous and walkable network of buildings.



      2.   Standards.  A shaded sidewalk shall be provided
alongside at least fifty percent (50%) of all building frontages adjacent to
or facing an arterial or collector roadway or adjacent off-street parking
area.  When abutting off-street parking areas, the shaded sidewalk shall be
raised above the level of the parking by way of a defined edge.  Ramps for
wheelchairs alongside the building must also be shaded.



   Building entrances shall be located under a shade device such as an
awning or portico.



   D.   Standards for Windows.  Windows shall be located at pedestrian
scale.



   E.   Compatibility Standards.  Proposed projects should compliment
existing or approved adjacent mixed use projects in terms of height, color,
style massing, and materials.



   F.   Off-Street Parking Area Standards.



      1.   Types of Off-Street Parking Facilities.  The four (4)
types of off-street parking facilities regulated herein are as follows:
Surface parking, understory parking, freestanding parking garages, and
integrated parking garages.  They are generally described as follows:



         a.   Surface Parking.  A parking area where there is no
gross building area below or above the parking stalls, except for ancillary
structures such as shade canopies or similar structures.



         b.   Understory Parking Garage.  An off-street parking
area located below gross building area.  Parking stalls are typically
located on or below ground level.



         c.   Freestanding Parking Garage.  An off-street
parking area located within a structure with two (2) or more levels, where
the parking structure is the principal use of the building.  Freestanding
parking garages may include accessory habitable or non-habitable building
areas located at ground level.



         d.   Integrated Parking Garage.  An off-street parking
area located within a structure with two (2) or more levels, where the
parking structure is the accessory use of the premises.  Integrated parking
garages are located within mixed-use developments and habitable gross
building area is wrapped around the facility on all levels.



      2.   Standards for Mixed Use (Urban) Districts and Central
Business District (CBD).  This subsection shall be applicable to all new
projects and major modifications to existing developments.  Within "Urban
Mixed-Use" districts, off-street parking areas shall be located to the rear
or side of the structure they are intended to serve and screened from view
from public streets, notwithstanding other provisions of these regulations
that require a specific setback for a garage for a residential dwelling
unit.  The intent of these regulations is to emphasize buildings and
pedestrian features within the streetscape and minimize the visual impacts of
parking facilities.  Where possible, parking areas should be located to the
rear of a project.  Also where possible, access to parking areas shall be
from side streets, in order to minimize driveways and vehicular/pedestrian
conflicts.  The following standards shall apply to all properties located
within Urban Mixed-Use districts as described in Section 6.B.2.a.(2) above:



         a.   Surface Parking.  Within the "Mixed-Use (Urban)"
districts, surface parking should not be visible from an arterial or
collector roadway.  Structured parking is preferred for all mixed-use
development.



         b.   Understory Parking Garage.  Understory parking (on
the first floor of a structure) is allowed throughout all "Mixed-Use (Urban)"
districts.



         c.   Freestanding Parking Garages.  Freestanding
parking garages are allowed within the "Mixed-Use (Urban)" districts provided
that they do not have frontage on any arterial or collector roadway.  The
height of the freestanding parking garage may not exceed 75 feet in the MU-H
district.



         All parking garages that front on arterial or collector
roadways must be integrated into the development and designed as provided for
in subparagraph "d" below.



         d.   Integrated Garages.  Parking garages that are
incorporated into the same structure as a principal building, including
structures providing parking on lower floors and habitable space on upper
floors are permitted within every "Mixed-Use (Urban)" district. Habitable
floor area must wrap all upper-levels of the parking structure where the
structure has frontage along a public right-of-way or is abutting a
single-family residential zoning district.  The intent of the integrated
garage is to border or wrap the parking structure with permitted habitable
floor area, such as storefronts, to a minimum depth of 20 feet, so as to
disguise the garage and create continuity in street-level activity by
maintaining interest for pedestrians and passing automobile traffic.



         The remaining facade(s) of the integrated garage shall be
constructed to appear as habitable floor area and designed compatible with
the architecture of the adjacent structures within the subject development
and abutting properties.  Design elements used to disguise the garage may
include features such as a living trellis (utilizing climbing vines), planter
boxes, tall landscaping, shutters, and/or other architecturally articulated
facade features in order to soften its impact.



      3.   Standards for the "Overlay Zones" and Boynton Beach
Boulevard.  The purpose and intent of this subsection is to prevent the
placement of off-street parking areas between the front of the building and
the rights-of-way, particularly in areas where build-to line and reduced
setback areas are applicable. Within redevelopment areas, the location of
off-street parking areas is strongly discouraged between building and
rights-of-way.  However, when a project is proposed in such a manner that
building location(s) would deviate from respective build-to line and reduced
setback area requirements, resulting in a design that is contrary to the
purpose and intent of Section 6.B. above and this subsection, then that
project shall be required to make upgrades to public realm and streetscape
with simple but innovative urban design enhancements such as additional
landscaping; pergolas/trellis-work/decorative structures;



      4.   Standards for the Suburban Mixed-Use (SMU) District.



         a.   Understory Garages.  Understory parking (on the
first floor of a structure) is allowed throughout the SMU district.



         b.   Freestanding Garages.  Freestanding parking
garages are not allowed within the SMU district.  All parking structures,
excluding understory garages, shall be designed as an integrated garage as
provided for in subparagraph "c" below.



         c.   Integrated Garages.  Parking garages that are
incorporated into the same structure as a principal building, including
structures providing parking on lower floors and habitable space on upper
floors are permitted within the SMU district.  Habitable floor area must
wrap all upper-levels of the parking structure where the structure has
frontage along an arterial roadway or is abutting a single-family residential
zoning district.  The intent of the integrated garage is to border or wrap
the parking structure with permitted habitable floor area, such as
storefronts, to a minimum depth of 20 feet, so as to disguise the garage and
create continuity in street-level activity by maintaining interest for
pedestrians and passing automobile traffic.



         The remaining facade(s) of the integrated garage shall be
constructed to appear as habitable floor area and designed compatible with
the architecture of the adjacent structures within the subject development
and abutting properties.  Design elements used to disguise the garage may
include features such as a living trellis (utilizing climbing vines), planter
boxes, tall landscaping, shutters, and/or other architecturally articulated
facade features in order to soften its impact.



      5.   Miscellaneous Standards.



         a.   Number of Required Parking Spaces.  Required
parking for all uses shall be as set forth by Chapter 4, Article V, Section 2.



         b.   Off-Site Parking.  Off-street parking spaces may
be allowed off-site but with a maximum distance in accordance with Chapter 4,
Article VI, Section 4.D.2.



         c.   Interconnectivity.  Interconnectivity between
off-street parking areas, including drive aisles and pedestrian connections
shall be planned for and designed in accordance with Chapter 4, Article VI,
Section 4.D.3.



         d.   Off-Street Parking for Large Non-Residential
Development (Big Box).  See Section 7.J  below for additional regulations
regarding off-street parking lot locations for large non-residential (big
box) developments.



         e.   Trash Collection Points.



            (1)   Screening.  See Chapter 4, Article VI,
Section 4.C. for additional regulations regarding the appropriate location
and screening of trash collection areas.



            (2)   Landscaping.  See Chapter 4, Article II,
Section 6.G. for additional regulations regarding the landscaping of trash
collection areas.



         f.   Off-Street Parking for Station Area.  See Section
6.H. below for additional standards regarding off-street parking areas
located within the Downtown Transit-Oriented Development District Overlay
Zone (the Station Area).



   G.   Sidewalks.  The following regulations shall apply to sidewalks:



      1.   "Urban Mixed Use" Districts.  The following regulations
shall apply to sidewalks in all Urban Mixed Use zoning districts as described
in Section 6.A.2.a.(2) above:



         a.   Materials.  Sidewalks shall, where practical, be
Holland-Stone pavers, red/charcoal color mix 2 by Paver Systems, Inc., or
equal, laid in a 4 S herringbone pattern to continue the consistent with the
current design elements in place along Federal Highway.



         b.   Design.  Pedestrian circulation should be
carefully planned to prevent pedestrian use of vehicular ways and parking
spaces.



         In all cases, pedestrian access shall be provided to public
walkways.



      2.   Mixed Use-Core (MU-C) District.  Sidewalks constructed
along arterial roadways shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet wide, measured
from the back of the curb.



      3.   Mixed Use Developments.  Sidewalk accents via pavers or
stamped colored concrete shall be utilized in all central pedestrian ways of
mixed-use development areas.



   H.   Design and Architectural Requirements for Mixed Use (Urban) and
Central Business Districts.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this subsection is
to encourage traditional building architecture and urban design through both
standards and guidelines that are based on the principal that a building is
composed of the following three distinct parts: the "base;" the "middle;" and
the "top."  The functional and visual values of a building are measured and
achieved through proper design of each component through human scale and
"friendliness," appropriate traditional materials, architectural rhythm,
classical vertical proportions, appropriate "solid to void" ratio, and
uniqueness.



      2.   Applicability.  The standards of this subsection shall
be applicable to properties located within the mixed use and central business
districts as defined in Chapter 1, Article II, Definitions.



      3.   Generally.



         a.   Project design shall not be an independent
component in the downtown, but instead designed as an integral component
linking seamlessly pedestrian and vehicular circulation with other
developments, adjacent neighborhoods, nearby amenities and infrastructure.



         b.   Appropriate transitions between new and existing
buildings shall be provided.



         c.   Architectural design shall incorporate multiple
architectural rhythms in the building facades, appropriate "traditional,"
"solid-void ratio," classical vertical proportions, and step-backs in tower
components.



         d.   Projects shall contribute to "placemaking" with
enhanced building corners, defining components to building tops, and
diversity in the use of materials, building articulation, and building colors
that contribute and accentuate the building hierarchy and different
components.



      4.   Building Anatomy.  Design buildings/projects based on
traditional architecture, recognizing the "base/middle/top building
hierarchy."



         a.   Base.  The "base" is the most important part of
the building design, which is that component that represents the streetscape
or "streetwall."



            (1)   The base should be characterized by having
all elements enhance the pedestrian environment to which it is exposed, with
high transparency, including windows, entries, canopies, awnings, courtyards,
and elements of pedestrian interest such as retail stores, storefront show
windows and landscape elements.



            (2)   The height of the base is a factor of
overall building height and scale of the streetscape environment.  The base
will vary between approximately thirty (30) feet and forty-five (45) feet
depending on the zoning district, overall project height and scale of the
abutting roadway.



         b.   Middle.  The "middle" of the building should
include the expression of the primary building uses.  The "middle" of the
building shall include multiple architectural rhythms derived through
step-backs, changes in plane, changes in materials or colors, window types,
window sizes, pairing or multiples of windows, oriel windows and by shutters
and other detailing.  Typically there should be more solid wall than window
opening to maintain the traditional character.  Mirrored and/or deeply
colored glass should be avoided, as well as horizontal banding of windows
and/or a regular horizontal expression of floor slabs.



         c.   Top.  The "top" of a building tower terminates the
building at the sky, and defines a skyline.



            (1)   Towers shall be placed to allow views
between towers and allow natural light to penetrate the lower building levels
and the street below.  The building top achieves its character through the
design of cornices, step-backs, and changes in scale, geometric elements and
materials or textures.



            (2)   Projects with tower elements shall be
designed to maximize separation between project towers and between towers on
abutting projects to ensure protection of views and privacy, and minimize the
negative effects of shadowing.



      5.   Public Pedestrian Entrances.  The main public entrance
into a building shall be located on facades that front on arterial and
collector roadways.  Vehicular driveways/openings and curb cuts shall be
relegated to local streets.



      6.   Off-Street Parking.  Except for on-street parking,
off-street parking areas shall not be visible from abutting arterial or
collector roadways.



(Ord. 12-013, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord. 13-013, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord.
15-006, passed 3-2-15; Am. Ord. 17-023, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 7.   Design Standards for Large Non-Residential Development (Big Box)
in Suburban Areas.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  Large commercial buildings have a major
impact on the aesthetic fabric of a community.  The purpose of the following
regulations is to achieve an optimal appearance of those structures typically
called "Big Boxes," which are often large square or rectangular-shaped
buildings with limited architectural enhancements.  These regulations are
intended to set minimum design standards for large buildings to ensure their
positive contribution to the City's character and fabric.



   B.   Applicability.  The following standards are applicable to any
commercial structure in excess of 15,000 square feet, unless stated otherwise
herein, excluding those properties located in urban areas as described in
Section 6 above.  The term "commercial," as used in these regulations, shall
also include structures utilized for office uses and those industrial uses
that front on arterial or collector roadways.



   C.   Facades. All facades visible from abutting properties or public
streets shall be designed and enhanced with architectural features that
provide visual interest at pedestrian levels, reduce the massive appearance
of the building, and reflect the local character of the community.  These
facades shall meet the following objectives:



      1.   Community integration shall be achieved through the
choice of building materials, architectural style, extensive use of windows,
and multiple complimentary paint colors.



      2.   Building design shall include a mix of massing and
building heights, and varying roof lines on all facades.



      3.   Architectural styles shall not be used that are tailored
to further "corporate" identity objectives rather than the existing or
planned identity and character of the surrounding community, and which are
inconsistent with these regulations.



      4.   Architectural elements, excluding complimentary accent
features, shall be integral components of the building fabric and constructed
of durable and substantial quality and not superficially applied trim.



      5.   All building facades shall be designed with "repeating
patterns" that include no less than three (3) of the following elements:
color change, texture change, material module change, or a change in plane
(recess or projection), at maximum intervals of 50 feet.  The recess or
projection of a change in plane shall be at least 10 feet in width, two (2)
feet in depth, and finished from grade to the roofline.  At least one (1) of
the design elements listed above shall repeat horizontally.



      6.   Material changes may substitute as an alternative to the
required offsets as noted above where decorative and substantive roofline
changes are coupled with a correspondingly aligned facade.



      7.   A minimum of two (2) different types of building
materials, allowed under Section 3 above shall be proportionally used on
required facades.  A change in stucco texture or use of windows and/or
awnings will not count toward meeting this requirement.







 







 



   D.    Roofl ine.



      1.    For flat rooflines, vertical articulation in parapet
walls shall be required with a minimum of five (5) feet for front and side
facades, and any facade oriented toward a street; and, two and one-half (2½)
feet for rear facades.



      2.   A Parapet return is required with a length equal to or
exceeding the required parapet articulation.







 



 



      3.    Parapet walls  shall feature three dimensional cornice
treatment, to provide a finished look from any angle.



      4.   Articulation in the parapet wall shall coincide with the
horizontal changes within the building, which are required under Section
7.C.5.



   E.   Windows.



      1.   On any facade on which a customer entrance to the
building is located, a minimum of 1.6 square foot of window is required for
each one (1) lineal foot of facade.



      2.   On any other facade facing a public street, a minimum of
0.8 square foot of window is required for each one (1) foot of facade.



      3.   A minimum of 70% of windows on the front or side facades
shall be transparent.  The remaining 30% may be opaque, provided that the
following conditions are met:



         a.   Window construction using opaque glass shall appear
identical to the transparent windows;



         b.   Opaque windows shall not be superficially attached
to the wall;



         c.   Opaque windows shall not be perceptibly different
in texture, color, or reflectivity than the glass of the transparent windows.



      4.   Architecturally ornate window boxes displaying
merchandise only, may be substituted for 25% of the required transparent
windows and 100% of the opaque windows.  This design element may also be
applied to smaller-sized buildings with shorter facades and those buildings
without traditional front entrances.



   F.   Public Entrances.



      1.   A minimum of one (1) customer entrance should be provided
on the front facade.



      2.   All sides of a building that directly face an abutting
street, with no intervening building, should provide a customer entrance.



      3.   All public entrances to the building shall be the focal
point of the facade through the use of a combination of the following
architectural elements: pediments, lintels, columns, pilasters, porches,
balconies, railings, balustrades, and ornate moldings.  Design features may
also include entry recesses/ projections or locating display windows so that
they are directly adjacent to the entrance.



      4.   Any side of a building with a parking field in excess of
20% of the required parking, and where 50% of that parking is located farther
than 300 feet from a customer entrance, shall be required to have a customer
entrance on that facade.  See Section 7.J below for additional parking
regulations.







 



      5.    A customer entrance proposed for a side facade shall be
located a minimum distance from the corner of the front facade equal to 25%
of the lineal length of the side facade on which it is to be located. A
customer entrance located at the corner of the building cannot substitute or
fulfill the requirement to provide entrances on both front and side facades.



   G.   Covered Walkways.



      1.   Rules.



         a.   For the purposes of this subsection only, the
"front" of a building is considered to be the building facade where a public
entrance is proposed. A building that contains public entrances on two (2) or
more facades is said to have multiple "fronts."



         b.   A building facade that is oriented toward a public
street but does not contain a public entrance is considered to be a "side
corner" facade.



         c.   A building facade that is neither oriented toward a
public street nor contains a public entrance is considered to be either the
"side" or "rear" facade.



         d.   A covered walkway is considered to be an "ARCADE,
PEDESTRIAN" as defined in Chapter 1, Article II.



         e.   The horizontal extent of a covered walkway shall be
measured upon the entire length of a facade where required.



         f.   Greater preference is placed on the proximity of a
covered walkway to the location of the public entrance.



      2.   Covered walkways are required along building facades that
contain public entrances or along facades that are oriented towards public or
private streets. The location and horizontal extent of covered walkways shall
be based upon the following types of building designs:



         a.   Public entrance(s) on one (1) facade:  Covered
walkways are required along at least 70% of the front facade and at least 30%
of the side corner facade.  No covered walkways are required along the side
or rear of the building.



         b.   Public entrance(s) on two (2) or more facades: 
Covered walkways are required along at least 50% of each facade where a
public entrance is proposed.  No covered walkways are required along the
side or rear of the building.



         c.   Public entrance on corner of building:  Covered
walkways are required along a minimum of 50% of each facade where a corner
entrance is proposed.  The intent is to wrap each facade with a covered
walkway, commencing at the corner where the public entrance is proposed.



         d.   Covered walkways shall have a minimum external
dimension of 10 feet in width. The minimum internal dimension shall be seven
(7) feet in width, absent of any obstruction by columns, furniture, and/or
other appurtenances.



   H.   Landscaping.



      1.   Foundation landscaping areas for large non-residential
(big box) developments shall be required in accordance with Chapter 4,
Article II, Section 6.B.



      2.   See Chapter 4, Article II, Section 6.J.4 for additional
regulations regarding the required width of the landscape strip abutting the
right-of-way for large non-residential (big box) developments.



   I.   Site Amenities.  Sculptures, fountains, gardens, pools,
trellises, and benches shall be encouraged within the site design.  In
addition, the following standards shall be required for every 50,000 square
feet or fraction thereof of every non-residential (big box) development:



      1.    Two (2) site amenities shall be required.  Site
amenities include but are not limited to bell or clock towers, pergolas,
public seating areas (separate and apart from any outdoor seating provided
for an associated restaurant use), fountains (of at least eight (8) feet in
height and 16 feet diameter), and public art but only when combined with
another amenity.  Public art, which is in fulfillment of the Art in Public
Places program, may be utilized to comply with the pedestrian amenity
requirement of this subparagraph, provided that the public art is located in
conjunction with another qualifying pedestrian amenity.







 



      2.   Pedestrian pathways through off-street parking areas
shall be required in accordance with Section 7.J below.



   J.   Off-Street Parking Lot Orientation.



      1.   Parking areas shall provide safe, convenient, and
efficient access. Off-street parking areas shall be distributed around large
buildings in order to shorten the distance to customer entrances, other
buildings, and public sidewalks, as well as to reduce the overall area and
visual blight of the paved surface.  No more than 60% of the off-street
surface parking area shall be located between any facade and a public street.



      2.    Pedestrian pathways shall be required where parking
spaces are located in excess of 400 feet from any customer entrance. These
pedestrian pathways shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width leading from
the farthest parking space to the customer entrance.  These pathways shall
incorporate the use of a combination of decorative pavement, trellises,
seating, pergolas, arbors, gazebos, decorative light fixtures and landscaping.







 







 



      3.   Where off-street parking areas are screened by outparcel
buildings or is not visible from a public street, a maximum of 75% of the
required parking may be adjacent to a front or side facade containing a
customer entrance.



      4.   Unique conditions associated with individual sites may
justify the review and approval of alternative site designs that do not
specifically comply with the parking lot orientation standards of this
subsection.  A different design proposal may offer superior results or
maximum achievement of the City's objectives.  The above standards may be
varied by the City Commission, provided that the applicant can demonstrate
there is an unusual site configuration and/or unique circumstances, and the
alternative site design clearly meets the intent of these provisions. 
Alternative design must consider and address the following objectives:



         a.   Maximize the proximity of parking spaces to
customer entrances;



         b.   Reduce visual blight of large expanses of surface
off-street parking areas; and



         c.   Improve pedestrian connectivity in excess of the
minimum standards.



      5.   Regulations shall be enforced in zoning districts and
overlay zones where the objective is to discourage or prohibit off-street
parking areas between the building and the rights-of-way.



   K.   Miscellaneous.



      1.   Buildings should be configured so they complement outdoor
spaces. Walkways, entrances and gathering areas should have shading features,
such as trees, landscaping, trellis structures, projecting canopies, covered
walkways, arcades, and/or porticos. Seating areas and benches should be
located in shaded areas that are close to activity, but that will not block
or cause congestion in circulation or at entrances. Outdoor employee areas
should be integrated into the site design, but should be separated from
general public circulation with screening.



      2.   Accessory uses, including a Gasoline Station or
Automotive, Minor Repair within large commercial developments should
incorporate the design characteristics and architectural treatments applied
to the larger building. The use of standardized "corporate" architectural
styles associated with chain type businesses is prohibited. The accessory use
should not be the focal point in the front setback. If the accessory use is
located forward of the larger building, a 25-foot wide landscape strip shall
be utilized along all property lines abutting the operation, including a
minimum three (3) foot high berm.  Additionally, the accessory use shall be
landscaped separately from the remainder of the parking area by a 10-foot
wide planting strip.



      3.   See Section 10.B below for additional regulations
regarding the design of transit shelters where abutting or located within
large non-residential (big box) developments.



      4.   Large commercial buildings in excess of 75,000 square
feet should be structurally designed to be easily divided into smaller tenant
spaces in planning for future adaptive re-use purposes.



(Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 8.   Open Space and Plaza Requirements.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  Open air and semi-enclosed public
gathering spaces can act as central organizing elements in a large
development.  They can also contribute to the relationship between different
land uses and provide focal points and anchors for pedestrian activity.



      2.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of
this code are at conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply.
Additionally, specific design provisions within the zoning district
regulations of this subsection shall take precedence over the General Design
Standards of Section 7.B. below.



      3.   Applicability (by Zoning District).



         a.   Mixed Use 4 (MU-4) and Mixed Use Core (MU-C)
Districts.  Pursuant to Chapter 3, Article III, Section 5.C.1, usable open
space shall be required for all developments two (2) acres in size or
larger.  Such space shall be devoted to usable open space, consisting of
plazas or public open space, excluding private recreation areas.



         b.   Infill Planned Unit Development (IPUD).  A minimum
of 200 square feet of usable open space shall be required per dwelling unit
pursuant to Chapter 3, Article III, Section 2.G.3.  The physical attributes
of the site shall be respected with particular concern for preservation of
natural features, tree growth and open space.  Interior and open spaces
shall meet the following criteria:



            (1)   Shall be required for residential
development projects and mixed-use residential projects;



            (2)   Shall be designed to be available and
accessible to every dwelling unit proposed;



            (3)   Shall include consolidated areas principally
set aside for active or passive recreational space;



            (4)   Shall, where feasible, be centrally located
in the development;



            (5)   May be designed or sited in conjunction with
but shall not include private courtyards, landscape strips, perimeter
landscape buffers, preservation/natural areas, and water bodies; and



            (6)   Shall not be occupied by streets, drives,
parking areas, or structures other than recreational structures.



         c.   Suburban Mixed Use (SMU) District.  Usable open
space shall be required for each component of the mixed-use development
pursuant to Chapter 3, Article III, Section 4.D.1.  In addition, the
following standards shall apply:



            (1)   Usable open space shall provide active or
passive recreational space and shall not be occupied by water bodies,
streets, drives, parking areas, or structures other than recreational
structures.



            (2)   All least 50% of the required usable open
space for single family residential uses shall be contained in one (1) or
more common pooled areas and a rectangle inscribed within each common pooled
area shall have no dimension less than 75 feet; and



            (3)   Up to 50% of the usable open space required
for all other uses may be hardscaped plazas and public gathering places.



   B.   Design Standards.  Where required or recommended, plazas and
usable open space shall be designed as follows:



      1.   Location.



         a.   Common open space areas shall be located so as to
be readily accessible and useable by residents or visitors in various
locations of the development, unless the lands are sensitive natural
resources and access should be restricted;



         b.   The lands shall be compact and contiguous unless
the land shall be used as a continuation of an existing trail or specific
topographic features require a different configuration.  An example of such
topographic features would be the provision of a trail or private open area
along a riparian corridor;



         c.   Where private common open space areas, trails,
parks, or other public spaces exist adjacent to the tract to be subdivided or
developed, the private common open space or pedestrian amenity shall to the
maximum extent feasible, be located to adjoin, extend, and enlarge the
presently existing trail, park, or other open area land;



         d.   At minimum, the area shall be lighted to meet the
requirements of crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED)
principles; and



         e.   To the maximum extent feasible, where significant
natural and scenic resource assets exist on a property, priority shall be
given to protect and preserve as common open space.  The assets shall be
prioritized as follows:



            (1)   Wetlands;



            (2)   Flood hazard areas; and



            (3)   Tree preservation areas.



      2.   Materials.  Plazas shall be designed with pavers and
landscaped areas in order to provide a place for the public to enjoy the
outdoors. Boardwalks may be used if the property is located along the
Intracoastal Waterway provided that the boardwalk area is sized comparably
with the intent of this subsection.



      3.   Seating Areas.  At least one (1) linear foot of seating
for every 30 square feet of plaza space is required.  Seating surfaces shall
have a minimum depth of 20 inches;



      4.   Access.



         a.   Pedestrians shall have direct access to the plaza
from at least one (1) major thoroughfare and at least 50% of the plaza
frontage;



         b.   At least one (1) accessible route complying with
the Florida Building Code shall connect accessible buildings, accessible
facilities, accessible elements, and accessible spaces that are on the same
site.



         c.   Curb cuts providing motor vehicle access onto a
plaza are prohibited; however, plazas may be designed to provide access for
emergency vehicles;



      5.   Landscaping.



         a.   Landscape strips and perimeter landscape buffers,
required under Chapter 4, Article II, Section 4 cannot count towards the
minimum requirements of this subsection; and



         b.   Trees are required in accordance with Chapter 4,
Article II, Section 6.B.



      6.   Maintenance.  All common open space or pedestrian
amenity areas shall be maintained by the owner(s) of the development.



(Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord. 17-023, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 9.   Standards for Pedestrian and Bicyclist Amenities.



   A.   General.  The purpose and intent of this section is to provide
regulations that require developments to plan for pedestrian circulation and
access; locate, install and maintain pedestrian amenities; and to provide for
controls and regulations to protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the residents and visitors.  The requirements for pedestrian
amenities will further the City's goals and objectives by providing for
alternative means of transportation that improve air quality, reduce energy
consumption, efficient use of vehicular parking facilities, proper disposal
of waste, and provide for the enhanced physical appearance of the City.



   The Director of Planning and Zoning or designee may waive certain
pedestrian amenity requirements of Table 4-9 based on consideration of the
number of employees, forecasted anticipated number of customers and projected
bicycle and pedestrian traffic.



   B.   Standards.



      1.   Circulation.



         a.   Pedestrian circulation should be carefully planned
in order to prevent conflict between pedestrian areas and vehicular use areas.



         b.   In all cases, pedestrian access shall be provided
to public walkways.



         c.    Pedestrian circulation design shall promote
interconnectivity with and between land uses to discourage unnecessary use of
the automobile and reduce vehicle miles traveled (VMT).



      2.   Table 4-10.  Pedestrian & Bicyclist Amenities.  The
minimum number of pedestrian amenities shall be required as follows:



 



PEDESTRIAN & BICYCLIST AMENITIES


Zoning District or Use
 
Bicycle Racks
 
Benches
 
Trash Receptacles


Building area size is based upon gross floor area (in square feet) unless
specifically expressed otherwise.



Any "Commercial, Retail Sales and Services" use;

 
1 per 12,500
 
1 per 12,500
 
1 per 12,500



Greater than 25,000 s.f.

 
1 per 12,500 up to 25,000; then 1 per 30,000
 
1 per 12,500 up to 25,000; then 1 per 30,000
 
1 per 12,500 up to 25,000; then 1 per 30,000



Any "Office and Health Care" use

 
1 per 12,500 up to 25,000 then 1 per 50,000
 
1 per 12,500 up to 25,000 then 1 per 25,000
 
1 per 12,500 up to 25,000 then 1 per 25,000



Any "Arts, Entertainment, and Recreational" use

 
1 per 15,000
 
1 per 12,500
 
1 per 12,500



Any "Educational" use

 
1 per 5 classrooms
 
1 per 5 classrooms
 
1 per 5 classrooms



Any "Industrial" use

 
1 per 30,000
 
1 per 30,000
 
1 per 30,000



Dwelling, Multi-family (3+ units);

 
1 per 75,000 of lot area
 
1 per 25,000 of lot area
 
1 per 25,000 of lot area



Mobile/Manufactured Home Park

 
1 per recreation or amenity area
 
1 per recreation or amenity area
 
1 per recreation or amenity area



Bed & Breakfast

 
1 per establishment
 
1 per establishment
 
1 per establishment



Hotel & Motel

 
1 per 100 units
 
1 per 25 units
 
1 per 25 units



Group Home Type 2, 3, and 4

 
1 per 7 residents but not less than 2
 
1 per 7 residents but not less than 2
 
1 per 7 residents



Cemetery

 
1 per cemetery
 
1 per cemetery
 
1 per cemetery



Church

 
1 per 30,000
 
1 per 30,000
 
1 per 30,000



Community Garden

 
1 per lot
 
1 per lot
 
1 per lot



Community Facilities; Post Office

 
1 per 12,500
 
1 per 12,500
 
1 per 12,500



Greater than 25,000 s.f.

 
1 per 12,500 up to 25,000; then 1 per 30,000
 
1 per 12,500 up to 25,000; then 1 per 30,000
 
1 per 12,500 up to 25,000; then 1 per 30,000




ÿ



         a.   Where the number of required pedestrian amenities
as computed includes a fraction, the number of amenities shall be the
computed number rounded to the next highest whole number;



         b.   All pedestrian amenities shall be located on the
same building site which they serve and situated on a site so that they do
not obstruct the flow of pedestrians using the building entrances or
sidewalks and shall adhere to Florida Accessibility Code for Building
Construction;



         c.   The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be
jointly and severally responsible for the continued proper maintenance of all
pedestrian amenities and shall keep them in proper, neat, and orderly
appearance;



         d.   When bicycle racks are required or recommended,
they shall be located in areas that are enclosed or roofed, or otherwise
designed with solid covering, either inside the building (e.g., foyer) or
outside and placed in close proximity to the project entrance while still
maintaining safe and accessible building ingress and egress.  See Section
12.B.2 below for additional regulations regarding bicycle racks and Crime
Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) guidelines;



         e.   To the maximum extent feasible, trash receptacles
should include ashtrays and be located near other pedestrian amenities.  The
number of receptacles provided may be reduced if located within close
proximity of benches;



         f.   On a case by case basis, additional pedestrian
amenities may be required for other land uses not listed in Table 4-9;



         g.   Additional pedestrian amenities may be recommended,
depending on projected need; and



         h.   A certificate of occupancy or certificate of
completion shall not be issued until pedestrian amenities are provided in
accordance with this subparagraph; and



         i.   All pedestrian amenities provided by the property
owner shall be decorative in nature and substantial in construction.  Their
design and appearance must be aesthetically pleasing and compatible with the
subject site, adjacent properties, and streetscape furniture, including
public improvements and furniture located within the public right-of-way. 
No signage or advertising shall be permitted on pedestrian amenities.



(Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 10.   Design Standards for Walls, Fences, and Miscellaneous Outdoor
Structures.



   A.   Walls and Fences.  Design, construction, and appearance of
walls and fences are important components of site development.  Their
appearance and upkeep are visual reflections of community character and
quality.  This subsection shall apply to all new walls and fences.



      1.   Design.  Wall and fence design shall be enhanced and
decorative in appearance where visible by the public under the following
circumstances:



         a.   From the interior of a property;



         b.   From public or private rights-of-way; or



         c.   From abutting or adjacent properties.



      2.   Consistency.  Enhanced walls and fences shall be
designed in an architectural style consistent with the principal structure(s)
incorporating the dominant exterior material(s), colors, and finishes of that
structure.



      3.   Monotony Restrictions.  Enhanced walls and fences shall
be designed with offsets, banding, columns, posts with lintels, finials, or
caps, landscape pockets, and other elements to avoid an expansive monolithic
or monotonous appearance.  Such elements shall be included every 16 feet or
less.



      Decorative wood or PVC/vinyl fences shall either be picket, rail
basket weave, or shadow-box style. As noted above, decorative fences shall
not be installed in such a manner so as to create a monolithic or monotonous
appearance. Every two (2) fence panels or 16 feet of fence must be
interrupted by decorative columns or posts, visible from the exterior of the
property and topped with decorative capitals. This requirement will not be
satisfied by the reversing of the fence material to place the unfinished side
out exposing the four (4) inch by four (4) inch posts and crossmembers to the
exterior.



      4.   Chain-Link Fences.  Except for within industrial
districts, chain-link fences shall not be allowed within the front or side
corner yard where they are visible from public or private rights-of-way. 
See Chapter 3, Article V, Section 8 for additional regulations regarding the
screening of outdoor storage of merchandise.



      5.   Construction Sites.  Temporary fencing (and other types
of barriers deemed acceptable to the Building Official) may be erected around
construction sites for visual buffering and safety. Temporary fencing shall
be approved in conjunction with a building permit and must be removed prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or completion. The temporary
fencing may contain screening material enhanced with lifestyle graphics,
images, pictorals, wraps, photographs, or a combination thereof as regulated
in the Sign Code (Chapter 4, Article IV, Section 4.B.3.d).  However, the
screening material allowed in the Sign Code shall not conflict with the
original intent for said fencing, mesh, and related materials, which is to
offer protection from dust, debris, and other airborne particulate matter
(pursuant to Chapter 3, Article V, Section 2.F).



   B.   Transit Shelters.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of this
subparagraph is to maximize availability and accessibility of mass-transit by
providing an amenity for patrons, help beautify corridors by creating
positive gateways into and out of the City, and to provide safer environs for
mass-transit users and motorists.



      2.   Standards.  A transit shelter is a roofed structure that
may provide seating areas and is typically located within the right-of-way. 
A transit shelter shall be designed to comply with the Florida Building
Code.  In addition, the following standards shall apply:



         a.   The location of a transit shelter, including its
associated structure and/or equipment, shall comply with all cross visibility
and safe-sight requirements.



         b.   If placed on a public sidewalk, the transit shelter
location shall provide adequate clearance for pedestrian traffic in order to
comply with accessibility requirements of the Florida Building Code.



         c.   All signage placed on transit shelters shall be
regulated in accordance with Chapter 4, Article IV, Section 4.D.2.



         d.   The need for, and addition of transit stops shall
be considered in conjunction with all new development to accommodate transit
stops for the county bus service and other types of transit systems,
including a future water taxi service. Fire lanes and other emergency
vehicular accessways may be designated by the appropriate public agency. Uses
that require service by large vehicles should be designed to allow large
vehicle access without blockage of adjoining vehicular or pedestrian
circulation.



         e.   The design and architecture of the transit shelter
should be compatible with the principal building(s) of large non-residential
(big box) developments (see Section 7 above) or consistent with an overall
redevelopment plan that provides aesthetic and uniform design guidelines for
shelter design.



         f.   Where located within the public right-of-way, the
following shall also apply to transit shelters:



            (1)   The transit shelter requires a right-of-way
permit, which is subject to review and approval by the City Engineer or
designee.  See Chapter 2, Article III, Section 4 for additional regulations
regarding the right-of-way permit.



            (2)   All necessary permits are required to
install transit shelters within rights-of-way owned by the State of Florida
and/or Palm Beach County.



         g.   Where located on private property, the following
shall also apply to transit shelters:



            (1)   When an outside governmental agency acquires
an easement on private property for the purpose of constructing a transit
stop shelter, these improvements shall not be subject to minimum setback
requirements of the zoning district; and



            (2)   Waste receptacles and bicycle racks shall be
required and accommodated at transit shelters.



      3.   Removal.  Should any bus shelter, associated structure
or equipment or sign on an associated structure or equipment, or bus shelter
sign fail to conform to the above standards; or should a residential property
owner object to the presence of a bus shelter abutting his property, then the
city may order the sponsoring organization to remove such bus shelter and,
that failing, may remove same at the expense of the sponsoring organization.



   C.   Shopping Cart Corrals.  Shopping cart corrals shall be
compatible with the architectural design, colors, materials, and finishes of
the principal structure.



   D.   Donation Bins.  Unmanned donation bins are allowed within
commercial and industrial zoning districts but subject to the following
regulations:



      1.   Number of Bins.  One (1) donation bin may be allowed per
lot for commercial or industrial developments consisting of at least 100,000
square feet of gross building area.  An additional bin may be allowed for
each 100,000 square feet of gross building area.



      2.   Location.  Donation bins shall not be located in within
rights-of-way, required parking spaces, access aisles, walkways, landscape
strips, or perimeter landscape buffers. They shall comply with all visibility
and safe-sight standards and not pose a safety threat to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic. In addition, they shall be located behind the front and
side corner building lines.



      3.   Maintenance. The owner of the property shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the bins, such that the area is kept neat
and orderly and in compliance with the approved site plan for the subject
property. This means that all items are located within the bins; no trash is
left on the site and there is no graffiti or other visible damage to the bins.



      4.   Appearance. Donation bins shall be painted with natural,
earth-tone colors or with those that are intended to match the principal
building(s).



      5.   Advertising. Donation bins shall not be used for off-site
advertising of commercial activities and be limited to a maximum of four (4)
square feet of sign area advertising the sponsoring charitable tax-exempt
organization.



      6.   Sponsoring Agencies. Sponsoring agencies shall register
with and be evaluated annually by the Department of Development for
compliance with the regulations contained in this section. Sponsoring
agencies shall provide proof of authorization by the property owner(s), the
size, and overall dimensions of each bin, and a site plan detailing the
proposed location(s). Sponsoring agencies must provide proof of being a
tax-exempt, charitable organization registered as a 501(c)3 of the Internal
Revenue Code, in order to place donation bins in the City. Donation bins to
an existing site shall require a modification to the approved site plan in
accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F.



      7.   Miscellaneous.  The foregoing restrictions shall not
apply to recycling bins or other similar public collection bins located on
City property or otherwise sponsored by the City.



(Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 11.   Maintenance of Buildings, Structures, and Site.



   It shall be unlawful for owner(s) of real property within the City to
permit the deterioration of the exterior of a building or off-street parking
areas such that it becomes non-compliant with these standards or the minimum
standards for appearance and maintenance of public and private property (see
Part II, Chapter 15, Article IX and Part II, Chapter 10, Article IV).



   The awning/canopy and support system should be maintained at the same
level as other components of the building.  Rusting/peeling support
structures shall be cleaned and repainted.  Rotted or broken supports should
be replaced.  Faded and dirty awnings shall be cleaned or replaced.



(Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 12.   Exterior Building and Site Design Guidelines.



   A.   Urban Design Guidelines of the Community Redevelopment Agency
(CRA).



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of Boynton Beach Urban
Design Guidelines are to provide a basis for evaluating redevelopment
proposals and act as a guide for making decisions about public and private
improvements within the boundaries of the Community Redevelopment Agency. 
It is anticipated that through the use of the guidelines, both private and
public projects will endeavor to preserve and enhance the form, scale, and
visual character that make downtown unique within the city and the region. 
The guidelines will assist to ensure that each incremental site design,
architectural, and streetscape project contributes to a positive image for
the city.



      2.   Relationship to Comprehensive Plan.  In particular, the
guidelines are designed to support the following objectives in accordance
with the City of Boynton Beach Comprehensive Plan:



         a.   Assure long-term economic vitality of the downtown;



         b.   Create a vibrant mixed-use development downtown
urban environment;



         c.   Create an aesthetically pleasing and vibrant
pedestrian oriented downtown;



         d.   Provide improved visual and physical connectivity
between downtown districts;



         e.   Encourage the creation of exciting and inviting
public urban spaces;



         f.   Develop a downtown urban character that is unique
to Boynton Beach;



         g.   Provide interesting architectural design diversity
within a continuity of urban design principles; and



         h.   Provide safe, efficient, and aesthetically pleasing
accommodations for vehicular access and parking.



      3.   Relationship to Redevelopment Plan. The Urban Design
Guidelines are applicable to all properties that are located within the CRA,
particularly within the Federal Highway Corridor Community Redevelopment
Plan, Heart of Boynton Master Plans & Schematic Designs, Ocean District
Community Redevelopment Plan, and Boynton Beach Boulevard Corridor Plan.



      4.   Relationship to Land Development Regulations.  The Urban
Design Guidelines are applicable to all properties that are located within
the CRA, particularly within the Mixed-Use Low Intensity 1 (MU-L1), Mixed-Use
Low Intensity 2 (MU-L2), Mixed-Use Low Intensity 3 (MU-L3), and Mixed-Use
High Intensity (MU-H) zoning districts.



   B.   Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED).



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose & Intent.  The proper design and effective
use of the built environment can lead to a reduction in the incidence and
fear of crime and improvement in the quality of life by incorporating access
control, natural surveillance, and territorial defensive tactics into
building and site design components.



         b.   Applicability.  The following guidelines have been
developed for incorporation into the design of all new residential and
non-residential developments and major modifications to approved developments.



      2.   Guidelines.  The following guidelines have been
developed to further the purpose and intent of this subsection through
compliance with the following design elements:



         a.   Lighting.



            (1)   Exterior lighting should be placed above or
near entryways and garages.



            (2)   Landscaping should be designed and
maintained to reduce conflicts with exterior lighting, taking into account
long-term tree canopy growth.



            (3)   Landscaping should be designed and
maintained to minimize obstruction of view of windows, address numbers, and
walkways.



            (4)   Pedestrian-scale lighting (maximum 12-foot
tall, metal halide light poles) should be used  for all street and
pedestrian walkways.



            (5)   On non-residential projects, non-glare
lighting should be located around the perimeter or placed on building walls.



            (6)   In parking garages, all lighting should be
vandal resistant. Enhanced lighting should be used at entrance/exits to
reduce transition (from daylight) when entering structure, while not drawing
additional attention at night.



         b.   Numerical Address.



            (1)   For all multi-family residential and
non-residential developments, illumination of the building numbers is
recommended.



            (2)   For all multi-family residential and
non-residential developments, building numbers should be 12 inches in height
and placed away from landscaping. Building numbers should be placed on
facades that are adjacent to accessways and off-street parking areas.



         c.   Building Design.



            (1)   Building architecture should allow for
enhanced natural surveillance of all off-street parking areas, providing a
sense of security to patrons and visitors.



            (2)   Security vision doors shall be utilized at
all entrances to stairwells on each floor.



            (3)   Convex mirrors shall be installed in
stairwell and elevator areas.



            (4)   Elevators shall be located close to the main
entrance, constructed to avoid hidden spaces and utilize Closed Circuit
Television (CCTV) surveillance.



         d.   Understory Parking and Parking Garages
(Freestanding and Integrated).



            (1)   The first level of a parking garage should
have restricted access from exterior common ground area, in an effort to
reduce unauthorized/unsupervised entry.  Wrapping the parking garage with
residential or non-residential uses is the preferred methodology in the
design of a parking garage to restrict unwanted access and meet other design
guideline objectives.



            (2)   In the limited areas of the garage not
wrapped by other uses, exterior walls surrounding the first floor (ground
level) parking should be a minimum three (3) to four (4) feet high.
Additionally, decorative grill work should be installed between the top of
this wall and the flooring of the second parking level.



            (3)   Pedestrian entrances should be adjacent to
vehicle entrances, open and free of hidden spaces and wired for CCTV
surveillance.



            (4)   Each level of the parking garage should be
equipped with well-marked, direct-ring emergency telephones which shall
terminate at a central monitoring office, station, or booth.



            (5)   Ceilings and solid walls inside parking
garages should be painted white to increase the brightness within the
structure.



         e.   Miscellaneous.



            (1)   Central mailbox stations should be placed in
high-activity and conspicuous locations for enhanced safety and natural
surveillance of users.



            (2)   Pedestrian crosswalks should be delineated
by using contrasting paver blocks as opposed to surface striping.  When
crosswalks are located away from stop signs within off-street parking areas,
they should also be raised.  Paver bricks should be compatible in style
throughout a development.



            (3)   Bicycle racks should be placed in close
proximity to building entrances and not located within off-street parking
areas.



            (4)   Automated Teller Machines (ATM) should not
be obscured by any landscaping in excess of two (2) feet in height or other
fixed objects that would prevent clear visibility and should have a convex
mirror strategically placed to allow the ATM operator to identify any
approaching persons.



            (5)   ATM's should have illumination of the
walkway leading to and from it positioned so as not to cause glare on the
video recording equipment.



            (6)   Benches should have adequate lighting if
they are intended for nighttime use and be located in open view to eliminate
concealment areas.



(Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



ARTICLE IV.  SIGN STANDARDS



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Short Title.  This article shall hereafter be known and cited
as the "City Sign Code."



   B.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this article is to set
forth the regulations for the use of signs within the city's jurisdictional
limits for site identification, communication, and advertisement.  It is the
intent of this article to promote the health, safety, convenience,
aesthetics, morality, and general welfare of the city by regulating signs in
order to meet the following objectives:



      1.   Identification.  Promote and aid in the identification
and location of an establishment, organization, or neighborhood;



      2.   Aesthetics.  Preserve the beauty and unique character of
the city by protecting it from visual blight and providing a pleasing
environmental setting and community appearance, which is deemed vital to the
attraction and retention of business and commerce;



      3.   Land Values.  Protect property values by assuring the
compatibility of signage with surrounding land uses;



      4.   Safety.  Promote general safety and protect the general
public from damage or injury caused by, or partially attributed to, the
distractions, hazards, and obstructions that result from improperly designed,
constructed, maintained, or located signs;



      5.   Compatibility.  Ensure that signs are compatible with
the surrounding built environment, including adjacent architecture and
neighborhoods, and they compliment each other rather than detract from one
another; and



      6.   Sustainability.  To promote signage and support
structures that employ sustainable designs and technologies with respect to
their construction, maintenance, and operation (e.g. recycled materials,
energy efficient, low energy usage bulbs, etc.).



   C.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee shall have the authority to interpret and administer this article.



   D.   Applicability.  The provisions of this article shall be
considered the minimum standards and are applicable to all new signs
constructed or displayed after the date of enactment of these Regulations or
modification to signs which were permitted prior to the date of adoption of
these Regulations. 



   E.   Exemptions.  The permitting requirements of this article shall
not apply to the following signs however, that such signs may be subject to
other provisions of these Land Development Regulations:



      1.   Address Sign.  A non-illuminated sign, which indicates
the address of the site, provided it does not exceed two (2) square feet in
area.  The sign shall comply with the standards of Section 4.A.9. below.



      2.   Residential Yard Sign.  A non-illuminated sign with
non-commercial copy located in any zoning district, provided it does not
exceed three (3) square feet in area.  If proposed as a freestanding
structure, the sign shall not be greater than four (4) feet in height and
must be located within five (5) feet of a building on a lot; or if there is
no building on the lot, the sign must be located at least ten (10) feet from
any property line.



      3.   Nameplate or Identification Plaque.  A non-illuminated
nameplate or identification plaque provided it does not exceed two (2) square
feet in area.  The plaque shall comply with the standards of Section 4.C.13.
below.



      4.   Temporary Real Estate Sign.  A non-illuminated temporary
real estate sign provided it is five (5) square feet or less in area. 
However, this sign shall comply with the standards of Section 4.B.1. below,
which regulates the minimum required setback, allowable location, and maximum
size and height.  No temporary real estate sign is allowed within a public
right-of-way because it would be considered an off-premises sign and is
therefore prohibited pursuant to Section 3.K. below.



      5.   Temporary Political Sign.  A non-illuminated temporary
political sign provided it is less than thirty- two (32) square feet in
area.  However, this sign shall comply with Section 4.B.5. below, which
regulates the minimum required setback, allowable location, and maximum size
and height.  No temporary political sign is allowed within a public
right-of-way because it would be considered an off-premise sign and is
therefore prohibited pursuant to Section 3.K. below.



      6.   Transit Shelter Sign.  A sign located on a transit
shelter provided it complies with Section 4.D.2. below and the Building
Official determines that compliance with the Florida Building Code is not
required.



      7.   Civic/Government Sign.  A sign which is deemed necessary
by an appropriate city department or public agency and consisting of
non-commercial copy, intended for safety, welfare, or informational
purposes.  This sign typically includes 1) information pertaining to current
or future public improvements and events; 2) traffic, railroad crossing,
wayfinding, commemorative, and other governmental signage; 3) legal notices,
public hearings, and other temporary and non-emergency related signage; and
4) signage identifying caution, danger, or emergency situations.



      8.   Changing the Copy of a Manual Changeable Copy Sign. 
Manual changeable copy signs may be allowed as an accessory component to a
primary or secondary monument sign pursuant to Section 4.C.2.h. below.  The
changeable copy portion of a monument sign is exempt from the permitting
requirements of this article, provided that such new copy complies with the
standards of this article.



   Note:   In the event any word, sentence, clause, or other portion of
this section is determined invalid, then any sign otherwise allowed by this
section shall comply with the requirements set forth in this code as if this
section was never enacted.



   F.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the regulations and
standards contained herein.



   G.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of this
code conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply, unless otherwise
stated herein.



   H.   Severability.  Except as for otherwise provided in Section
1.G., Section 3, and Section 4, should any section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause, phrase, or other part of this article be declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of this article as a whole or any article, section, subsection,
paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word thereof, other than that so
declared to be invalid.



   I.   Relief from Standards.  Unless described otherwise, any
deviation from the sign standards contained herein shall require approval of
a variance application, which is subject to review and approval by the City
Commission.  Any request for a variance shall be reviewed in accordance with
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.D.  No variance may be granted for any sign
expressly prohibited by this article.  The City Commission however, may
grant a variance if it finds that the unusual shape or topography of the
property or other mitigating factors (e.g., required landscape buffers),
prevent signage allowable under the provisions of these Regulations from
adequately identifying the business or other activity located on such
property.  The City Commission may only grant a variance to the following:



      1.   Required Setback.  Allow a setback less than that
required under the chapter;



      2.   Sign Area or Height.  Allow the area and/or height of a
sign to be increased by up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the maximum
allowable height or area; or



      3.   Number of Signs.  Allow the number of signs to be
increased over the maximum allowed by this code.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   City Approval Required.



   No signs, including support structures shall be erected, altered,
displayed, or modified on private property, public lands, or within city
rights-of-way without first securing the necessary city approvals and permits
as provided hereunder, except in instances when exempt from these Regulations
pursuant to Section 1.E. above.  The following processes and permits are
intended to ensure that all signage complies with the standards of this
article:



   A.   Site Plan Review.  Except for individually platted lots
containing single-family and duplex homes located within single-family and
two-family residential zoning districts, the site plan review process shall
be required and reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to the issuance of any sign
permit.  For the purposes of this subsection, the term "site plan" is
construed to include master site plan and technical site plan applications.



   B.   Sign Permit.  The sign permit process shall be required, and
initiated only subsequent to the approval of a site plan application, except
in those instances when site plan review is not required.  The sign permit
application shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 5.A., unless the Building Official determines
that compliance with the Florida Building Code is necessary.  In these
instances, the sign permit shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 3.  Any sign,
including the support structure, which is erected, altered, displayed, or
changed without a sign permit is considered an illegal sign, and shall be
subject to the penalties set forth herein.  Any sign proposed within a city
right-of-way shall require approval from the Engineering Division.  The
issuance of a sign permit shall not relieve any party from obtaining the
necessary permits which may be required by the various federal, state, or
local government agencies.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Prohibited Signs.



   The following signs and related equipment are prohibited in all zoning
districts, unless otherwise stated herein:



   A.   Noise Sign.  Any sign that produces noise or sounds capable of
being heard (excluding voice units at drive-through facilities) and those
which emit visible smoke, vapor, particles, or odor.



   B.   Animated or Fluttering Sign.  Any sign with visible moving,
revolving, flashing, or rotating parts or visible movement of any kind.



   C.   Motion Picture or Video Sign.  Any sign with motion picture or
video mechanisms used in such a manner as to permit or allow images.



   D.   Electronic Messaging Centers (EMC).  Any sign, including
electronic changeable copy, which incorporates a technology that allows the
sign face to change its image without having to physically or mechanically
replace the sign face or its components.  Such technologies or methods may
include but are not limited to cathode-ray tube (CRT), light-emitting diode
(LED) displays, plasma displays, liquid-crystal displays (LCD), or similar
technologies or methods that allow the sign face to present a series of
images or displays.  However, this prohibition excludes those instances when
such signs are used by a government or public agency for the purposes of
directing or regulating pedestrian or vehicular movement or when providing
other important information to the public.



   E.   Mobile Sign.  Any sign not permanently attached to a wall,
ground, or any other approved supporting structure, or a sign designed to be
transported, such as signs transported by wheels, mobile billboards,
"A-frame" or sandwich type, sidewalk or curb signs, and unanchored signs,
except where otherwise stated in this article.



   F.   Roof Sign.  Any sign erected, placed, or affixed 1) to the
slope of a hip or gable roof; 2) above the roofline or parapet wall; or 3) on
rooftop structures, including but not limited to mechanical enclosures,
mechanical equipment, or chimneys.  All signs shall be located a minimum of
six (6) inches below the top of the mansard or parapet wall, where applicable.



   G.   Snipe Sign.  Any sign that is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted,
glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, trailers, or
other supporting structures, except where otherwise stated for in this
article.



   H.   Painted Wall Sign.  Any sign painted on or attached to a wall,
excluding murals, which are reviewed separately in accordance with Section
4.D.4. below and approved by the Arts Commission.



   I.   Unauthorized Sign.  Any sign that has not been properly
permitted by the city but located on property owned by or under control of
the city.



   J.   Non-Geometric Sign.  Any sign structure, shaped to depict
figures or demonstrative shapes used to attract attention to the business
activity with which the sign is associated, excluding an under canopy or
blade sign regulated in accordance with Section 4.C. below.



   K.   Off-Premises Sign.  Any temporary or permanent off-premises
sign, including billboards but excluding those types of signs which may be
allowed in limited instances in accordance with this article.



   L.   Other.



      1.   Signs attached to or painted on fire escapes, television
antennas, satellite dishes, utility poles, or any other associated structure.



      2.   Signs or sign structures supported by visible guy wires,
cables or where there is visible electrical conduit.



      3.   Any balloons, pennants, streamers, or the like shall be
prohibited if used as a permanent display or temporary sign or as a means of
directing attention to any establishment or organization, or to a commodity
or service sold, offered, or manufactured.



      4.   Any stationary or revolving light (beacon) which flashes
or projects illumination, single-color or multi-colored, in any manner which
is intended to attract or divert attention.  This does not include any
lighting required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or similar
agencies.



      5.   Any sign which advertises a home-based business (home
occupation), excluding those allowed in conjunction with a live/work unit and
the corresponding regulations.



      6.   Any illuminated sign designed with bare bulbs, exposed
neon tubing, or similar technology, which is not shielded and therefore
leaving it exposed and directly visible, except for when used as a window
sign and regulated in accordance with Section 5.C.6. below.  Neon tubing,
bare bulbs, miniature lighting, and similar technologies shall not be used to
illuminate or outline building façades, storefronts, door openings, window,
or window displays pursuant to Chapter 4, Article VII, Section 5.E.



      7.   Any pylon sign as defined in Chapter 1, Article II.



      8.   Any sign and/or sign structure which does not meet all
the criteria set forth in this article.



   Note:   In the event any word, sentence, clause, or other portion of
this section is determined invalid, then any sign otherwise prohibited by
this section shall comply with the requirements set forth in this code as if
this section was never enacted.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Standards.



   A.   General.  The following general standards shall apply to all
signs city-wide:



      1.   Sign Content.



         a.   Obscene.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
display upon any sign or other advertising structure any obscene or indecent
matter.  No sign shall display any statement, word, character, or
illustration of an obscene nature, as defined by F.S. Chapter 847, as may be
amended from time to time.



         b.   Misleading.  It shall be unlawful for a person to
display false or misleading statements upon signs, intended to mislead the
public as to anything sold, any services to be performed or information
disseminated.  The fact that any sign or display shall contain words or
language sufficient to mislead a reasonable and prudent person in reading
same, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section by the
person displaying the sign or permitting same to be displayed.



         c.   Non-commercial Copy.  Any sign authorized in this
article may contain non-commercial copy in lieu of any other copy.  However,
in non-residential zoning districts, the area of a sign containing
non-commercial copy shall be construed to count towards the total signage
area allowed for the sign type that it most closely resembles.  Any sign
allowed under this article may contain, in lieu of any other message or copy,
any lawful non-commercial message that does not direct attention to a
business operated for profit, or to a product, commodity or service for sale
or lease, or to any other commercial interest or activity, so long as said
sign complies with the size, height, area and other requirements of this
article.



      2.   Computation of Sign Area.  The sign area shall be
expressed in square feet for each sign face.  The area of each sign shall be
computed as follows:



         a.   Designed as a Freestanding Sign.  The total square
footage of a sign face is calculated by multiplying the height by the width
of a regular rectangular area which encompasses the entire sign face area
exclusive of structural supports.  When designed as double-faced or
multi-faced freestanding sign, the area for a sign with more than one (1)
face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible
from any one (1) point.  For multi-faced signs, the area shall be computed
by the measurement of one (1) of the faces when:



            (1)   Two (2) identical faces are placed
back-to-back so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same
time; and



            (2)   Such sign faces are part of the same sign
structure and there is no more than a forty-five (45)-degree angle between
the faces.



         b.   Affixed to a Building Façade, Fence, or Wall. 
The area of a sign face shall be computed by means of the smallest square,
circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the
extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display,
together with any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop
or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting
framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall
otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the
display itself.  The background area of a wall or façade on which a sign is
affixed shall be excluded from the computation of sign area unless the
color(s) and/or material(s) of the wall or façade is such that it visually
appears or contributes to the effect of a sign or that it explicitly
distinguishes itself as different or unique from the greater and remaining
portion of the building façade, fence, or wall.



            (1)   Individual Letters.  If a sign consists of
individual letters, each attached directly to a building or structure without
a change in background color, the area of the sign shall be measured by the
area of the smallest rectangle or series of contiguous rectangles that
enclose all letters or non-word depictions.  In addition, the horizontal
separation of words shall not exceed twice the maximum letter height.  The
maximum vertical separation of words shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of
the maximum letter height.



            (2)   Panel or Cabinet Style.  If a sign is
designed as a panel or cabinet style sign, the total area, including
background is included.



      3.   Cross Visibility and Safe-Sight.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to promote safety in the placement of freestanding signs (as
defined in Chapter 1, Article II) and those signs posted to freestanding
structures where in close proximity to rights-of-way, off-street parking
areas, and other vehicular use areas.  The intent is to ensure safe and
unobstructed views for both pedestrians and motorists.



         b.   Standards.  The "safe-sight triangle" is the
triangular-shaped area described by the Engineering Design Handbook and
Construction Standards (EDHCS).  All freestanding signs shall comply with
the following cross visibility and safe-sight standards:



            (1)   Visibility at Driveway Openings onto
Rights-of-Way or between Properties.  Unobstructed cross visibility shall be
maintained in the safe-sight triangle where parking lot driveway openings and
access points occur along rights-of-way or between individual properties. 
All freestanding signs may be allowed within the safe-sight triangle provided
that unobstructed cross-visibility is maintained thirty (30) inches above the
pavement, measured from the abutting right-of-way or cross-access drive,
whichever is applicable.



            (2)   Visibility at Corners of Rights-of-Way. 
Freestanding signs shall not obstruct cross visibility within twenty-five
(25) feet of the intersection of two (2) right-of-way lines pursuant to
Chapter 4, Article VIII, Section 3.C.4.u.



            (3)   Visibility along State Roads.  The
placement of a sign shall not cause any traffic line-of-sight obstruction and
must comply with the visibility requirements of Florida Department of
Transportation (FDOT) Standard Index No. 546 or the latest supplement thereof.



      4.   Traffic Hazards.  No sign or structure authorized by
this article shall be designed and/or erected in such a manner to obstruct
free and clear vision; to be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal, or device; or to otherwise confuse motorists or pedestrians by reason
of its position, shape, color, or content.  For example, signs which may be
confused with authorized traffic signs, signals, or devices may include but
are not limited to those which makes use of the words "stop", "look",
"danger", or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character that interferes
with, misleads, or confuses motorists.  Furthermore, no sign shall be
erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct any fire fighting
equipment, unless otherwise approved by the Fire Marshal.



      5.   Wind Load.  All signs and other advertising structures
shall be designed and constructed to withstand weather conditions, wind and
dead loads as required by the Florida Building Code or other ordinances of
the city.



      6.   Unlawful or Unsafe Signs.  If it is determined that any
sign, or structure supporting a sign, regulated herein is unsafe or is a
menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being
maintained in violation of the provisions of these Regulations, the city
shall give written notice to the owner thereof.  If the owner fails to
remove or alter the sign or structure so as to comply with the standards set
forth herein within the time prescribed in the notice, such sign or structure
may be removed or altered to comply by the city at the expense of the
permittee or owner of the property upon which the sign or structure
supporting the sign is located.  The city may cause any sign or structure
supporting a sign which presents a direct and immediate peril to persons or
property to be removed without notice to the property owner.



      7.   Maintenance.  The owner of any sign and structure
supporting a sign, as defined and regulated by this article shall be required
to properly maintain such sign and structure.  For a sign to be properly
maintained, the sign, together with its framework, braces, angles, or other
supports shall be in a safe condition, properly secured, supported and braced.



      8.   Overhead Clearance.  A sign projecting over a pedestrian
walkway shall maintain a minimum overhead clearance of nine (9) feet in
height.  A sign projecting over a vehicular use area shall maintain a
minimum overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet – six (6) inches in height.



      9.   Property Address.  All properties shall be identified
with the respective property address pursuant to City Code of Ordinances Part
II, Chapter 10, Article IV (Property Maintenance Requirements).  In
addition, the following sign standards shall apply:



         a.   Size.  The numbers and/or letters associated with
each address shall consist of characters which are four (4) inches for
residential properties and six (6) inches for multi-family or non-
residential properties.



         b.   Computation of Sign Area.  Numbers and/or letters,
which are associated with the address of the property, shall not count
towards the total signage area of the sign.  An address sign, designed in
accordance with paragraph "a" above and Section 1.E.1. above, shall be exempt
from the permitting requirements of this article.  However, any sign that
contains the property address and is larger than two (2) square feet in area
shall require a sign permit.  This sign shall be regulated by the standards
for the type of sign with which it most closely resembles.



         c.   Location of Address on Monument Signs.  The
property address shall be included on each monument sign.  The location of
the address shall be centered at the top of the sign and visible from
abutting rights-of-way.



      10.   Illuminated Signs.



         a.   National Electric Code.  All illuminated signs
shall be subject to the provisions of the National Electric Code.  Signs
that are illuminated from an exterior source shall be designed and/or
shielded in such a manner so that no direct source of light is visible from
off-site.



         b.   Prohibition in Residential Zoning Districts.  All
internally-illuminated signs are prohibited in residential zoning
districts.  Signs may be uplit from dusk until dawn but in no case shall the
uplighting spill over or glare onto adjacent properties.  The uplighting
shall not be excessive to the extent that it would be incompatible with the
existing lighting levels within the surrounding homes and neighborhoods.



         c.   Illumination Level.  Illuminated signs, support
structures, and external lighting sources shall not create conditions of
glare and must be designed to further the objectives of this article as they
relate to safety, function, energy usage, and aesthetic value.  In
multiple-tenant developments, the illumination level of each sign must be
consistent with each other (and abutting properties) and no one (1) sign
shall be conspicuously brighter than the other so as to draw more attention
to it.  The illumination levels of signs within single-tenant developments
shall be compatible with the lighting levels of signage on abutting
properties.



         d.   Neon Tubing, Bare Bulbs, and Miniature Lighting. 
Neon, bulbs, miniature lighting, CRT, LED, LCD, and similar technologies may
be utilized as a component of any internally-illuminated sign permitted in
this article.  However, the light source of all such signs, excluding window
signs, must be completely shielded.  See Section 5.C.3. below for additional
community design standards regarding internally-illuminated window signs.



      11.   Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED). 
See Chapter 4, Article III, Section 12.B. for additional regulations
regarding signs and CPTED guidelines.



   Note:   In the event any word, sentence, clause, or other portion of
this section is determined invalid, then any sign otherwise allowed by this
section shall comply with the requirements set forth in this code as if this
section was never enacted.



   B.   Temporary Signs.  It shall be unlawful to affix, erect,
locate, or maintain any temporary sign off-premises unless otherwise
authorized under this subsection.  Temporary signs shall be allowed in
accordance with the following provisions:



      1.   Real Estate Sign.  A temporary real estate sign is
allowed on private property for the purpose of advertising the sale or lease
of such property.  The sign(s) shall comply with the following standards:



         a.   Maximum Number, Size and Height (Table 4-11).



 

Project Size
 
Sign Area (Aggregate) – Maximum1
 
Sign Height – Maximum
 
Number of Signs – Maximum


Single-family and multi-family (less than 10 dwelling units)
 
5 s.f.
 
6 feet
 
1 per street frontage


Multi-family (10 dwelling units or more)
 
16 s.f.
 
6 feet
 
1 per street frontage


All non-residential developments2
 
16 s.f.
 
6 feet
 
1 per street frontage



 



1   Based upon the aggregate signage area of all temporary real estate
signs located within a particular lot or development.



2   For the purpose of this subsection, non-residential districts include
commercial, industrial, mixed-use, and miscellaneous zoning districts. 



         b.   Setbacks.  A temporary real estate sign that is in
excess of five (5) square feet in area shall be setback a minimum of ten (10)
feet from all property lines.



         c.   Exemptions.  A temporary real estate sign that is
five (5) square feet or less in area is exempt from the permitting
requirements of this article pursuant to Section 1.E.4. above.



         d.   Duration.  A temporary real estate sign permit
shall be valid for one hundred eighty (180) days.



         e.   Prohibited in Required Landscape Strip.  A
temporary real estate sign is not allowed within the required landscape strip
that abuts a right-of-way.  See Chapter 4, Article II, Section 4 for
additional standards regarding landscape strips abutting rights-of-way.



      2.   Project Development Sign.



         a.   General.  A temporary project development sign or
banner is allowed on properties located within planned and multi-family
residential zoning districts, and for all non-residential developments, for
the purpose of describing the anticipated development during the construction
process.  This signage typically identifies the proposed name of the
development and basic information, such as its pricing, square footage,
projected completion date, identification of major tenants, and the like. 
It may also consist of graphics, such as illustrations of the subject
development.



         b.   Maximum Number, Size and Height (Table 4-12).  A
project development sign or banner is allowed as a freestanding structure or
it may be affixed to a temporary construction trailer.  The following
standards shall apply:



 

Project Size
 
Sign Area (Aggregate) – Maximum
 
Sign Height – Maximum
 
Number of Signs – Maximum


Less than 10 acres
 
125 s.f.
 
15 feet1
 
12


Greater than 10 acres
 
250 s.f.
 
15 feet1
 
23



 



1   If affixed to the side of the temporary construction trailer, the sign
or banner shall not be greater than fifteen (15) feet in height or exceed the
height of the trailer, whichever is less.



2   A second sign or banner may be allowed if warranted by unique
circumstances, such as the number of street frontages or access driveways;
however, the aggregate signage area shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five
(125) square feet within a particular development.



3   Additional signs or banners may be allowed if warranted by unique
circumstances, such as the number of street frontages or access driveways,
provided the aggregate signage area between all signs and banners do not
exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet within a particular development.



         c.   Duration.  The temporary project development sign
permit shall be valid for one hundred eighty (180) days.  No permit shall be
issued until a site plan has been approved for the development.  For the
purpose of this subsection, the term "site plan" is construed to include
master site plan and technical site plan applications. The sign or banner is
subject to removal if construction has not commenced or is substantially
abandoned, as evidenced by a lack of inspections and/or other pertinent
conditions.  The sign or banner shall be removed prior to final building
inspection.



      3.   Construction Sign.



         a.   General.  A temporary construction sign or banner
is allowed on all properties during the construction period for the purpose
of advertising the active participants and stakeholders of a project.  This
signage typically identifies the names and phone numbers of associated
developers, planners, architects, engineers, contractors, subcontractors,
financiers, and the like.



         b.   Standards.  At construction sites, a temporary
construction sign or banner is allowed to be installed in  accordance with
the following methods:  1) on the temporary security and safety fencing or
other types of barriers that are required and approved by the Building
Official; 2) as a freestanding structure; or 3) affixed to a temporary
construction trailer.  The sign or banner shall not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet in area or be greater than six (6) feet in height.  However, if
affixed to the side of a construction trailer, the height of the sign or
banner shall not be greater than fifteen (15) feet or exceed the height of
such construction trailer, whichever is less.



         c.   Duration.  The temporary construction sign permit
shall be valid for one hundred eighty (180) days.  No permit shall be issued
until an application is submitted for a construction-related permit.  The
sign or banner is subject to removal if construction has not commenced or is
substantially abandoned, as evidenced by a lack of inspections and/or other
pertinent conditions.  The sign or banner shall be removed prior to final
building inspection.



         d.   Temporary Security Fencing.  Temporary security
fencing around construction sites may contain screening material enhanced
with lifestyle graphics, images, pictorals, wraps, photographs, or a
combination thereof.  However, the screening materials shall not conflict
with the original intent for such fencing, mesh, or related materials, which
is to offer protection from dust, debris, and other airborne particulate
matter (pursuant to Chapter 3, Article V, Section 2.F.).  See Section 5.C.1.
below for additional community design standards regarding lifestyle graphics
on temporary fencing and barriers around construction sites.



      4.   Banners.



         a.   New Development.



            (1)   A temporary banner, not to exceed twenty
(20) square feet, is allowed for a maximum of one (1) year for a new
multi-family residential development or non-residential use.  The permit to
allow for such banner shall only be issued once a certificate of occupancy
has been approved for the project.



            (2)   For multi-family residential developments
and projects located in mixed use zoning districts, an additional banner of
equal size and shape may be allowed, provided that both are placed at the
main point of vehicular ingress/egress.  This placement and symmetry may be
repeated at one (1) project entrance per frontage with a maximum number of
two (2) banners per entrance and maximum height of fifteen (15) feet.



         b.   Existing Development.  A temporary banner, not to
exceed twenty (20) square feet, is allowed for existing multi-family
developments and non-residential uses.  This banner is allowed for a maximum
of ninety (90) days within a one (1)-year period.



         c.   Landscaping.  Banners, if placed within the
landscape strips abutting rights-of-way or perimeter landscape buffers, shall
not be attached to any trees or shrubs.  In these instances, banners shall
be placed behind the shrub line and their location must comply with the cross
visibility and safe sight standards of Section 4.A.3. above. 



         d.   Miscellaneous.  All banners, regardless of
location, shall be removed within twelve (12) hours upon the posting of a
tropical storm or hurricane watch.  Banners may be used in the following
types of temporary signage:  1) project development signs; 2) construction
sign; 3) special temporary sales event; 4) seasonal sales event sign; and 5)
Special Event sign.  The provisions of this subsection do not apply to the
aforementioned type of temporary signs.  See the appropriate subsections of
Code and their respective regulations for each type of aforementioned sign.



      5.   Political Sign.  With consent of the property owner, a
temporary political sign is allowed on private property during the period
preceding any local, state, or national election.  No political sign is
allowed within rights-of-way or on city-owned property.  In addition,
political signs shall meet the following standards:



         a.   Maximum Number, Size and Height (Table 4-13).



 

Project Size
 
Sign Area (per sign) – Maximum
 
Sign Area (Aggregate) – Maximum1
 
Sign Height – Maximum
 
Number of Signs – Maximum2


Single-family and multi-family (less than 10 dwelling units)
 
5 s.f.
 
20 s.f.
 
4 feet
 
Multiple


Multi-family (10 dwelling units or more)
 
5 s.f.
 
32 s.f.
 
4 feet
 
Multiple


Non-residential developments (less than 5 acres)3
 
5 s.f.
 
32 s.f.
 
4 feet
 
Multiple


Non-residential developments (5 acres or more)3
 
32 s.f.
 
75 s.f.
 
6 feet
 
Multiple



 



1   Based upon the aggregate signage area of all temporary political signs
located within a particular development.



2   A development is allowed to have multiple signs.  However, the total
aggregate signage area shall not exceed the maximum allowed within that
particular development.



3   For the purpose of this subsection, non-residential districts include
commercial, industrial, mixed use, and miscellaneous zoning districts. 



         b.   Setbacks.  A temporary political sign that is in
excess of five (5) square feet shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet
from all property lines.



         c.   Exemptions.  A temporary political sign that is
thirty-two (32) square feet or less is exempt from the permitting
requirements of this article pursuant to Section 1.E.5. above.



      6.   Special Sales Event Sign.



         a.   General.  Pursuant to the supplemental zoning
regulations (Chapter 3, Article V, Section 6), it shall be unlawful for any
establishment to display retail merchandise outside a principal building
without first having secured a permit for a special temporary sales event. 
The purpose and intent of these Regulations is to establish minimum
requirements for signage related to a special temporary sales event.



         b.   Sign Permit Required.  See Chapter 2, Article II,
Section 5.E. for additional regulations regarding the process for obtaining a
sign permit from the Planning and Zoning Division.



         c.   Size.  The size of a sign or banner associated
with a special temporary sales event shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.



         d.   Location.  The sign or banner shall not be located
within 1) the building setback; 2) landscape strip abutting rights-of-way; 3)
perimeter landscape buffer; or 4) located off-premises within a
right-of-way.  In all instances, the location of the sign or banner shall
comply with the cross visibility and safe-sight standards of Section 4.A.3.
above.



         e.   Duration.  The special temporary sales event sign
shall be valid for the duration of the special temporary sales event.



         f.   Miscellaneous.



            (1)   All signs and banners shall be removed
within twelve (12) hours upon the posting of a tropical storm or hurricane
watch. 



            (2)   Any property owner desiring to obtain a sign
permit in order to sell Christmas trees, pumpkins, or fireworks as an
accessory use would need to obtain a seasonal sales event permit, which is
regulated separately in accordance with Section 4.B.7. below.



      7.   Seasonal Sales Event Sign.



         a.   General.  Pursuant to the supplemental zoning
regulations (Chapter 3, Article V, Section 7), it shall be unlawful for any
establishment or organization to display Christmas trees, pumpkins, or
fireworks outside a principal building without first having secured a permit
for a seasonal sales event.  The purpose and intent of these Regulations is
to establish minimum requirements for signage related to a seasonal sales
event.



         b.   Sign Permit Required.  See Chapter 2, Article II,
Section 5.A. for additional regulations regarding the process for obtaining a
sign permit from the Planning and Zoning Division.



         c.   Size.  The size of a sign or banner associated
with a seasonal sales event shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.



         d.   Location.  The sign or banner shall not be located
within 1) the building setback; 2) landscape strip abutting rights-of-way; 3)
perimeter landscape buffer; or 4) located off-premises within a
right-of-way.  In all instances, the location of the sign or banner shall
comply with the cross visibility and safe-sight standards of Section 4.A.3.
above.



         e.   Duration.  The seasonal sale event sign shall be
valid for the duration of the seasonal sales event sign.



         f.   Miscellaneous.  All signs and banners shall be
removed within twelve (12) hours upon the posting of a tropical storm or
hurricane watch.



      8.   Vehicle Display Sign.  Motor vehicles displaying
business names, addresses, telephone numbers, email address, website
information, contractor certification numbers, logos or similar information,
or which contain signage of any kind on vehicle surfaces shall not be parked
or stored in the row of parking stalls or in any area within twenty-five (25)
feet of the front property line for longer than four (4) hours within a
twenty-four (24)-hour period.  However, this type of advertising on vehicles
shall not apply under the following circumstances:



         a.   Vehicles, in the process of making a temporary
delivery to a residence, establishment, or organization (i.e. U.S. Postal
Service, UPS, Federal Express, DHL, Airborne, etc.);



         b.   Vehicles used in conjunction with a special
promotion and possessing a valid permit;



         c.   Vehicles containing advertising signs which are
less than eight (8) square feet in area and letters that are less than eight
(8) inches in height;



         d.   Vehicles used for public transportation; and



         e.   Vehicles parked on private properties located in
industrial zoning districts, unless parked or stored in off-street parking
areas that abut an arterial or collector roadway.



      9.   Special Event Sign.  Any sign or banner proposed in
conjunction with a Special Event is regulated separately and shall comply
with City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 13, Article I, Section 13-20.



      10.   Feather Banners.



         a.   Terms and definitions.



            A feather banner is a style of temporary lightweight
sign comprised of partial metal or plastic frame, pole, and/or base to which
a vinyl, nylon, canvas or polyester fabric sign face is attached. Depending
on the shape and type of movement, such signs may also be called a "flutter,"
"tear drop," "flying," "wing," "bow," "blade," "rectangular" banner, etc.



            Height/size standards - A maximum height of ten (10)
feet six (6) inches overall measurement including support portion of sign,
and a maximum width of thirty (30) inches.



         b.   Materials. The sign face shall be nylon, polyester
vinyl or canvas and neither the sign face nor the sign frame shall contain
glitter, florescent, metallic, or reflective materials.



         c.   Number of banners.



            (1)   Along business or shopping center frontage:
one (1) feather banner per business (as evidenced by business tax receipt)
per three hundred (300) feet (or less) of linear street frontage. A minimum
of one (1) banner shall be allowed along the frontage if linear frontage is
less than three hundred (300) feet. Where more than one frontage exists, the
linear dimension shall be cumulative, and the permitted banner may be placed
along either frontage.



            (2)   Banners placed on or within five (5) feet
from the building facade or supporting components: one (1) feather banner per
business (as evidenced by business tax receipt).



            (3)   Only one (1) banner (i.e., feather or fixed
banner as provided for in Section 3.B.4.) shall be permitted and displayed
per business at any one (1) time.



         d.   Location. Feather banners shall not be placed
within the sight triangle of driveways or intersections, shall not be
attached to landscaping materials, and must be placed behind the shrub row of
the landscape buffer. The minimum setback shall be ten (10) feet from the
property line, except that the setback may be less than ten (10) feet if
still placed, as described herein, within an existing landscape buffer with a
continuous hedge row. Banners shall not be placed on public sidewalks, and
they shall not be placed in, or otherwise block parking spaces or drive
aisles. Banner placement may not interfere with pedestrian movement.



         e.   Duration.  The maximum display period shall be
ninety (90) days per twelve (l2)-month period, except that feather banner
permits may be issued for one (1) additional display period contingent upon
there being available space based on the maximum number of banners allowed
per property as described above.  In order to ensure priority treatment of
first-time applicants, a permit for an additional ninety (90)-day display
period may be requested after seven (7) working days following permit
expiration, if there remains capacity on the property for the additional
banner.  If desired by a first-time applicant for a feather banner,
applications shall be held by the city in queue for the next available
display period based on the expiration dates of existing permits.  Complete,
first-time applications will be processed and held on a first-come,
first-served basis.  The duration period shall run for consecutive days.



         f.   Application.  An application shall be required for
each banner, shall include a scaled plan or drawing that identifies the
location of and setback for the proposed banner, and indicates the length of
the property frontage if banner is to be placed greater than five (5) feet
from the building where the subject business is located.  The application
shall be signed by the business owner and the property owner.



         g.   Fee requirements.  Permit applications shall be
processed following the same process used for processing other zoning
permits, with a fee based on reviewer wage and review time.  The minimum fee
for each application shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).



         h.   Deposit.  One hundred dollars ($100.00),
refundable on or before the expiration of the ninety (90) day permit,
provided the applicant surrenders the original permit.



         i.   Penalties.  Fifty dollars ($50.00) per day or
portion of a day for each banner displayed without a permit or after the
expiration of a permit.



      Note:   In the event any word, sentence, clause, or other
portion of this section is determined invalid, then any sign otherwise
allowed by this section shall comply with the requirements set forth in this
code as if this section was never enacted.



   C.   Permanent Signs.  It shall be unlawful to affix, erect,
locate, or maintain any permanent sign off-premises unless otherwise
authorized under this subsection.  Permanent signs shall be allowed in
accordance with the following provisions:



      1.   Wall Sign (Affixed to Building).



         a.   General.  One (1) or more wall signs, which
typically advertises the name of the establishment, organization, product, or
service, are allowed on the façade of a building, provided such sign(s) and
supports do not extend in excess of eighteen (18) inches off of the face of
the building wall, beyond the building corner, or at all above the parapet. 
An exception may be made for architectural elements that provide a roofline
break such as an entry feature with a minimum offset forward of the typical
building wall of three (3) feet.



         b.   Maximum Sign Area (Table 4-14).  The maximum
allowable wall sign area is a factor of the zoning district within which a
building is located and the length of such building. Specifically, it shall
be based on the ratio of wall and to each linear foot of building frontage or
tenant space frontage.



 


Zoning District

 

Ratio of Maximum Allowable Signage Area




Sign Area
(square feet)

 

Building Frontage



Residential
   Single-Family districts 1
   R-2 1
   PUD 1
   R-3 2
   IPUD 2
CBD
Industrial5
 

1 s.f. 5

 

1-foot



Commercial, excluding CBD
Mixed Use
Miscellaneous
 

1.5 s.f.

 

1-foot 3, 4




 



1   Wall signs are allowed for nonresidential developments within the
following: 1) single-family residential districts; 2) the R-2 and PUD
districts; and 3) all developments containing multiple-family residential
uses (in excess of ten (10) dwelling units). The cumulative signage area
shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. The top of the sign(s) shall
not exceed the height of ten (10) feet.



2   Wall signs are allowed within all developments containing multi-family
residential or non-residential uses.



3   Pursuant to Section 5.C.2. below, the maximum wall sign area may be
increased by ten percent (10%) to allow for additional signage on rear
façades of multiple-tenant buildings within non-residential developments.



4   For a multiple-tenant building designed as an indoor shopping mall,
the maximum allowable wall sign area may be increased, provided the total
signage area (per wall of a major department store or center store containing
an exterior customer entrance) does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area
for each façade.



5   Non-industrial businesses allowed in an industrial zoning district on
an arterial right-of-way under the zoning regulations would be allowed a
multiplier of one and one-half (1.5) square foot of wall signage per one (1)
foot of building frontage.



         c.   Signs on Multiple-Story Buildings.  Wall signs are
allowed on upper floors of multiple-story buildings, but only in the
following instances:  1) the building is designed for and contains multiple
tenants or occupants, and the entrance doors for such tenants or occupants
(on upper floors) are designed external to the building; or 2) the sign,
which indicates the name of the building or its major tenant, is placed near
the top of the building regardless of any external doors on upper floors. 
In both instances however, the signage is considered "wall sign (affixed to
building)," and shall count toward the aggregate wall signage area.  Wall
signs located on upper floors, excluding the building or major tenant name as
identified above, shall be located in front of each tenant space or bay.



         d.   Community Design Standards.  See Section 5.C.2.
below for additional community design standards regarding wall signs.



      2.   Monument Sign.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this
subsection is to ensure order, safety, and unobstructed views for both
pedestrians and motorists.  The intent is to specifically prevent project
signage from lowering the level of safety and aesthetic quality of the
streetscape environment through appropriate and uniform restrictions on size
and placement.



         b.   Computation of Height.  The methodology for
measuring the height of a monument sign shall be in accordance with the
definitions (see "Signs, Height" in Chapter 1, Article II).  However, for
the purpose of this subsection, the height shall exclude that portion of the
sign devoted to displaying the property address.



         c.   Maximum Height, Size and Number (Table 4-15).  The
maximum allowable sign height and area are a factor of zoning district,
property size, and number of travel lanes on the abutting roadway.  Use
Table 4-14 below, including the corresponding footnotes to determine the
regulations applicable to a given project.  Note that circumstances such as
compatibility with surrounding properties and project scale may warrant a
reduction in total sign height and size.



 

Zoning District
 
Property Size (in Acres)
 
Number of Travel Lanes in Abutting Roadway
 
Height1– Maximum (in feet) Primary and Secondary2,3 Signs
 
Area – Maximum

(in square feet)


Single- Tenant Development
 
Multiple- Tenant Development
 
Single- Tenant Development
 
Multiple- Tenant Development




Residential4
 
Any
 
2
 
5
 
5
 
16
 
N/A


4 or 6
 
5
 
5
 
32
 
N/A


Office, Commercial, Industrial, SMU, Other
 
<1
 
2
 
5
 
5
 
16
 
16


4 or 6
 
5
 
5
 
326
 
32


<2
 
2
 
5
 
5
 
32
 
32


4 or 6
 
5
 
5
 
32
 
40


2 to 8
 
2
 
5
 
5
 
32
 
40


4
 
6
 
6
 
40
 
407


6
 
8
 
8
 
40
 
407


>85
 
2
 
5
 
5
 
40
 
40


4
 
6
 
10
 
40
 
100


6
 
8
 
12
 
64
 
120


Mixed Use (Urban Districts)
 
<2
 
2
 
5
 
5
 
32
 
40


4
 
5
 
5
 
32
 
40


6
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A


2 to 8
 
2
 
5
 
5
 
32
 
40


4
 
6
 
6
 
40
 
64


6
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A


>8
 
2
 
5
 
5
 
32
 
40


4
 
6
 
6
 
40
 
64


6
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A




 



1   Circumstances, such as compatibility with surrounding properties,
existing or planned character for the area, speed limits, and project scale
may justify further reductions in the maximum sign heights.



2   Secondary signs shall be located along property line(s) abutting
rights-of-way with secondary access.



3   For maximum height of secondary sign, see primary sign height for
travel lanes of road on which the sign will front.



4   A primary or secondary monument sign is allowed for all
non-residential uses or within multi-family residential developments
containing at least ten (10) dwelling units.  The sign shall not be
internally-illuminated.



5   For indoor shopping malls, as an alternative, a four (4)-sided sign,
not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face, is allowed at each
point of vehicular ingress (from a public right-of-way) into the development.



6   The maximum area of a monument sign shall not exceed sixteen (16)
square feet where located on outparcels which are smaller than one (1) acre.



7   Sign area may be increased by ten (10) square feet per each additional
acre of lot size greater than two (2) acres (round up at 0.5).



         d.   Setbacks.  All monument signs shall be setback at
least ten (10) feet from all property lines, measured from the property line
to the closest surface of the sign.



         e.   Cross Visibility and Safe-Sight.  All monument
signs shall comply with the cross visibility and safe-sight standards and
regulations of Section 4.A.3. above.



         f.   Property Address.  The property address shall be
required on each monument sign in accordance with Section 4.A.9. above.



         g.   Project Name.  Each sign shall include the name of
the project or development.  The name shall be located at the top of the
sign just below the site address.  The balance of the sign and/or copy must
meet the objectives of the purpose and intent of Section 1 above (e.g.
identification, aesthetics, etc.) and the community design standards of
Section 5 below (e.g. compatibility, sign style, lettering, etc.).



         h.   Changeable Copy Signs.  A monument sign may
contain changeable copy provided the entire sign and its support structure
are designed in accordance with the following standards:



            (1)   Size.  The changeable copy component of the
sign shall not comprise more than twenty percent (20%) of the sign face,
unless a larger percentage is otherwise required by federal or state law.



            (2)   Timing.  The message from any changeable
copy shall not change more than once in any twenty-four (24)-hour period,
unless otherwise required by federal or state law.



            (3)   Design.  When a monument sign is proposed
to include changeable copy, the existing or proposed sign shall be
constructed of masonry, concrete-block-steel (CBS), or other comparable
material so that its appearance meets the aesthetic requirements of this
article.  In addition, the changeable copy portion shall not interfere or
conflict with the visibility of the property address, which is a required
component of all monument signs pursuant to Section 4.A.9. above.  The
changeable copy portion of the sign shall be located at the bottom of the
sign face.



            (4)   Multi-Tenant Developments.  Changeable copy
is allowed on signs within multi-tenant developments provided that such copy
is part of an approved sign program.



            (5)   Lettering.  The type of lettering for all
changeable copy signs shall be one (1) of the following:  1) plastic channel
lettering; 2) plastic card type lettering; or 3) raised wood lettering.  The
manufacturing of such lettering shall be of typeset (machine printed)
quality.  No type of freehand lettering, chalk, or chalkboard surfaces are
allowed, and electronic messaging centers are prohibited pursuant to Section
3.D. above.



      The color of the lettering (and/or characters) within the
changeable copy portion of the sign shall be similar and consistent with the
lettering style of the main portion of the sign face. 



      The maximum height of all letters, digits, and/or characters
associated with a changeable copy sign shall be ten (10) inches, unless
otherwise required by federal or state law.



         i.   Miscellaneous.  Signs which are affixed to a
perimeter wall or fence shall be regulated as follows:



            (1)   Mixed-Use Development Identification Sign. 
Signs, which are typically affixed to security or perimeter walls of a mixed
use development, are considered mixed use development identification signs
and are regulated in accordance with Section 4.C.11. below.



            (2)   Neighborhood Identification Sign.  Signs,
which are typically affixed to security or perimeter walls of a condominium
project, residential development, or registered residential neighborhood, are
considered neighborhood identification signs and are regulated in accordance
with Section 4.C.12. below.



         j.   Community Design Standards.  See Section 5.C.3.
below for additional community design standards regarding monument signs.



      3.   Directory Sign.  One (1) directory sign is allowed for
each street frontage of a non-residential development containing multiple
tenants.  The sign shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in area or be
greater than six (6) feet in height, and must comply with the setbacks
required for the principal building.  Staff may support additional directory
signs if justified accordingly.  See Section 5.C.4. below for additional
community design standards regarding directory signs.



      4.   Directional Sign.  A maximum of four (4) directional
signs, erected at points of ingress/egress are allowed within all planned and
multi-family residential developments, and non-residential developments. 
Each sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area or be greater than
five (5) feet in height.  Staff may support additional directional signs if
justified accordingly.  A directional sign may be allowed off-premises,
provided that the following conditions are met:



         a.   Legal Cross-Access.  The establishment,
organization, or residential development does not have frontage on an
arterial or collector roadway but contains legal cross-access through private
property (or from a private right-of-way) to an arterial or collector roadway;



         b.   Easements and Agreements.  Recorded sign easements
and agreements between property owners and/or land holders for any proposed
off-premise directional sign are submitted for city review and approval.



      5.   Menu Board Sign.  One (1) menu board sign is allowed in
conjunction with a drive-through facility.  Additional menu board signs may
be allowed should circumstances warrant more than one (1) structure.  The
sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area or be greater than
six (6) feet in height.  The sign, which indicates the products or services
rendered and their corresponding prices, may be designed as a single-faced
freestanding structure or affixed to a building façade.  If placed on the
façade of a building and oriented toward an abutting right-of-way, then it
is considered a wall sign and shall count toward the aggregate wall signage
area in accordance with Section 4.C.1. above.  In all instances, all menu
board signs shall be located as far from residential properties as possible
and any audio devices oriented away from such properties to the maximum
extent possible in order to reduce potential impacts.



      6.   Awning Valance Sign.  One (1) sign, located on the
valance of an awning hung over each public entrance is allowed within
multi-family residential (ten (10) units or more) and non-residential
developments, provided the signage area does not exceed eighty percent (80%)
of the valance area.  An awning valance sign shall count toward the
aggregate wall signage area.  The sign shall not be
internally-illuminated.  See Section 5.C.5. below for additional community
design standards regarding awning valance signs.



   See Chapter 4, Article III, Section 3.E. for additional design
standards regarding awnings and canopies.



      7.   Covered Walkway/Arcade Sign.  One (1) sign, not to
exceed three (3) square feet in area, is allowed for non-residential uses
within a multiple-tenant building that has a covered walkway or arcade on the
first or upper floors.  The sign shall be located in front of each public
entrance and oriented perpendicular to the building façade.  In all
instances, the sign shall be hung with rigid mounting and all brackets and
materials used must be decorative and compatible with the principal
structure.  The minimum overhead clearance over a walkway shall be nine (9)
feet in height.



      8.   Blade Sign.  One (1) blade sign, not to exceed four (4)
square feet in area, is allowed for non- residential uses within a
multiple-tenant building in accordance with an approved sign program.  The
sign shall be located on the wall of a building in front of each ground floor
tenant space in close proximity to the public entrance and oriented
perpendicular to the building façade.  Additional signs are allowed if the
tenant has multiple frontages and each frontage contains a public entrance. 
It shall be hung with rigid mounting and all brackets and materials used must
be decorative and compatible with the principal structure.  The minimum
overhead clearance over a walkway shall be nine (9) feet in height.  The
projection of the blade sign shall not cause the sign to be taller than the
existing building height or sixteen (16) feet, whichever is less.  The sign
and its support structure shall not extend more than three (3) feet from the
wall.  A blade sign may protrude into any required yard but it shall not
extend outside the property line unless it protrudes into an abutting
right-of-way and not onto private property.  In this instance, the owner
shall obtain all necessary permits where the blade sign protrudes beyond the
property boundary and into a right-of-way.  A blade sign shall not be
internally-illuminated.



      9.   Window Sign.  This subsection is intended to regulate
the allowable location, size, and appearance of permanent window signs.



         a.   Applicability.  Window signs are allowed in any
non-residential zoning district.  For clarification, this includes any
illuminated sign located inside a building within five (5) feet of a window
or any sign attached to an interior display located within five (5) feet of a
window, and each shall count toward the aggregate window signage area allowed
on the nearest windowpane, which is regulated in accordance with Section 5.C.
below.



         b.   Exemptions.  Window signs are exempt from the
permitting requirements of this article if designed in stenciled or vinyl
lettering and affixed to a window.  However, the maximum coverage allowed
for all window signs shall comply with the community design standards of
Section 5.C. below.



         c.   Restrictions.  Window signs shall not be allowed
for any residential use.  In addition, window signs made of paper,
cardboard, plywood, or the like shall be prohibited when affixed to the glass
or displayed inside of the glass but not necessarily attached thereto, and
which are visible from the outside.  However, this does not prohibit the use
of neon tubing, bulbs, miniature lighting, CRT, LED, LCD, and similar
technologies, or the use of die-cut vinyl or stencil lettering applied
directly to the glass.



         d.   Community Design Standards.  See Section 5.C.6.
below for additional community design standards regarding window signs.



         e.   Miscellaneous.  See Chapter 4, Article VII,
Section 5.E. for additional prohibitions regarding the use of neon, bare
bulbs, and miniature lights that are intended to encircle or outline windows,
doors, and other building elements.



      10.   Rear Door Business Identification Plaque.  One (1)
business identification plaque is allowed on the rear door(s) of each
establishment or organization within a building containing a non-residential
use.  The sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area or be
internally-illuminated.



      11.   Mixed Use Development Identification Sign.  A
development located within a mixed use zoning district may erect a
single-faced sign on each side of any entrance.  One (1) double-faced sign
may be erected in lieu of two (2) single-faced signs.  However, where
feasible, the sign shall be incorporated into project elements such as
building façades, decorative or perimeter walls, or accent features such as
fountain structures or the like.



         a.   Size.  The maximum height and size of such sign(s)
shall be regulated in accordance with Section 4.C.2. and Table 4-14 above. 
Circumstances such as project scale, traffic speed, ideal streetscape design
and vision for the respective corridor, and compatibility with surrounding
properties, may justify reductions in the maximum size allowed.



         b.   Setbacks.  The sign shall be setback a minimum of
ten (10) feet, unless combined with other project elements as described above
which may be subject to a lesser setback dimension.



   The sign and support structure may be allowed within a public or
private right-of-way if adequate space does not exist on private property as
determined by the city, and provided that it does not interfere with the
maintenance of existing utilities.  A sign proposed within a city maintained
public right-of-way shall require approval from the Engineering Division and
comply with the following:



            (1)   No person shall begin to construct,
reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade in or upon any area of public
rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a permit as provided for in
Chapter 2, Article III, Section 4.



            (2)   All traffic regulatory and warning signs
shall comply with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).



            (3)   Where applicable, permits must be obtained
from other agencies, including the State of Florida and/or Palm Beach County.



         c.   Cross Visibility and Safe-Sight.  All signs shall
comply with the cross visibility and safe-sight standards and regulations of
Section 4.A.3. above and the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction
Standards (EDHCS).



         d.   Illumination.  The sign shall not be
internally-illuminated.



      12.   Neighborhood Identification Sign.  A condominium
project, residential development, or registered residential neighborhood
association may erect a single-faced sign on each side of any entrance.  One
(1) double-faced sign may be erected in lieu of two (2) single-faced signs. 
Where feasible however, the sign shall be incorporated into project elements
such as building façades, decorative or perimeter walls, or accent features
such as fountain structures or the like.



         a.   Size.  The maximum height and size of such sign(s)
shall be regulated in accordance with Section 4.C.2. and Table 4-14 above. 
Circumstances, such as compatibility with surrounding properties, speed
limits, and project scale may justify reductions in the maximum size of each
sign.



         b.   Setbacks.  The sign shall be setback a minimum of
ten (10) feet, unless combined with other project elements as described above
which may be subject to a lesser setback dimension.



   The sign and support structure may be allowed within a public or
private right-of-way if adequate space does not exist on private property as
determined by the city, and provided that it does not interfere with the
maintenance of existing utilities.  A sign proposed within a city maintained
public right-of-way shall require approval from the Department of Public
Works and comply with the following:



            (1)   No person shall begin to construct,
reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade in or upon any area of public
rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a permit as provided for in
Chapter 2, Article III, Section 4.



            (2)   All traffic regulatory and warning signs
shall comply with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).



            (3)   Where applicable, permits must be obtained
from other agencies, including the State of Florida and/or Palm Beach County.



         c.   Cross Visibility and Safe-Sight.  All signs shall
comply with the cross visibility and safe-sight standards and regulations of
Section 4.A.3. above and the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction
Standards (EDHCS).



         d.   Illumination.  The sign shall not be
internally-illuminated.



      13.   Nameplate or Identification Plaque.  One (1) nameplate
or identification plaque with non- commercial copy is allowed in all zoning
districts, provided that it does not exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
This sign typically indicates the name of occupants residing on the premises
but also may be used to identify buildings and/or structures of cultural or
historical significance, and is not intended to be an alternate method of
advertising for a non-residential establishment or organization.  It may
also include signage associated with a live/work unit in conjunction with an
applicable sign program.  The nameplate or identification plaque shall not
be internally-illuminated.



   Note:  In the event any word, sentence, clause, or other portion of
this section is determined invalid, then any sign otherwise allowed by this
section shall comply with the requirements set forth in this code as if this
section was never enacted.



   D.   Special Signs.  The following special signs shall be allowed
in accordance with the following provisions:



      1.   Civic and Not-for-Profit Directional Sign.  For the
purposes of providing a convenience and benefit for the traveling public, a
maximum of two (2) off-premise signs are allowed for a civic and fraternal
organization, church, or recreation facility.  Each sign, which shall not
exceed twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches, may be affixed to a post
or other approved structure at intersections of public rights-of-way, and at
a maximum of one (1) sign per organization or facility at any given
intersection. A maximum of three (3) different civic and not-for-profit
directional signs are allowed per post or supporting structure.



   All signs and posts shall be reviewed by the City Engineer where
proposed within city maintained public rights-of-way.  In all instances, the
applicant shall bear the cost to construct the sign in accordance with city
specifications.  The city will provide the post and install the sign at a
fee set by the city, which shall be paid for by the applicant.  The city
shall maintain the sign for safety purposes only and may remove it at no
expense to the applicant should it become illegible or unsafe.  The signs
shall not be illuminated.



      2.   Transit Shelter Sign.  Signs on city transit stop
shelters may be allowed when authorized by written agreement approved by
action of the City Commission pursuant to the provisions of Florida
Statutes.  When so authorized by the City Commission, the following
standards shall apply:



         a.   Location.  Signs placed on city transit stop
shelters shall only be allowed at city transit stops designated or approved
by the city.  A transit shelter, proposed on private property or within the
right-of-way, shall be located and designed in accordance with Chapter 4,
Article III, Section 10.B.



         b.   Number.  Not more than one (1) bus shelter
displaying signage or intended for the display of signage shall be allowed at
a city transit stop.



         c.   Elevation.  Display space on bus shelters shall be
limited in location and size to the side or rear wind screen panels.



         d.   Exemption.  Pursuant to Section 1.E.6. above, a
bus shelter sign shall be exempt from the permitting requirements of this
article, provided the Building Official determines that compliance with the
Florida Building Code is not required.



      3.   Newsracks.  Newsracks shall have no signage or
advertising except for that which is allowed in accordance with City Code of
Ordinances Part II, Chapter 15, Article VI.



      4.   Murals.



         a.   Purpose.  Murals, as defined in Chapter 1, Article
II, are intended to improve the value and aesthetic appearance of the city,
contribute to community identity and redevelopment, foster cultural identity
and preserve history, and may be used to enhance blank walls that are visible
to the public, all the while respecting community standards relative to
decency and obscenity. 



         b.   Standards.  Murals shall be applied in accordance
with the following design criteria:



            (1)   Murals shall be applied utilizing weather
resistant paint or materials;



            (2)   Murals shall not contain any obscene,
indecent, or immoral content;



            (3)   Murals shall not be designed as to
constitute or create a traffic hazard; and



            (4)   Murals shall only be allowed on building
façades.



         c.   Review Process.  Any new mural or any modification
to an existing mural shall require site plan review (Chapter 2, Article II,
Section 2.F.).  In addition, the Arts Commission shall review each new mural
or modification to an existing mural to ensure the enhancement of the city's
aesthetic, historic, cultural, and economic value, and the preservation and
protection of works of art.



   Note:  In the event any word, sentence, clause, or other portion of
this section is determined invalid, then any sign otherwise allowed by this
section shall comply with the requirements set forth in this code as if this
section was never enacted.



      5.   Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Station Sign.



         a.   Each public EV charging station shall have at least
one (1) posted sign displaying operational information such as voltage and
amperage levels, hours of use, fees, safety information and penalties related
to a misuse, and it must be approved by the city.



         b.   Directional signs for EV charging stations may be
allowed, provided that each complies with Section 4.C.4 above, except that
the size and style shall not exceed that which is allowed in accordance with
the Federal Highway Administration's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (MUTCD) 2009 edition or latest supplement thereof. In addition, a
maximum of two (2) off-premises directional signs located within public
rights-of-way may be allowed. All signs associated with EV charging stations,
if proposed within rights-of-way, shall comply with the permitting and
processing requirements of the city and any other entity having jurisdiction
over the subject right-of-way.







 



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-024, passed 10-4-11; Am. Ord.
11-030, passed 12-6-11; Am. Ord. 12-002, passed 3-6-12; Am. Ord. 12-013,
passed 7-17-12; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord. 13-012, passed
6-4-13; Am. Ord. 15-005, passed 3-2-15; Am. Ord. 15-015, passed 6-16-15; Am.
Ord. 16-003, passed 2-2-16)



Sec. 5.   Community Design.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The aesthetic quality of a building
or an entire neighborhood is materially a factor of the level of visual
harmony between signs, support structures, project architecture, and adjacent
surroundings.  In addition to the mechanical limitations on signs imposed by
this section, there are certain aesthetic considerations that must be met,
and therefore signs are subject to review by the Planning and Development
Board and City Commission, when required.



      2.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee shall have the authority to coordinate, interpret, and administer
this section.



      3.   Applicability.  The provisions of this section shall
apply to all new signs, excluding single-family and duplex dwelling units
within single-family or two-family residential zoning districts.



      4.   Relief from Standards.  Any deviation from these
community design standards shall require approval of a community design plan
appeal (CDPA) application, which is subject to review and approval by the
City Commission.  A request for a CDPA shall be reviewed in accordance with
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.B.



   B.   Community Design Standards for All Signs.



      1.   Compatibility.  Signs shall be designed and treated as
part of the architecture of buildings and structures.  Freestanding signs
and other site signs shall be compatible with and contain the same
architectural elements and repeating features that are used on buildings
throughout the development.  All signage, including its color and scale,
shall be compatible with the architecture of the building or structure on
which it is affixed or attached.  The overall effect of the lettering,
configuration, or color of a sign shall not be too bright, garish, gaudy,
showy, glaring, and/or cheaply brilliant or involving excessive
ornamentation.  Garish signs are not in harmony with and are not compatible
with the building or adjacent surroundings.



      2.   Color.  Sign colors and supporting structures and/or
materials shall be complementary to the colors of the development. 
Excessive use of large areas of several colors can create competition for the
eye and significantly reduce readability.  All signs, including those
associated with nationally registered tenants and those within a sign
program, shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) different colors for the
entire development, inclusive of black and white.  In addition, the
background color of a wall sign shall be considered a sign color and count
towards the aggregate number of colors allowed on a sign.  This restriction
also includes the background color of any "cabinet-style" sign.  However, in
all instances, colors of registered logos and icons shall be excluded from
this limitation.



      3.   Letter Size.  Sign lettering shall be easy to read and
in scale with the building or tenant space on which it is located.  The sign
copy shall be designed and based, in part, on the average distance and
average travel speed of the viewer.  Sign messages oriented towards
pedestrians may be smaller than those oriented towards automobile drivers. 
A sign message shall be easily recognized and designed in an uncrowded,
clear, unambiguous, and concise manner, so that a viewer can perceive what
appears on the sign.  In order to maximize readability and legibility, it is
discouraged to advertise on a wall or freestanding sign, in an excessive
manner, the phone or fax number, email address, or a particular project or
service, in conjunction with the name of the establishment or organization.



      4.   Letter Style.  The number of different lettering styles
on tenant signage on multiple tenant buildings and their outbuildings and
outparcels shall be limited to one (1) in addition to the lettering styles of
the nationally registered copy of all tenants located within the building and
its outbuildings and outparcels.



   C.   Community Design Standards for Specific Types of Signs.



      1.   Graphics on Fences and Barriers around Construction
Sites.  At construction sites, signs and graphics are allowed on temporary
security and safety fencing or other types of barriers that are required and
approved by the Building Official.  The temporary fencing may contain
screening material enhanced with graphics, images, pictorals, wraps,
windscreens, digital prints, photographs, or a combination thereof, provided
that such enhancements are not intended to be an alternate method of
advertising other than identifying the name of the development, and does not
create a diversion or distraction to passing motorists (also see Chapter 3,
Article V, Section 2.F.).  See Section 5.D. below for additional community
design standards regarding the maximum allowable size of logos and icon
proposed on signs on fences and barriers around construction sites.



      2.   Wall Sign (Affixed to Building).



         a.   Scale.  Signage on buildings shall be anticipated
during the site plan approval process in order to incorporate them properly
into project architecture.  Signs shall be accommodated on the façade to
prevent them from conflicting and/or overcrowding with a building's
architectural features and enhancements. 



         b.   Type of Sign.  A single sign style (such as
cabinet, channel, reverse channel) shall be used for wall signage on all
buildings on a site.  Channel and reverse channel letter style are preferred
in lieu of cabinet signs.



         c.   Scale.  A wall sign (and corresponding sign band)
shall be in scale with the building, as well as with signs on the same
building and buildings and structures on adjacent properties.  Signs
consisting of multiple words may be stacked (in rows) to maintain the
appearance as a single sign (and sign band), but the sign band of a stacked
sign shall be in scale with the sign band of non-stacked signs, except in
those instances where a building façade has been intentionally designed or
modified to accommodate a larger size sign band for a nationally registered
anchor tenant (within multi-tenant developments).  However, in no case shall
any sign exceed the size limitations as provided for in other sections of
this article.



         d.   Signs on Rear Façades.  The maximum area of wall
signs shall be based on the standards specified in Section 4.C.1. above. 
However, the maximum size may be increased by ten percent (10%) to allow for
additional signage on rear façades of buildings within non-residential and
mixed use developments.  Factors to justify additional signage include but
are not limited to 1) the visibility of rear façades from rights-of-way; 2)
existence of off-street parking and other vehicular use areas; 3) building
orientation and site design; and 4) pedestrian access and connectivity.



         e.   Logos and Icons.  See Section 5.D. below for
additional community design standards regarding the maximum allowable size of
logos and icons when proposed in wall signs.



      3.   Monument Sign.  The base of all freestanding signs shall
have landscape material installed in accordance with Chapter 4, Article II,
Section 6.I.  See Section 5.D. below for additional community design
standards regarding the maximum allowable size of logos and icon proposed on
monument signs.



      4.   Directory Sign.  To ensure the safety of vehicular
traffic on the city's rights-of-way and to further the legibility
requirements of this section, the monument sign for a project shall not be
designed to resemble a directory sign, with the inclusion of numerous tenant
names in small font.  Directory signs are the preferred method of
advertising multiple listings or tenants, and are accommodated by these
Regulations.  Such directory signs are located internal to a site to avoid
confusing a motorist and causing a traffic hazard on the abutting roadway. 
See Section 5.D. below for additional community design standards regarding
the maximum allowable size of logos and icon proposed on directory signs.



      5.   Awning Valance Sign.  The letters and characters within
the sign shall be no greater than six (6) inches in height.  See Section
5.D. below for additional community design standards regarding the maximum
allowable size of logos and icon proposed on awning valance signs.



      6.   Window Sign.  The intent of this subsection is to
encourage the use of window signs to promote a traditional "main street"
appearance in storefronts, particularly for business establishments that are
an integral component of a pedestrian-friendly streetscape environment.  The
design of window signs, including font, point size, and layout should be
tasteful, nostalgic, and comply with the following standards:



         a.   Location.  Signs are allowed on windows that are
located on the ground (first) floor and where such windows are visible from
pedestrian walkways. 



         b.   Size.  On the entrance door or window located
closest to the public entrance/exit door, the size of the sign shall not
exceed twenty percent (20%) of the window area, unless an
internally-illuminated sign is proposed, in which case, it may not exceed
three (3) square feet in area.  For clarification, if two (2) windowpanes
are located on each side of a public entrance, only one (1) shall be allowed
to have the maximum twenty percent (20%) coverage.  For all other windows,
the size of the sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area,
regardless of the location or sign type.



         c.   Logos and Icons.  See Section 5.D. below for
additional community design standards regarding the maximum allowable size of
logos and icons when proposed in window signs.



   D.   Community Design Standards for Logos and Icons.



      1.   General.  Logos, trademarks, insignias, emblems, and
other non-word depictions shall be considered signage.



      2.   Maximum Percentage and Size (Table 4-16).  The maximum
size of each non-word depiction (i.e. logos, graphic icons, illustrations,
etc) of a sign shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the sign erected,
except for as follows:



 

Type of Sign
 
Maximum Percentage of Sign Erected




Wall
 
20%1


Monument
 
100%


Directory
 
20%


Directional
 
100%


Awning Valance
 
100%2


Covered Walkway/Arcade
 
100%


Blade
 
100%


Window
 
20%3


Rear Door ID
 
100%


Any other type of other lawful sign
 
20%




 



1   If greater than twenty percent (20%) of the sign erected, the non-word
depiction shall not exceed nine (9) square feet.  Only one (1) logo or icon
is allowed per building elevation (per tenant).



2   The non-word depiction shall not exceed six (6) inches in height.



3   If greater than twenty percent (20%) of the sign erected, the non-word
depiction shall not exceed three (3) square feet.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 6.   Sign Program.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this section is to
create a comprehensive set of design standards applicable to all signage
within a multi-tenant development.  The intent is to promote uniformity and
compatibility between multiple signs (within a single development) and with
project architecture, in order to maximize the aesthetic character and
overall quality of the development.



      2.   Applicability.  A sign program shall be required for all
sign types within non-residential and mixed use developments containing
multiple tenants.  The sign program shall be processed in accordance with
site plan review.  The sign program shall regulate every type of permanent
sign proposed within the development.



      3.   Permits Required.  No permit shall be issued for an
individual sign within a development containing multiple tenants, unless the
sign conforms to the approved sign program.  If a sign program has not yet
been approved, the proposed sign shall incorporate the desired design
features and characteristics of the majority of signs within the development.



      4.   Relief from Standards.  Any deviation from the
requirements of this section shall require the submittal of a community
design plan appeal (CDPA), which is subject to review and approval by the
City Commission.  A request for a CDPA shall be reviewed in accordance with
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.B.



   B.   Standards.  The sign program shall consist of a set of
standards, including but not limited to the sizes, number, locations,
materials, lettering (size and font), and colors to be used within the
development.  All aspects of the sign program shall be in compliance with
the requirements of this article.



   C.   Review Process.  A new or proposed modification to an existing
sign program shall be reviewed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II,
Section 2.E.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 7.   Nonconforming Signs.



   A.   General.  A sign, which does not conform to the requirements
of this article, shall be deemed nonconforming.  A nonconforming sign cannot
be modified (excluding re-lettering or change of copy) unless the
modification brings the sign into compliance with all sections of this
article, or as outlined in Section 7.B. below.



   B.   Nonconforming Freestanding Signs at Shopping Centers.  The
city's objectives to improve the visual aesthetics, appearance, and economic
vitality of multi-tenant properties along city thoroughfares will permit
property owners to modify nonconforming freestanding signs at shopping
centers beyond the limitations contained within Section 7.A. above, in
conformance with the following requirements:



      1.   The shopping center shall have an adopted sign program in
place, or adopts a sign program as part of this process.



      2.   A request for an amendment to the existing sign program
is approved.



      3.   The amended sign program will allow improvements to the
existing sign structure(s) which do not increase the mass of the sign (i.e.
height, length, width), including removal, repair and/or replacement of sign
cabinets.



      4.   The proposed improvements will bring the sign into
further compliance with the sign regulations, and improve the aesthetics of
the sign.



      5.   As part of the city's economic development initiatives,
additional sign square footage, also known as "copy area," may be added to
the sign in instances when aesthetic improvements and required landscape
improvements are made to, and immediately surrounding the sign, and in
situations where the additional signage does not increase the mass of the
sign (i.e. height, length, width).



      6.   The amount of future repairs of the newly renovated sign
that the property owner will be allowed to complete will be an amount not to
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the new value of the sign, as determined by a
licensed sign contractor and confirmed by staff.



   The regulations contained in Chapter 4, Article IV, Section 7.B. above
are not intended to allow removal and reconstruction of the sign in entirety,
as such a situation would require the sign to come into compliance with
current sign regulation.



   C.   Repair or Removal.  Any nonconforming sign and corresponding
support structure that is damaged or otherwise in need of repair, to such an
extent that the cost of repairing the sign equals fifty percent (50%) or more
of the original cost of the sign, then its classification as a
"nonconforming" sign under this section shall be automatically revoked and
either repairs be made so that such sign shall meet all the requirements of
this article or said sign shall be removed from the property.  Furthermore,
any nonconforming sign and corresponding support structure shall be removed
by the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the building,
structure, or premises, where such sign may be found if a bona fide
establishment, organization, or residential development ceases its operation
or occupancy for more than six (6) consecutive months.



   D.   Annexation of Nonconforming Freestanding Signs.



      1.   Billboard.  Any property located in unincorporated Palm
Beach County, which is considered for annexation into the city, shall have
its billboard sign removed prior to annexation, unless otherwise approved by
the City Commission.  In such instances, the City Commission may grant an
extension to the time period allowed for removing the billboard sign.



      2.   Monument, Pylon, and Pole Sign.  Any freestanding
monument, pylon, pole, or similar type of sign located on a property that is
proposed to be annexed into the city shall comply with all provisions of this
article within six (6) months following the date of such annexation.  Any
signs subject to this requirement shall be documented by the city in any
applicable ordinance, development order, or annexation agreement.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 15-005, passed 3-2-15)



Sec. 8.   Abandoned Signs.



   When an establishment, organization, or service is discontinued, all
signs relating to such establishment, organization, or service shall be
removed within six (6) months from the date of discontinuance.  The sign
structure may remain in place if the sign text is not visible, provided the
sign text is covered with an approved durable material.  Failure to so
remove such a sign shall subject the sign to removal and disposition pursuant
to the provisions of this article.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 9.   Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE V.  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this article is to provide
accessible, attractive, secure, properly lighted, well-maintained, and
screened off-street parking facilities for the citizens and visitors of the
city.  It is the intent of these Regulations to ensure the provision of
off-street parking in proportion to the typical and daily demand created by
various businesses located downtown and in the suburban areas.  It is also
the emphasis of this article to promote efficient use of land and
redevelopment through promotion of cross-parking and interconnectivity,
shared parking and necessary reductions to consider alternative parking
resources and redevelopment initiatives.



   B.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or
designee shall have the authority to interpret and administer this article.



   C.   Applicability.  The provisions of this article shall be
considered the minimum standards and except where specifically stated
otherwise herein, are applicable to all new construction projects or
modifications to existing sites. 



   D.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the regulations and
standards contained herein.



   E.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of this
Code are at conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply, unless
otherwise stated herein.



   F.   Relief from Standards.  Unless described otherwise, any
deviation from the parking standards contained herein shall require approval
of a variance application, which is subject to review and approval by the
City Commission.  A request for a variance shall be reviewed in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.D.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 17-014, passed 7-18-17)



Sec. 2.   Standards.



   A.   General.



      1.   Rules and Methodology.



         a.   Parking space requirements shall be computed on the
basis of the principal use of a structure or lot, and using gross floor area
unless stated otherwise in this article.  Gross floor area, for the purposes
of this subsection, shall include the floor area occupied by the principal
use, plus the floor area occupied by all other enclosed spaces, including but
not limited to storage rooms, maintenance and mechanical rooms, offices,
lounges, restrooms, lobbies, basements, mezzanines, and hallways.



         b.   Where several principal uses exist in one (1)
structure or on one (1) lot, parking space requirements shall be computed
separately for each principal use, unless stated otherwise in this article. 
Where parking spaces are required in this article for each of several
principal uses that commonly occur together, this is done for the purpose of
clarification only, and shall not limit the application of the requirement
contained in this paragraph.



         c.   A use shall be considered a principal use, for the
purposes of this subsection, if it could exist separately from all other uses
in the same structure or on the same lot, and would by itself generate
significant parking demand.



         d.   Where several principal uses exist in one (1)
building or part of a building, and the floor area of each principal use
cannot be clearly delineated, the parking space requirement for the use
requiring the greatest number of parking spaces shall apply.



         e.   Where a use is not listed below, parking space
requirements shall be determined by the City Commission after review and
recommendation by the Director of Planning and Zoning or designee.



         f.   Where the number of required parking spaces as
computed includes a fraction, the number of required parking spaces shall be
the computed number rounded to the next highest whole number.



         g.   Except as provided in Section 3.E. below, there
shall be provided, at the time of the erection of any structure or
establishment of any use, a number of off-street parking spaces in accordance
with the following minimum requirements, and subject to the parking
requirements of this subsection.  Where a structure or use is enlarged or
increased in capacity by any means, including a change in building occupancy
which requires the provision of additional parking spaces, or a change in use
to or which requires additional parking spaces, the minimum number of parking
spaces shall be computed by applying these requirements to the entire
structure or use.



      2.   Minimum Number of Required Off-Street Spaces for
Non-Residential Uses.  No fewer than four (4) parking spaces shall be
provided for any non-residential use.



      3.   Location of Off-Street Parking Areas.



         a.   Residential.  Required parking spaces for all
dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling to be served.



         b.   Non-residential.  Required parking spaces for all
non-residential uses shall be owned by the owner of the building or lot to be
served, and shall be located on the same lot, or not more than three hundred
(300) feet distance, unless the property is located within those areas
defined within the adaptive re-use section of the Code (Chapter 4, Article 5,
Section 4).  In those areas, required parking spaces may be leased within
three hundred (300) feet of the use in which they serve, subject to Board and
City Commission approval, and the property shall be posted with signage
indicating to patrons the location of the leased parking.



      4.   Driveways and other impervious surfaces within front or
side yards of single- and two-family dwelling units.



         a.   Applicability. The requirements of this section are
applicable to new construction projects, modifications that increase
air-conditioned living space and/or number of bedrooms, and requests for a
Certificate of Use.



         b.   Driveways shall be constructed of concrete,
asphalt, or other hard-surface as approved by the City Engineer. Where
possible, design and construction should maximize the albedo and minimize the
heat island effect of such improvements. Also where possible, tandem parking
design is encouraged to minimize impervious surface area and maximize the
environmental design of the project.



         c.   Such surfaces shall not exceed 40% of the minimum
front yard area.



   B.   Table 4-17.  Residential and Lodging Uses.



 




Residential and Lodging Uses

 

Standard Number of Required Parking Spaces




Building area size is based upon gross floor area (in square feet) unless
specifically expressed otherwise.



Single-family, duplex dwelling, or mobile home:
 

x1, 2



Efficiency or one (1)-bedroom apartment:
 

1.51,2, 3



   Within Mixed Use Core district:
 

1.333



Two (2) or more bedroom apartment:
 

21,2, 3



   Within Mixed Use Core district:
 

1.661,2, 3



Dormitories:
 

1 per unit



Hotel & motel suite:
 

1.25 per unit6



   Within Mixed Use Core district:
 

1 per unit



Group home (types 1 and 2):
 

21, 2



Group home (type 3)
 

1 per 3 beds



Bed & breakfast:
 

12, 4



Live/work unit:
 

1 per 2 units5





 



1   A minimum of two (2) spaces are required per unit, or 1 space per
bedroom, whichever is greatest. Except that dwellings with 5 or more bedrooms
are required 1.5 spaces per bedroom. This requirement shall apply to new
construction, reconstruction, expansion of existing homes that increase the
number of bedrooms, or when the home is the subject of an application for a
business tax receipt or certification of use.



2   Residential driveways can be used to satisfy, or partially satisfy the
parking space requirements for single-family detached dwelling units,
duplexes, and multi-family dwelling units containing garages, provided such
driveways are of sufficient size to meet the parking space requirements of
this subsection.  A residential driveway of sufficient size shall be
provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.  If garages
are used towards meeting minimum parking requirements, said garages shall
remain open and available for vehicle parking consistent with the design
represented at time of approval. For all required parking spaces not located
within an enclosed garage, the first parking space shall be the minimum size
required for a handicap space, exclusive of public or private rights-of-way,
and all other required spaces must be dimensioned in accordance with current
city standards.  All driveways shall be setback at least two (2) feet from
interior side and corner side property lines, and maintained and drained so
as to prevent nuisance conditions or a danger to the public and/or adjacent
property owners.  Any expansion to an existing driveway shall require a
zoning permit from the Planning and Zoning Division in accordance with the
procedures specified in Chapter 2, Article II, Section 5.B.; however, any
driveway expansion (or similar impervious surface) that is equal to or
greater than eight hundred (800) square feet shall require the approval of a
land development permit in accordance with Chapter 2, Article III, Section
3.  Any work, such as a driveway, proposed within the swale (right-of-way)
shall require a permit from the Engineering Division in accordance with the
procedures specified in Chapter 2, Article III, Section 4.



3   Guest parking shall be provided at a rate of 0.15 spaces per unit for
residential developments consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units.



4   Required parking shall be calculated on the basis of one (1) space per
each employee, manager, or owner and one (1) parking space for each guest
unit.  Newly created parking may be located only in the rear and side yard.



5   In addition to the required parking for the residential unit, the city
requires that one (1) parking space per two (2) live/work units be provided
to meet business activity needs.  Parking provided to meet this requirement
shall be located on the lot, built into or under the structure, or within
three hundred (300) feet of the unit in which the use is located.  The
distance shall be a straight line measurement from a point on the boundary
line of the property of the subject unit to the closest boundary line of the
property on which the parking is located.  Parking provided to accommodate
said space, including driveways of adequate depth in front of the unit's
garage, shall not serve as meeting required parking for the unit's
residential use.



6   Hotel/motel uses open to the general public, such as a restaurant or
lounge, shall provide parking at a rate of fifty percent (50%) of the
requirement of a standalone operation.



   C.   Table 4-18.  Commercial and Office & Health Care Uses.  Where
a use is located in a shopping center, office building, or office-retail
complex, the parking space requirement for the shopping center, office
building, or office-retail complex in which it is located shall apply; except
that where a theater is located in a shopping center the parking space
requirement for theaters shall apply for the seating or gross floor area of
the theater (see "theater" in Section 3.D. below).



 

Commercial and Office & Health Care Uses
 
Standard Number of Required Parking Spaces




Building area is based upon gross floor area (in square feet) unless
specifically expressed otherwise.


Any non-residential use (minimum):
 
4 or 1 per 200, whichever is greater1


Shopping center:
 
1 per 200


Office-retail complex:
 
1 per 200


Restaurant:
 
1 per 2.5 seats - no less than 1 per 1002


Bar & night club:
 
1 per 2.5 seats - no less than 1 per 100


Gasoline station:
 
1 per 2503


Grocery store:
 
1 per 200


Auto car wash (polishing, waxing, detailing)
 


   Automated (no employees):
 
N/A


   Full-service:
 
4 per tunnel4


Auto car wash, self-service bay:
 
2 per bay


Auto/motorcycle/truck, trailer, rec. vehicle sales/rental:
 
1 per 5005


Automotive, repair major and minor
 
1 per 2507


Automotive, repair (paint and body shops only):
 
1 per 3008


Boat dealer/rental:
 
1 per 5006


Coin-operated laundry or dry cleaner:
 
1 per 250


Copying, printing, or sign design:
 
1 per 300


Funeral home:
 
1 per 200


Pet care:
 
1 per 300


Bank and financial office:
 
1 per 250


Medical or dental office, imaging/testing:
 
1 per 200


Photography studio:
 
1 per 300


Personal care (beauty, hair, and nails):
 
1 per 100


Furniture and home furnishings:
 
1 per 500


Hospital:
 
1 per 2.5 beds


Taxi, limousine, and charter bus:
 
1 per 300


Nursery, garden, and farm supply:
 
1 per 2,000 of outdoor nursery area9


Travel agency:
 
1 per 300


Showroom warehouse (single-product line)
 
1 per 50010


Business/professional office not listed within this subsection:
 
1 per 300


Establishments not listed elsewhere within this subsection:
 
1 per 200




 



1   Non-residential: For the non-residential components of a mixed use
project, parking shall be calculated at a minimum of one (1) parking space
for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.



2   Indoor child play areas shall be excluded for this purpose if such
areas are designed/delineated separate from dining areas and if twenty
percent (20%) or less than the gross floor area of the restaurant.  No
additional parking spaces are required for outdoor seats provided that the
number of outdoor seats is twenty percent (20%) or less than the total number
of indoor seats. Additional parking spaces shall be required for outdoor
seats in excess of this threshold.



3   The required queuing distance at pump islands shall be in accordance
with Chapter 4, Article VI, Section 3.F.  Gasoline station establishments
that contain "automotive, minor repair" shall provide for additional parking
spaces (see "automotive, minor repair"). 



4   Plus one (1) space per seventy-five (75) square feet of detail,
washing, and waxing areas.



5   Plus required parking spaces for outdoor storage or display of
vehicles for sale or for rent.



6   Plus one (1) space per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of paved or
unpaved outdoor area used for the storage or display of boats for sale or for
rent.



7   One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor
area devoted to office, display of merchandise, and waiting area.  In
addition, three (3) parking spaces are required for each service bay.  The
space within a service bay may be counted towards satisfaction of the
required parking.  However, in no case shall less than four (4) outside
parking spaces be provided.



8   In addition, each overhead door and interior spray booth may be
counted towards satisfaction of the required parking, provided there is the
minimum area (the size of a standard parking space) between an overhead door
and an interior spray booth.  However, in no case shall less than four (4)
outside parking spaces be provided.



9   Plus required parking for any retail floor area.



10   One (1) space per 500 square feet for first 10,000 square feet, then
one (1) space per 1,000 square feet thereafter.



   D.   Table 4-19.  Arts, Entertainment, and Recreational Uses.



 

Arts, Entertainment, and Recreational Uses
 
Standard Number of Required Parking Spaces




Building area size is based upon gross floor area (in square feet) unless
specifically expressed otherwise.


Any non-residential use (minimum):
 
4 or 1 per 200, whichever is greater1


Swimming pool:
 
1 per 50 (water area)


Ice and roller skating rink:
 
1 per 100 (rink area)2


Indoor athletic court:
 
1 per 1,800 (court/adjoining paved area)


Outdoor athletic court:
 
1 per 1,500 (court/adjoining paved area)


Golf course:
 
8 per hole


Miniature golf course:
 
1.5 per hole


Bowling alley:
 
1 per 2502


Gym, fitness, and health club:
 
1 per 3002


Martial arts, gymnastics, and dance studio:
 
1 per 200


Arcades, pool halls, and other indoor amusement places:
 
1 per 1002


Marina, including yacht club:
 
1 per boat slip3


Marina without commercial vessels
 
1 per 5 wet or dry storage slips, and 1 per 500 of boat sales showroom


Museum:
 
1 per 300


Shooting range, indoor
 
1 per 250


Sightseeing & scenic tours:
 
1 per 3 seats4


Rentals, recreational (bicycles, canoes, personal watercraft):
 
1 per 200


Residential recreational/amenity area:
 
55


Theaters, auditoriums, meeting rooms, and other places of assembly:
 
1 per 4 seats6


Establishments not listed elsewhere within this subsection:
 
1 per 200




 



1   Non-residential:  For the non-residential components of a mixed use
project, parking shall be calculated at a minimum of one (1) parking space
for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.



2   Parking space requirements may be computed separately for floor area
occupied by other uses (i.e. athletic courts, swimming pools, restaurants,
bar, amusement arcade, pool halls, or other principal uses for which parking
space requirements are listed in these Regulations).



3   Plus required parking spaces for any other principal uses, including
hotels and motels, restaurants, retail floor area, charter boats, sightseeing
boats, drift fishing boats, and outdoor lots occupied by boats for sale or
for rent.



4   One (1) space per three (3) seats on each boat/vehicle but not fewer
than two (2) parking spaces per boat/vehicle.



5   A mix of five (5) parking spaces, plus one (1) additional space per
three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area of office use for leasing
or management purposes located in recreation buildings or separate structures
(handicapped spaces should be pursuant to ADA requirements).  A greater or
lesser number of parking spaces may be imposed or allowed by the Director of
Planning and Zoning or designee, depending on the size, location, and
characteristic such recreational or amenity area.



6   Not less than one (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross
floor area.



   E.   Table 4-20.  Industrial Uses.



 

Industrial Uses
 
Standard Number of Required Parking Spaces




Building area size is based upon gross floor area (in square feet) unless
specifically expressed otherwise.


Any non-residential use (minimum):
 
4 or 1 per 200, whichever is greater1


Beverage and/or food manufacturing:
 
1 per 500 2


Dry cleaning plants:
 
1 per 500


Publishing and commercial printing:
 
1 per 500


Packing & shipping, trucking, and moving:
 
1 per 800


Research & development, scientific/technological:
 
1 per 300


Warehouse, wholesale, distribution
 


   Multi-tenant building, multi-use:
 
1 per 5003


   Single-tenant building, single-use:
 
1 per 8003


Warehouse, dead-storage
 
1 per 1,000


Warehouse, internet sales
 
1 per 7004


Storage, self-service (limited and multi-access):
 
1 per 75 bays5


Manufacturing and industrial uses not listed elsewhere:
 
1 per 500




 



1   Non-residential: For the non-residential components of a mixed use
project, parking shall be calculated at a minimum of one (1) parking space
for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.



2   Plus one (1) space per 300 square feet for that portion of an
accessory tasting room that exceeds 20% of the gross floor area of the
establishment.  However, in no case shall the size of a tasting room equal
or be greater than 50% of the gross floor area.



3   Space allocated for accessory office use shall require parking at the
ratio required for the principal use, provided that the accessory office use
does not exceed twenty percent (20%) of a single-tenant building or twenty
percent (20%) of each bay within multi-tenant buildings.  Additional parking
shall be required at a ratio of one (1) space per three hundred (300) square
feet for any accessory office floor area that exceeds twenty percent (20%) of
the building/bay(s).



4   Plus one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of area devoted
to showroom/auction room.



5   Plus one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of office space
plus two (2) security spaces, if applicable.



   F.   Table 4-21.  Educational Uses.



 

Educational Uses
 
Standard Number of Required Parking Spaces


Building area size is based upon gross floor area (in square feet) unless
specifically expressed otherwise.


Day care:
 
1 per 300


School, primary:
 
1 per 500


School, secondary:
 
1 per 100


College, university, or seminary:
 
1 per 150


Educational uses not listed elsewhere:
 
1 per 200



 



   G.   Table 4-22.  Public and Civic Uses.



 

Public and Civic Uses
 
Standard Number of Required Parking Spaces




Building area size is based upon gross floor area (in square feet) unless
specifically expressed otherwise.


Any non-residential use (minimum):
 
4 or 1 per 200, whichever is greater1


Church:
 
1 per 4 seats2


Organization, civic & fraternal:
 
1 per 100


Governmental and civic uses:
 
3


Wireless communication facility and utility substation:
 
4


Establishments not listed elsewhere within this subsection:
 
1 per 200




 



1   Non-residential: For the non-residential components of a mixed use
project, parking shall be calculated at a minimum of one (1) parking space
for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.



2   Not less than one (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross
floor area for the auditorium, plus required parking spaces for any other
principal uses, including offices, classrooms, meeting rooms, recreation
facilities and dwellings.



3   Government owned and operated uses including city hall campuses
combining multiple offices and services; libraries; community and recreation
centers; park facilities; utility operations; and essential services: the
standards herein for like uses shall be used as a guide for designing public
facilities, as well as proximity to other adjacent public uses and parking,
special geographic needs, employees, and proximity to residents and potential
customers.  Required parking for park facilities shall be determined by the
Director of Recreation and Parks or designee based upon the Recreation and
Parks Department Strategic Plan.



4   A minimum parking requirement shall not be applicable to wireless
communication facilities or utility substations. Access and parking areas,
separate from public or private roadways, must be provided for each project
and may utilize parking or circulation areas provided as part of a principal
use.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord.
13-013, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord. 13-020, passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 13-025, § 3,
passed 10-1-13; Am. Ord. 13-029, § 2, passed 11- 19-13; Am. Ord. 15-004,
passed 3-2-15; Am. Ord. 2017-014, passed 7-18-17; Am. Ord. 17-023, passed
9-19-17)



Sec. 3.   Special Reductions in Required Off-Street Parking.



   The following provisions to reduce the number of required off-street
parking spaces shall be utilized individually and not in conjunction with
each other or with any other provisions to reduce parking within this
article. NOTE: Calculation of needed handicap accessible off-street parking
spaces shall be pursuant to the base parking requirements and not based on
the reduced parking requirements described by this section for which a
project may be eligible (also see Section 5 below regarding Handicap
Accessible Off-Street Parking).



   A.   Minimum Parking (Five Percent (5%) Reduction).  For all
non-residential uses, the total number of required off-street parking spaces
may be reduced by up to five percent (5%) of the standard number of required
parking spaces for the use(s) to which they are assigned.



      1.   Applicability.  This provision to reduce the standard
number of required parking spaces shall only apply when the following
conditions are met:



         a.   The reduction in the number of parking spaces shall
not cause the development to be noncompliant with Section 2.A. above;



         b.   Shall only apply to non-residential uses; and



         c.   Shall not be applied in conjunction with other
provisions to reduce the number of required off-street spaces pursuant to
this article.



      2.   Criteria.  The following criteria shall be used in the
evaluation of a request to reduce the standard number of required parking by
five percent (5%):



         a.   Landscaped areas within off-street parking areas
shall be maximized and enhanced, and existing plant material, particularly
mature shade trees should be preserved to the maximum extent possible, to
help reduce ground-level absorption of solar radiation;



         b.   Impervious surfaces shall be minimized; and



         c.   Pedestrian connections shall be enhanced.



      3.   Methodology.  Where the reduction in the number of
required parking spaces as computed includes a fraction, the reduced number
of parking spaces shall be the computed number rounded down to the lowest
whole number.



   B.   Joint Access/Parking.  In all districts, when two (2) or more
abutting properties combine their on-site parking with common access drives
and interconnectivity for both vehicular and pedestrian use, the total number
of required parking spaces may be reduced by ten percent (10%).  A review
for this type of parking reduction shall be conducted by staff upon the
submittal of a cross-parking agreement between property owners in conjunction
with a request for a new site plan or site plan modification in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F.



   C.   Shared Parking.  Mixed use developments may utilize the
following required parking methodologies based upon shared parking with
different hours of use.  The total requirement for off-street parking spaces
shall be the highest of the requirement of the various uses computed for the
following five (5) separate time periods: weekdays (daytime, evening),
weekends (daytime, evening) and nighttime.  For the purpose of calculating
the requirement of the various uses for the various separate time periods,
the percent of parking required shall be calculated and certified by a
licensed traffic engineer using "Shared Parking, Second Edition", U.L.I.,
2005, or other acceptable methodology.



   Quantitative evidence may also include, where appropriate, field
studies and traffic counts prepared by a traffic consultant experienced in
the preparation of parking studies.  In addition, a minimum buffer of ten
percent (10%) shall be provided to ensure that a sufficient number of parking
spaces are available at the peak hour/peak season of parking demand. 
Calculation of said buffer shall be based on the total number of parking
spaces determined to be required at the peak hour/peak season of parking
demand.  Evidence for joint allocation of required parking spaces shall be
reviewed for accuracy and appropriateness.



   D.   Martin Luther King Boulevard Overlay Zone.  Parking space
requirements shall be calculated in accordance with Section 2 above and shall
be reduced by fifty percent (50%).



   E.   Payment in Lieu of Parking.  The payment in lieu of parking
option is applicable within the central business district (hereinafter CBD)
and those areas described under Section 4, "Exceptions to Providing Required
Off-Street Parking," A. "Adaptive Re-Use," below.



      1.   Applicability.  Within these areas at the time of any
new building construction, off-street parking spaces shall be provided as
required by this article and Chapter 3, Article III, Section 3.E.



      2.   Fee (Method of Assessment).  Up to ten percent (10%) of
the required parking for new construction and twenty-five percent (25%) of
the parking required under the adaptive re-use provisions below in Section 4,
as set forth in this subsection, may be satisfied in whole or part by the
payment of a non-refundable parking improvement fee in lieu of the provisions
of the required off-street parking spaces.  Parking improvement fees shall
be assessed as follows:



   The engineer for the applicant shall submit a signed and sealed cost
estimate for the construction of structured parking spaces.  The estimate
shall be broken down by individual spaces, including design, land, and
construction cost.  If necessary, an outside professional may be retained by
the city to review the applicant's cost estimate.  The applicant shall pay
the retainer fees associated with the review of the cost estimate by the
city's consultant.  Once reviewed and accepted by the City Engineer or
designee, the parking improvement fee in the amount of one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the estimate shall be paid to the city in full, prior to
the issuance of the first building permit for the project.



   Parking improvement fees shall be paid into the City of Boynton Beach
Parking Trust Fund, and are subject to use by the city for parking related
improvements in the geographic areas to which this subsection applies.



      3.   Additional Requirements.  Whenever a payment in lieu of
parking is authorized and accepted, the following additional requirements
shall apply:



         a.   Any off-street parking arrangement satisfied in
this manner shall run with the land, and any subsequent change of use which
requires more parking shall require recalculation of the payment in lieu of
parking fee.



         b.   No refund of payment shall be made when there is a
change to a use requiring less parking.



      4.   Parking Trust Fund.  In addition to land acquisition and
the construction of parking spaces, the funds collected may be used to inform
the public about parking resources or transit programs, as well as to promote
alternative programs intended to alleviate parking congestion, such as the
use of a trolley or shuttle system or the construction of bicycle lane
facilities.



   F.   Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone.  See Chapter 3, Article III,
Section 8.D. for additional off-street parking provisions regarding the Ocean
Avenue Overlay Zone.



   G.   Parking Reductions for Sustainability. To promote or recognize
sustainable design or operation, including increased pervious area, reduced
parking fields, promotion of mass transit and uses of renewable energy
sources, lower parking requirements will be granted to eligible developments
as follows:



 


Use

 

Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces 1






Building area is based on gross floor area unless specifically expressed
otherwise.



Efficiency or one (1)-bedroom apartment
 

1.33



Two (2) or more bedroom apartment
 

1.66



Shopping center
 

1 per 250



Office - Retail complex
 

1 per 250



Grocery store
 

1 per 250



(Reserved)
 

(Reserved)





   1 Only represents the base minimum parking rations. Other requirements
may also apply including parking for guests and recreation area as describe
in other sections of the Land Development Regulations.



      1.   Applicability.  Eligible developments must be able to
provide sustainable design and operation, and, except where noted below, must
be located within one-half (1/2) mile from a regional transportation facility
(e.g. Transit Area), or within five hundred (500) feet of a bus stop with
direct access to a regional transportation facility, measured from property
line to property line.



      2.   Application and Development Requirements.  Requests for
parking reduction must occur at time of site plan review, and must include a
parking demand study prepared by a professional engineer and/or based on
findings from an existing development or other comparable projects
experienced by the applicant that include, in part, projects designed to meet
lower parking requirements as allowed by this section. The study must provide
evidence that the project would not be deficient of parking, that the reduced
ratios would not adversely affect the project in any way, or increase the
demand for parking spaces upon public streets in the immediate vicinity, or
would not increase the demand for parking spaces on private properties in the
immediate vicinity unless in conjunction with an approval for shared parking
pursuant to city regulations.



      Eligible applicants must demonstrate that proposed parking design
or resources would be adequate, and shall satisfy the following requirements
meeting sustainable design and operation (where basic mathematical
calculations are involved, rounding will be based on the traditional
mathematical rule):



         a.   Describe, in quantifiable terms, how the project
provides an increase in green space (pervious area) which otherwise would be
paved for parking spaces, or how the proposed project provides a lower urban
heat island effect if the proposed development is an urban infill or
redevelopment project. At minimum, the elements to be included for compliance
are all building roofs, parking and other hard surfaces, and tree canopies.



         b.   Accommodate fuel efficient vehicles through
provision of covered and well-illuminated locations with apparatus for
parking and locking of bikes and low-powered mopeds and scooters, and
designated spaces for motorcycles and compact vehicles. Covered storage
facilities shall be located on the project site in close proximity to the
destination of the residents, employees, or visitors.



         c.   No more than three percent (3%) of the required
parking spaces are represented by spaces dedicated to motorcycles, which
should be covered as an incentive for use.



         d.   No more than ten percent (10%) of the required
parking spaces are represented by spaces dedicated to compact vehicles, and
disbursed throughout the project to maximize accessibility and convenience.



         e.   Provide efficiency in parking design including
consideration for space-conserving tandem spaces when functionally feasible.



         f.   Provide vehicle charging stations and dedicated
spaces for at minimum Level 2 charging power (one (1) per fifty (50) dwelling
units and one (1) per every fifty thousand (50,000) square feet for
non-residential developments in excess of seventy-five thousand (75,000)
square feet).



         g.   Design for maximized pedestrian interconnectivity
for internal circulation and efficient ingress and egress minimizing travel
distance for pedestrians and bike/moped/scooter riders.



         h.   Include a parking contingency plan to show areas on
the proposed site plan where parking spaces may be added in the event that a
shortage is subsequently realized for average daily parking demand. If such
future spaces do not equal or exceed the total deficiency determined by the
standard parking requirements for the use, provide operational rules,
procedures or strategies at time of site plan approval to off-set the
realized deficiency.



         i.   Facilitate a ride-sharing/car pool program by
screening, recording and maintaining participants' travel destination
information, schedules and routes for controlled access by residents and
employees.



         j.   Maintain bus and train schedules in the management
office, accessible to residents and employees. The management shall designate
employees who will maintain and distribute schedule and route information
enabling them to advise residents and employees as necessary.



         k.   Consider a shuttle service/program providing
transportation to the nearest transit facility, whether as an incentive or
fee-based. Residents should be polled for interest.



         l.   Include marketing goals and practices targeting
residents who work atypical shifts, including incentives for those in fields
such as law enforcement, medical, security, etc.



         m.   Provide the following information to residents at
time of lease, and post it on a permanent sign visible from a common location
and at entry to the management office: "This development offers sustainable
living (or working) environment that facilitates a reduction in required
parking spaces while accommodating bikes, low-powered mopeds and scooters,
motorcycles, compact vehicles and electric vehicles. Contact the management
for further information".



         n.   Establish and implement operational rules that
regulate the maximum number of vehicles per unit, provide incentives for
minimizing total vehicles and maximizing compact and electric vehicles, and
restrict where lesser used vehicles such as recreational, work, or utility
vehicles and equipment can be parked or stored. Incentives shall be provided
for single vehicle households or to those regularly using or dependent on
public transportation.



         o.   Implement an operational rule prohibiting
operators, residents, employees, visitors, etc. from using any parking space,
including interior garage spaces, for any purpose other than for the
temporary parking of vehicles as intended and designed for the project.



         p.   Consent to providing a report containing evidence
of continued compliance with the requirements herein upon request by the city.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-002, passed 3-1-11; Am. Ord.
13-013, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord. 14-020, passed 10-7-14; Am. Ord. 16-015,
passed 7-5-16)



Sec. 4.   Exceptions to Providing Required Off-Street Parking.



   A.   Adaptive Re-Use.



      1.   Applicability.  The following described areas shall be
eligible for specific parking reductions based upon adaptive re-use,
including modifications, of existing buildings:



         a.   Ocean Avenue Overlay Zone (OAOZ), as defined in
Chapter 3, Article III, Section 8.D.



         No additional parking shall be required where:



            (1)   The structure is enlarged in a manner not
exceeding a cumulative total of one hundred percent (100%) of the existing
gross floor area; or



            (2)   The capacity of the structure is increased
by adding subordinate dwelling units or floor area within the existing
building envelop; or



            (3)   The use of a structure is changed; or



            (4)   The number of seats for eating and drinking
establishments is increased by up to fifty percent (50%) of the existing
total or up to forty (40) seats are provided where the previous use had none.



         b.   CBD and C-4 parcels fronting on Federal Highway and
those located between Federal Highway and the FEC RR right-of-way, C-2
parcels fronting on Boynton Beach Boulevard between Seacrest Boulevard and
I-95 and C-3 parcels fronting on Boynton Beach Boulevard between Seacrest
Boulevard and the FEC RR right-of-way.



         A reduction of fifty percent (50%) of the required parking,
up to a maximum of ten (10) parking spaces, may be granted where:



            (1)   The structure is enlarged in a manner not
exceeding a cumulative total of one hundred percent (100%) of the existing
gross floor area; or



            (2)   The capacity of the structure is increased
by adding subordinate dwelling units, or floor area within the existing
building envelop; or



            (3)   The use of a structure is changed; or



            (4)   The number of seats for eating and drinking
establishments is increased by up to fifty percent (50%) of the existing
total or up to forty (40) seats are provided where the previous use had none.



      2.   Exemptions.  The provisions of this subsection do not
apply to the following uses:



         a.   Multi-family residential uses and structures and
group homes.



         b.   Churches, temples and other places or worship.



         c.   Theaters, auditoriums, meeting halls, and other
places of assembly.



         d.   Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.



         e.   Hotels and motels.



         f.   Schools and daycare.



      3.   Additional Requirements/Restrictions.  The following
requirements and restrictions are applicable to all properties considered
under the adaptive re-use provisions above:



         a.   Required parking spaces may not be eliminated to
accommodate building expansions.



         b.   Parking spaces that back out onto collector or
arterial roadways shall be removed as part of any site improvements utilizing
these adaptive re-use provisions.



         c.   Required parking spaces may be leased within three
hundred (300) feet of the use in which they serve, subject to Board and City
Commission approval, and the property shall be posted with signage indicating
to patrons the location of the leased parking.



   B.   Certificate of Conformity.  The minimum number of required
off-street parking spaces provided for a use or development may be satisfied,
in part, if a certificate of conformity is issued, due to an expansion of a
roadway.  See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 6.A. for the procedures for
obtaining a certificate of conformity.



   C.   On-Street Parking.



      1.   Applicability.  The minimum number of required
off-street parking spaces for a use or project may be satisfied, in part, by
the use of on-street parking spaces located within the public right-of-way
abutting that same lot or parcel.



      2.   Conditions.  The provision for on-street parking space
to be used to meet the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces
shall be subject to the following conditions:



         a.   The on-street parking provision is applicable to
all existing or proposed development located within the Community
Redevelopment Area;



         b.   Only the on-street parking spaces located within
the public right-of-way that abut the frontage of a use or project may be
used to count toward meeting the minimum number of required off-street
parking spaces.  The on-street parking spaces must be located on the same
side of the street as the subject use or project except if the land use on
the opposite side of a two-lane street would not be eligible for a parking
reduction under this section, or if the existing land use is any residential
use that does not rely upon on-street parking to meet its minimum parking
requirement then the parking spaces on the opposite side of the street from
the subject property may also be tabulated for the purpose of this section;



         c.   The design of the on-street parking spaces must be
approved by the City Engineer in order to satisfy parking demand according to
Section B.1. herein; and



         d.   On-street parking spaces utilized under this
provision shall not be reserved, temporarily or permanently, for any given
use.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-002, passed 3-1-11; Am. Ord.
13-013, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord. 14-020, passed 10-7-14; Am. Ord. 16-015,
passed 7-5-16)



Sec. 5.   Other Parking Regulations.



   A.   Maximum Number of Provided Parking.  For all new and major
modifications to existing non-residential uses, the total number of provided
off-street parking spaces shall not exceed the thresholds as established
below:



      1.   Thresholds.  The gross floor area of the building
expressed in square feet;



 

Building Size (Cumulative)
 
Maximum Number of Provided Parking


0 to 10,000 s.f.
 
No more than 15% of standard


10,001 to 50,000 s.f.
 
No more than 10% of standard


Greater than 50,000 s.f.
 
No more than 5% of standard



 



      2.   Methodology.  Where the increase in the number of
provided parking spaces as computed includes a fraction, the increase in
parking spaces shall be the computed number rounded down to the lowest whole
number.



      3.   Exemption.  Any project within an established "mixed
use" district is exempt from this maximum parking restriction, provided that
the parking provided is located within a parking garage or structure.



   B.   Handicap Accessible Off-Street Parking.



      1.   Applicability.  All parking lots shall meet or exceed
State Handicap Code requirements, and comply with the Florida Building Code.



   All residential district parking spaces (surface, covered, enclosed)
required pursuant to the Florida/Federal Fair Housing Act shall comply with
the mandatory requirements of the Act.  There shall be provided off-street
handicapped parking spaces available at the time of the erection of any
structure of any structure or the enlargement of any structure.



      2.   Table 4-23.  Handicap Accessible Parking Requirements.



 

Total Spaces
 
Min. Accessible




Up to 25
 
1


26 to 50
 
2


51 to 75
 
3


76 to 100
 
4


101 to 150
 
5


151 to 200
 
6


201 to 300
 
7


301 to 400
 
8


401 to 500
 
9


501 to 1,000
 
2%


Over 1,000
 
*




 



   Source:  Florida Building Code (Florida Building Code should be
reviewed for current requirements)



      *See Chapter 4, Article V, Section 3, Special Reductions in
Required Off-Street Parking, when calculating required accessible parking
spaces for a project designed according to a reduction provision.



      **Twenty (20) spaces plus one (1) space for each one hundred
(100) over one thousand (1,000)



      In addition to the above parking requirements, the Florida
Building Code requires additional accessible spaces for medical uses that
provide out-patient treatments or services for persons with mobility
impairment.



      The design and maintenance of accessible parking spaces and
signage shall be in accordance with the Florida Building Code.  All required
handicap accessible parking spaces shall be provided on-site.



   C.   Permanent Reservation of Off-Street Parking Spaces.  Area
reserved for off-street parking or loading, in accordance with the
requirements of this section, shall not be reduced in area or changed to any
other use unless equivalent off-street parking or loading is provided in
accordance with this section.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord.
14-020, passed 10-7-14)



Sec. 6.   Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE VI.  PARKING LOT, VEHICULAR USE AREAS, AND LOADING STANDARDS



Sec. 1.  General.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of the article is to provide
standards for well-designed vehicular use areas for the citizens, businesses,
and visitors of the city.  It is the intent of these Regulations to ensure
the provision of driveway access, queuing and stacking of vehicles, site
circulation, and loading/service areas that are designed for the safety and
welfare of motorists and pedestrians.  These design standards are also
intended to relieve traffic congestion on the streets and to minimize any
detrimental effects on adjacent properties.  The objectives of these
Regulations include, but are not limited to, the following:



      1.   Safety.  To provide a maximum degree of safety and
protection for the public through the orderly design of parking lots;



      2.   Nuisance.  To provide for a standard for construction
which results in a relatively durable and nuisance free parking lot;



      3.   Impact.  To reduce the negative environmental impacts
which may result from parking lot construction;



      4.   Storm Water.  To provide for storm water retention
on-site;



      5.   Handicap Accessibility.  To provide for parking lots
which are constructed in such a manner that the physically handicapped are
not discriminated against; and



      6.   Order.  To permit the land owner to benefit from his
ownership by providing for orderly parking lot design and construction
consistent with the public health, safety and welfare.



   B.   Administration.  The City Engineer shall have the authority to
interpret and administer this article.



   C.   Applicability.  The provisions of this article shall apply to
all new construction, major modifications to existing sites in connection
with site plan review (Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F.), and minor
modifications to building or site elements that are regulated by this
article, excluding those buildings and site improvements exempted in Section
1.D. below.  Furthermore, the regulations contained herein shall be
applicable to all permanent parking lots constructed or reconstructed in the
city.  In order to clarify the applicability of these Regulations,
compliance is required under any of the following conditions:



      1.   Existing Building.  When a parking lot serves an
existing building(s) where such building(s) is proposed to be enlarged or
when an additional building(s) is proposed to be constructed;



      2.   Change in Occupancy.  When a change in building
occupancy occurs as defined in the Florida Building Code;



      3.   Change in Use.  When a change in use occurs, resulting
in additional parking being required as noted in Chapter 4, Article V of
these Land Development Regulations;



      4.   Landscape Code.  When compliance with the landscaping
code is required (see Chapter 4, Article II);



      5.   Parking Lot Expansion.  When an existing parking lot is
expanded by twenty-five percent (25%) or more in parking stalls beyond what
was originally approved.  When any new parking stalls, driveways, access
aisles or parking lots are proposed, these newly constructed areas as well as
the existing parking spaces must comply with the requirements of this article.



   D.   Exemptions.  The following building and site improvements
shall be exempt from the permitting requirements and standards of this
article:



      1.   Single-family or Duplex Home.  The construction of a
single-family or duplex dwelling unit on an individually platted lot within
single-family or two-family residential zoning districts, notwithstanding the
off-street parking and driveway requirements of Chapter 4, Article V, Section
2.B.  See Section 2.A.2. below regarding the construction of new impervious
surfaces with respect to these types of lots and the requirement for approval
of a land development permit.



      2.   Exempted Buildings.  Buildings exempt from local
building permits or government review pursuant to State of Florida or federal
statutes;



      3.   Temporary Trailer.  When temporary construction or
storage trailers are proposed where the public is not invited;



      4.   Temporary Vehicles.  When the parking of equipment or
work vehicles or the storage of materials is proposed;



      5.   Minor Site Modification.  When the number of parking
stalls in an existing parking lot is expanded by less than twenty-five
percent (25%) beyond what was originally approved and no building(s) is
proposed to be enlarged or constructed, the existing portion of the parking
lot need not comply with the requirements of this article; however, any newly
constructed areas must comply with the requirements of this article;



      6.   Garages.  When a multi-family residential development is
proposed and is designed to include units containing garages served by
driveways, then these units shall be exempt from the requirements of this
article.  This exemption shall not apply to multi-family units that do not
contain garages;



      7.   Normal Maintenance.  When the proposed improvements are
of a maintenance nature such as repairs to existing lot(s), re-striping,
overlays, drainage improvements, etc.;



      8.   Upgrades.  When the proposed improvements are upgrades
to existing lot(s) such as lighting, curbs, landscaping, irrigation,
sidewalks, and drainage; or



      9.   Central Business District.  When an improvement or
property in the central business district or which fronts on that segment of
Ocean Avenue extending west from the central business district to Seacrest
Boulevard involves either a change in use and/or a minor improvement.



   E.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the regulations and
standards contained herein.



   F.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of this
Code are at conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply, unless
otherwise stated herein.



   G.   Relief from Standards.  In addition to the regulations of this
article, all lands shall be improved in conformance with the minimum
standards as set forth in the current Engineering Design Handbook and
Construction Standards or latest supplement thereof.  Unless described
otherwise, any deviation from the parking lot, vehicular use, and loading
standards contained herein or within the Engineering Design Handbook and
Construction Standards requires the approval of a waiver application, which
is subject to review and approval by the City Engineer.  A request for a
waiver shall be reviewed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article III, Section 5.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   City Approval Required.



   No off-street parking, vehicular use areas, or loading zones shall be
constructed, added to, or modified without first securing the necessary city
approvals and permits as provided hereunder, except in instances when exempt
from these Regulations in accordance with Section 1.D. above.  The following
processes and permits are intended to ensure that all construction activity
complies with the standards of this article:



   A.   Private Property and Public Lands.  The property owner or
agent shall file the following applications prior to commencement of any of
the aforementioned improvements:



      1.   Site Plan Review.  The site plan review process shall be
required and reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter
2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to the issuance of any land development
permit.  For the purposes of this subsection, the term "site plan" is
construed to include master site plan and technical site plan applications.



      2.   Land Development Permit.  The land development permit
process shall be required, and initiated only subsequent to the approval of a
site plan application, except in those instances when site plan review is not
required.  The land development permit application shall be processed in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 2, Article III, Section
3.  The land development permit shall also be required for the construction
of any new impervious surface of eight hundred (800) square feet or more on
any property in the city regardless of zoning district, and for any
improvement proposed within a city right-of-way that is not subject to the
city right-of-way permit, as determined by the City Engineer or designee. 
The issuance of a land development permit shall not relieve any party from
obtaining the necessary permits which may be required by the various federal,
state, or local government agencies. 



   B.   City Right-of-Way Permit.  No person shall begin to construct,
reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade in, or upon, any area within city
rights-of-way without first obtaining a permit as provided in Chapter 2,
Article III, Section 4.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Standards.



   A.   General.  All circulation systems and parking facilities
within a proposed development shall be designed and located in such a manner
as to comply with the following:



      1.   Movement.  A clearly defined vehicular circulation
system shall be provided which allows free movement within the proposed
development while discouraging excessive speeds.  Vehicular circulation
systems shall be separated as much as practicable from pedestrian circulation
systems.  Off-street parking facilities and other vehicular use areas shall
be integrated with surrounding structures and with the building or group of
buildings for which they serve.



      2.   Points of Access.  Access points to peripheral streets
shall be provided which adequately serve the proposed development and which
are compatible and functional with circulation systems outside the
development.



      3.   Through Traffic.  Whenever possible in proposed
residential developments, living units should be located on residential
streets or courts which are designed to discourage non-local through traffic.



      4.   Storage Demand.  Off-street parking areas shall be
provided which adequately accommodate maximum vehicle storage demands for the
proposed development and are located and designed in such a manner so as to
serve the uses in the proposed development and not create incompatible visual
relationships.



      5.   Emergency and Service Vehicles.



         a.   Safe and efficient access to all areas of the
proposed development shall be provided for emergency and service vehicles.



         b.   All proposed developments, regardless of size,
shall be designed, and located in such a manner as to ensure the adequate
provision of fire and police protection.



      6.   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall be provided as required by
the city regulations.



      7.   Compliance.



         a.   Conformance with the city and county thoroughfare
plans is required.



         b.   Compliance with the Palm Beach County Traffic
Performance Standards is required.



   B.   Off-Street Parking and Vehicular Use Areas.



      1.   General.  All proposed off-street parking areas shall
conform to the design and layout requirements contained herein and the
current edition of the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction
Standards.  Off-street parking areas shall be approved according to the
procedures contained in the land development permit (see Chapter 2, Article
III, Section 3).  A certificate of occupancy for a structure or premises
shall not be issued until the required parking area has been inspected and
approved by the City Engineer or designee.



      2.   Required Surface.  All areas proposed for parking and/or
loading shall be improved to provide a paved surface (asphalt or concrete) in
accordance with the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards. 
Those areas exempted in Section 1.E. above shall be surfaced with compactable
dust-free materials as approved by the City Engineer.  Stabilized sod may be
substituted for up to fifty percent (50%) of the required parking spaces,
where eighty percent (80%) or more of the parking demand falls within a
twenty-four (24)-hour period each week.  Sod may be substituted only for the
area of parking stalls.  All driveways, aisles, and maneuvering areas shall
be hard-surfaced and shall conform to the design requirements contained
herein.  Sod parking stalls shall have a base consisting of not less than
eight (8) inches of stabilized shell rock, lime rock, or sand, or an
equivalent material as approved by the City Engineer.  Sod parking areas
shall have dimensions equivalent to the dimensions of paved parking areas
with ninety (90)-degree parking stalls and two-way traffic in aisles, as
specified in these Land Development Regulations and Engineering Design
Handbook and Construction Standards.



      3.   Minimum Dimensions and Accessibility.  Off-street
parking areas, including the back-up distance between parking stalls and the
abutting aisle way, shall be designed to meet or exceed the dimensional
requirements for stalls, driveways, and access aisles, as provided for in the
Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards.  Maneuvering and
access areas shall be of sufficient size to allow vehicles to enter and exit
the parking stalls and parking lot in a safe and efficient manner.  In no
instance shall parking lots be designed to allow vehicles to back out into
any public alley or other road right-of-way as reflected in the Engineering
Design Handbook and Construction Standards.  All required spaces shall be
sized in accordance with the current city standards.  The dimensions of such
required off-street parking spaces shall not include public or private
rights-of-way, and all spaces must be maintained and drained so as to prevent
nuisance conditions or a danger to the public and/or adjacent property owners.



      4.   Vehicular Traffic Control Markings.  All traffic signing
and pavement marking shall comply with the U.S. Department of Transportation
Federal Highway Administration Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
Particular attention is directed toward Section 3.G, which contains sign
design, shape, color, mounting height and other conditions.  Fire lanes
shall be identified with marking and signage in accordance with Section 8 of
this article.  Parking stalls shall be delineated in accordance with the
Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards.



      5.   Landscaping.  Each parking lot shall be landscaped
consistent with Chapter 4, Article II, Section 4.  Landscape material
located within off-street parking or other vehicular use areas shall be
protected with curbing and/or wheel stops in accordance with Section 3.B.7.
below.



      6.   Irrigation.  All landscaped areas within parking lots
shall have an automatic irrigation system, approved and permitted through the
Department of Development.



      7.   Curbs and Car Stops.  Parking lot curbs and car stops
shall be required and constructed in accordance with the Engineering Design
Handbook and Construction Standards.  Landscaped areas in parking lots shall
be protected from the encroachment of vehicles by a continuous, raised curb,
or in the instance of a parking stall, by a wheel stop and a raised
continuous curb.  Areas to be protected include all pedestrian walkways,
landscaped islands, landscaping adjacent to parking stalls and landscaping
adjacent to curvilinear drive-ways where encroachment is likely to occur.



      8.   Drainage.  Stormwater shall be contained on-site. 
Containment capacity shall be designed for a minimum of two and one-half
(2.5) inches of rain-fall in one (1) hour.  Drainage structures and
exfiltration trenches shall comply with Chapter 4, Article VIII, Section
3.G., the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards and/or
standards of the South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD).  Inlets
shall be located in grassy areas unless otherwise approved by the City
Engineer.  Where appropriate, all drainage structures shall have
sediment-settling basins that can be cleaned regularly of deposits by typical
means.  For impervious areas exceeding twenty-five thousand (25,000) square
feet, the parking lot and facilities shall be designed and certified by a
Florida-registered engineer.  Maximum storage capacity of soil shall be
considered at the rate of one (1) inch of water for each six (6) inches of
soil above the water table.  Drainage calculations are required in all
instances.  The hydrologic conductivity of soil shall be determined with
tests made at the site using test procedures recommended by the (SFWMD) or
other procedures which have been approved by the City Engineer.



      9.   Illumination.  The lighting levels of off-street parking
and loading areas shall comply with Chapter 4, Article VII, Section 3.C.



      10.   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall be six (6) inches thick
through all driveways and shall meet American with Disabilities Act (ADA)
accessibility code requirements where applicable.  See Chapter 4, Article
VIII, Section 3.D. for additional standards regarding sidewalks within the
public right-of-way.



      11.   Structures.  Parking facilities may contain small,
permanent structures such as shade structures and booths used by parking
attendants.



   C.   Driveway Openings and Access.



      1.   Minimum Dimensions.  Parking lot driveway openings and
access points shall be designed in accordance with the Engineering Design
Handbook and Construction Standards.



      2.   Drive Radii.  Each parking lot driveway shall have a
radius at the intersection of the vehicular traffic lanes designed in
accordance with the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards.



      3.   Distance from Streets.  Parking lot driveway openings
shall be separated from intersections in accordance with the Engineering
Design Handbook and Construction Standards.



      4.   Clearance at Parking Stalls.  A safe and unobstructed
space between the side of a parking stall and a public/private right-of-way,
access aisle, or interior driveway shall be designed in accordance with the
Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards.



      5.   Clearance at Major Driveways.  Unless otherwise approved
by the City Engineer, the minimum distance from the street right-of-way line
at any major ingress or egress driveway to any parking stall or to any
interior access aisle having direct access to such driveway shall be one
hundred (100) feet.



      6.   Intersections.  Driveways which intersect streets owned
and maintained by a governing body other than Boynton Beach must be permitted
by the proper governing agency, prior to issuance of a building permit.



      7.   Maximum Number of Driveways.  A property with street
frontage is allowed a maximum of two (2) driveway openings.  The number of
driveways may be limited to one (1) opening due to factors such as the length
of the street frontage; distance between driveway openings; location of
driveway openings on abutting properties; or other extenuating circumstances
deemed substantial by the City Engineer.



   A property with frontage along two (2) or more rights-of-way may be
permitted additional driveway openings, depending on traffic volumes, but in
no case shall there be more than two (2) openings allowed on any given street.



      8.   District Standards.



         a.   PID Planned Industrial Development Districts.  In
addition to the minimum general standards stated above, driveway openings
shall be located no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from center line
to center line.



         b.   All "Mixed Use-Urban" Districts.  Driveway
openings shall not be directly from an arterial roadway where sufficient
alternative access is available.



   D.   Standards for Off-Street Loading Areas.



      1.   General.  Unless a waiver is granted by the City
Engineer, every hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial
building, or similar use, requiring the receipt or distribution of materials
or merchandise by oversized vehicles, shall have sufficient permanently
maintained off-street loading space so as not to hinder the free movement of
vehicles and pedestrians over parking areas, a street, or sidewalk. 



   Parcel pickup or customer drop-off lanes are permitted outside of the
fire lane, provided that they do not hinder the movement of vehicles or
pedestrians.



      2.   Minimum Dimensions.  For the purpose of these
Regulations, the term "off-street loading or unloading space" shall mean a
vehicular loading space constructed of a hard surface and shall consist of a
space with dimensions not less than twelve (12) feet in width, thirty-five
(35) feet in length and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of access
aisles, maneuvering space, or alley right-of-way.



      3.   Modifications.  A required loading bay or zone shall
neither be reduced in size causing it to be nonconforming nor shall the use
of it change thereby failing to meet the goals and objectives of the
original, unless it is replaced with an equivalent loading area or zone.



      4.   District Standards.  In addition to general requirements
in Section 5.A. above, additional loading areas may be required within
developments zoned planned commercial development (PCD).  The number of
required loading areas shall be based upon the size of the development, types
of uses, and configuration of the buildings.  Additional buffering may be
required at the discretion of the Director of Planning and Zoning to ensure
that such areas are adequately screened from view.



      5.   Community Design.  See Section 4.B. of this article for
additional regulations related to off-street loading areas.



   E.   Dumpsters and Solid Waste Removal.



      1.   General.  In accordance with this section and City Code
of Ordinances Part II, Chapter 10, Garbage, Trash, and Offensive Conditions,
all uses requiring the pickup of quantities of garbage or trash shall provide
an easily accessible area for the pickup and delivery of a dumpster or other
trash receptacle; all such areas shall be so designed that garbage and trash
pickup can be accomplished without excessive maneuvering such as turning
around and backing up. 



      2.   Parking.  No dumpster enclosure or trash receptacle
shall be located in a parking space.



      3.   Minimum Dimensions.  The size of the dumpster enclosure
shall be constructed in accordance with Engineering Standard Drawing G-4 of
the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards of latest
supplement thereof.



      4.   Screening.  Dumpsters shall be adequately screened from
view in accordance with the provisions of the Land Development Regulations,
or compatible with the surrounding environment if located out of view from
the general public (see also "Landscaping" in Chapter 4, Article II, Section
6.G.).



      5.   Community Design.  See Section 4.C. of this article for
additional regulations regarding dumpster enclosure areas.



   F.   Queuing and Stacking.



      1.   Minimum Dimension.  Unless otherwise approved by the
City Engineer, drive-through facilities for banks, pharmacies, restaurants,
and the like shall provide a minimum distance of seventy (70) feet for
vehicular stacking purposes.  Gasoline stations shall provide a distance of
thirty (30) feet at each end of the pump island.  Queuing shall be measured
from the front of the stopped vehicle that would be located at the point of
ultimate service to the rear of the queuing lane.  The queuing lane(s) shall
not obstruct or impede the free movement of fire, emergency or services
vehicles, or the general vehicular circulation throughout the site.



      2.   By-Pass Lane.  Where deemed appropriate by the City
Engineer, a by-pass lane shall be provided before or around the point of
service of a drive-through facility.  A by-pass lane may not be required if
the queuing lane is adjacent to a vehicular use area which functions as a
by-pass lane.  The by-pass lane shall be clearly designated and distinct
from the queuing area.



      3.   Drive-Through Facilities.



         a.   Community Design Standards.  See Chapter 4,
Article III, Section 3.A.10. for additional community design standards
regarding drive-through windows.



         b.   Conditional Use Approval.  See Chapter 3, Article
IV, Section 3.B.6. for additional regulations regarding the requirement for
conditional use approval.



   G.   Fire Lanes.  The Fire Marshal may require a fire lane along
the front of any non-residential building greater than fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet or any multiple-family/mixed use building, in order to
allow for the efficient movement and access of fire or emergency
vehicles/personnel.  Fire lanes shall be separate from off-street loading
zones or loading areas and shall not be encumbered by any parked or standing
vehicles.  Designated fire lanes shall be clearly marked with adequate
pavement marking and signage.  The fire lane dimensions, pavement markings,
and signage shall be designed in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention
Code and Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 4.   Community Design.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this section is to
promote harmony with nature and a pleasant and comprehensible cohesiveness
among development within the city.  Through enforcement of the community
design, the local elected officials shall determine the basic aesthetic
character to be achieved in the development of the community.



      2.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning
shall have the authority to coordinate, interpret, and administer this
section.



      3.   Relief from Standards.  Any deviation or variation from
the regulations of this section requires the approval of a community design
appeal (CDPA) in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.B.



   B.   Off-Street Loading.  Off-street loading areas shall be
designed in such a manner as to screen parked vehicles from view at ground
level.  In no instance shall a loading space front along a public
right-of-way.  These facilities shall be adequately screened from
residential districts.



   Unloading and loading areas shall be screened from streets and public
view by a buffer wall or continuous vegetative buffer in accordance with
Chapter 4, Article II, Section 6.E.



   C.   Dumpsters and Trash Receptacles.  All dumpsters, recycling
receptacles, lift stations and the like shall be screened from public view
with a minimum six (6) foot high stuccoed masonry wall.  The gates of the
enclosure shall be screened to obscure a view into the interior of the
enclosure.  The walls of the enclosure shall be painted to match the
color(s) of the principal structures on-site and have landscape material
planted in accordance with Chapter 4, Article II, Section 6.G.



   Within the infill planned unit development (IPUD) and all "mixed use
urban" districts, dumpsters or trash containers shall not be located within
setbacks abutting single-family residential developments.



   D.   Off-Street Parking Areas and Parking Garages.  Public or
private off-street surface parking lots, understory parking, and all types of
parking garages shall comply with this section, the Florida Building Code,
and with county-wide amendments thereto.  Where appropriate, security
systems may be required.



      1.   On-Site Parking.  Required parking spaces for all
residential uses shall be located on the same lot or development as the
dwelling to be served.  Parking spaces for non-residential uses may be
located off-site but only in accordance with Section 9.D.2. below.  See
Chapter 4, Article III, Sections 6 and 7 for additional community design
standards pertaining to off-street parking.



      2.   Off-Site Parking.  For all non-residential uses,
required parking spaces may be located off-site, provided that they are
located on property owned by the use in which to serve.



         a.   Method of Measurement.  The distance requirement
shall be a straight line measurement from a point on a boundary line of the
property which is the subject of the application, to the closest boundary
line of the property on which the leased parking located.  The property,
which is the subject of the application, shall be posted with signage
indicating to patrons the location of the leased parking.



         b.   Maximum Distance.



            (1)   Within all "urban mixed use" districts, the
CBD district, and the Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard Overlay Zone, parking
spaces may be located off-site but in no case, shall they be further than one
thousand (1,000) feet from the use in which to serve.



            (2)    Within all other non-residential districts,
required parking spaces shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of
the use in which to serve.



         c.   Lease Arrangements.  Within the areas defined in
the adaptive re-use section of the Code (Chapter 4, Article V, Section 4),
required parking spaces may be leased within three hundred (300) feet of the
use in which they serve, subject to Board and City Commission approval, and
the property shall be posted with signage indicating to patrons the location
of the leased parking.



      3.   Interconnectivity.  In order to increase the efficiency
of parking provision and vehicle circulation, parking facilities shall be
interconnected wherever possible.  All sites, including parking facilities,
drive aisles, and pedestrian sidewalks shall wherever feasible, be designed
for future connection to an adjoining parcel where an existing connection
cannot be established.



      4.   Required Off-Street Parking Calculations, By Use. 
Parking calculation requirements for all uses shall be as set forth by
Chapter 4, Article V, Section 2.



      5.   Shared Parking.  Parking space requirements of two (2)
or more uses of the same or different types may be satisfied by the
allocation of the requirement number of spaces for each use in a common
parking facility.  Joint allocation among several uses of a lesser number of
parking spaces may be permitted in accordance with Chapter 4, Article V,
Section 3.C.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord.
13-013, passed 6-4-13)



Sec. 5.   Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE VII.  EXTERIOR LIGHTING STANDARDS



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  It is the intent of this article to
preserve, protect, and enhance the lawful nighttime use and enjoyment of any
and all property through the use of appropriate lighting practices and
systems.  Such individual fixtures, luminaries and lighting systems are
designed, constructed, and installed to:  control glare and light trespass,
minimize obtrusive light, eliminate the increase of lighting levels on
competing sites, provide safe roadways for motorist, cyclists and
pedestrians, conserve energy and resources while maintaining safety, security
and productivity, and curtail the degradation of the nighttime visual
environment.



   B.   Administration.  The City Engineer shall have the authority to
interpret and administer this article.



   C.   Applicability.  The provisions of this article shall apply to
all new construction, major modifications to existing sites in connection
with site plan review (Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F.), and minor
modifications to building or site elements that are regulated by this
article, excluding those buildings and site improvements exempted in Section
1.D. below.



   D.   Exemptions.  The following building and site improvements
shall be exempt from the standards of this article: 



      1.   Single-family or Duplex Home.  Construction of a
single-family or duplex dwelling unit on an individually platted lot within
single-family or two-family residential zoning districts; and



      2.   Exempt Buildings.  Buildings exempt from local building
permits or government review pursuant to State of Florida or federal statutes.



   E.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the regulations and
standards contained herein.



   F.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of this
Code are at conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply, unless
otherwise stated herein.



   G.   Relief from Standards.  In addition to the regulations of this
article, all lands shall be improved in conformance with the minimum
standards as set forth in the current Engineering Design Handbook and
Construction Standards or latest supplement thereof.  Any deviation from the
lighting standards contained herein or within the Engineering Design Handbook
and Construction Standards requires the approval of a waiver application,
which is subject to review and approval by the City Engineer.  A request for
a waiver shall be reviewed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article III, Section
5.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   City Approval Required.



   No exterior lighting, including support structures shall be created or
modified without first securing the necessary city approvals and permits as
provided hereunder, except in instances when exempt from these Regulations in
accordance with Section 1.D. above.  The following processes and permits are
intended to ensure that site lighting complies with the standards of this
article:



   A.   Private Property and Public Lands.  The property owner or
agent shall file the following applications prior to commencement of any of
the aforementioned improvements:



      1.   Site Plan Review.  For any new or modified exterior
lighting structures or changes to any component of the light fixture that
would increase or decrease illumination, the site plan review process shall
be required and reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to the issuance of any land
development permit.  For the purposes of this subsection, the term "site
plan" is construed to include master site plan and technical site plan
applications.  The Director of Planning and Zoning or designee may require
the submittal of a photometric plan as part of the site plan application to
ensure compliance with the standards of this article.



      2.   Land Development Permit.  The land development permit
process shall be required, and initiated only subsequent to the approval of a
site plan application, except in those instances when site plan review is not
required.  The land development permit shall be processed in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Chapter 2, Article III, Section 3.  The City
Engineer or designee may require the submittal of a photometric plan as part
of the land development permit application to ensure compliance with the
standards of this article.  The issuance of a land development permit shall
not relieve any party from obtaining the necessary permits which may be
required by the federal, state, or local government agencies. 



   B.   City Right-of-Way Permit.  No person shall begin to construct,
reconstruct, repair, alter, grade in, or upon any area within city
rights-of-way without first obtaining a permit as provided in Chapter 2,
Article III, Section 4.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Standards.



   A.   General.  All exterior lighting shall be designed and
installed in compliance with the "Heat, Humidity, and Glare" provision of the
Operational Performance Standards of Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 1.



   B.   Public Rights-of-way.  Street lighting shall be placed on all
public and private rights-of-way in compliance with the most recent addition
of the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards for
Landscaping, Irrigation, and Lighting (or Volume II).



   Where street lighting is installed, it shall be installed on all local
and collector streets, at each intersection, at the end of cul-de-sacs, and
wherever, in the opinion of the City Engineer, a dangerous traffic/pedestrian
condition exists.  Between intersections, street-lights may be engineered
for security purposes only as recommended by the Chief of Police. 
Streetlights shall be wired for underground service except where aerial
service is permitted by Chapter 4, Article VIII, Section 3.B.



   C.   Off-Street Parking Lots.  A minimum average light level of one
(1) footcandle shall be provided, with no more than ten percent (10%) of the
spot readings below one (1) footcandle and none below one-half (½)
footcandle.  Lighting fixtures shall be energy efficient and automatically
controlled by a photoelectric switch or other device acceptable to the City
Engineer and are to remain on from dusk to one (1) hour after closing or 2:00
a.m., whichever is later.  However, the exterior lighting of off-street
parking areas and other vehicular use areas within parks and other types of
recreation facilities may be shut off at an earlier time as determined by the
Director of Recreation and Parks or designee based upon the characteristics
(e.g. type, location, hours of operation, etc.) of such park or facility. 



   A photometric plan shall contain lighting levels in accordance with the
standards of this section and Section 4 below.  Light fixtures must be
baffled, shielded, screened, or recessed to prevent visibility of the lit
portion of the fixture from off the premises.  In addition, light fixtures
shall be strategically located to avoid future conflicts with mature tree
canopies (see Chapter 4, Article II, Section 3.A.12.).



   D.   Pedestrian Lighting.  Walkways connecting parking lots to
buildings or walkways between buildings shall be lit in such a manner as to
provide a safe environment. 



   E.   Under Canopies.  Light fixtures under canopies for banks, gas
stations, and similar establishments must be baffled, screened, and recessed
to prevent visibility of the lit portion of the fixture from off the premises.



   F.   Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED).  See
Chapter 4, Article III, Section 5.B. for additional regulations regarding
lighting and CPTED guidelines.



   G.   Docks and Piers.  See City Code of Ordinances Part II, Chapter
9, Article II for additional regulations regarding lighting on docks and
piers.



   H.   Signs.  See Chapter 4, Article IV, Section 4.A.10.c. for
additional standards regarding lighting levels and signage.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Community Design.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this section is to
promote harmony with nature and a pleasant and comprehensible cohesiveness
among development within the city.  Through enforcement of the community
design, the local elected officials shall determine the basic aesthetic
character to be achieved in the development of the community.



      2.   Administration.  The Director of Planning and Zoning
shall coordinate, interpret, and administer this section.



      3.   Relief from Standards.  Any deviation or variation from
the regulations of this section requires the approval of a community design
appeal (CDPA) in accordance with Chapter 2, Article II, Section 4.B.



   B.   Buildings and Structures.  The following regulations shall
apply to all new development and redevelopment:



      1.   Generally.



         a.   Lighting fixture height, style, design and
illumination level shall be compatible with the building design and height
and shall consider safety, function and aesthetic value;



         b.   Lighting of the exterior, parking areas, and
watercraft docking facilities shall be of the lowest intensity and energy use
adequate for its purpose, and shall not create conditions of glare that
extend onto abutting properties;



         c.   Feature lighting emphasizing plants, trees,
barriers, entrances, and exits is encouraged;



         d.   Lighting may be used to illuminate a building and
its grounds for safety purposes and to enhance its beauty.  However, the
visual effect shall be subtle;



         e.   Lighting shall not be used as a form of advertising
in a manner that draws more attention to the building or grounds at night
than in the day; and



         f.   Lighting attached to the form of the exterior of
the building or part of the building exterior or visible from the exterior of
the building shall not be permitted if it is contrary to the architectural
style of the building.



   C.   Maximum Footcandle and Illumination Levels.  Permanent
off-street lighting levels for all multiple-family residential and
non-residential uses shall not exceed five and nine-tenths (5.9) footcandles
for any spot location reading, excluding those areas where higher lighting
levels are required for automated teller machines (ATM) or as identified in
crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED).



   D.   Pole (Total Overall) Heights in Relation to Building Height. 
It is the intent of this subsection to regulate the maximum allowable height
of outdoor free-standing lighting poles in order to encourage compatibility
between said poles and heights of principal buildings on-site and on adjacent
properties.



   The maximum height for all outdoor free-standing lighting poles of a
project or development shall not exceed the average roofline of a one
(1)-story structure.  In no instance shall an outdoor free-standing lighting
pole exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height unless the height limitation is
found to be incompatible with guidelines and/or recommendations of an adopted
redevelopment plan or other public works project.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 13-020, passed 7-2-13)



Sec. 5.   Prohibited Lighting.



   The following types of outdoor lighting are prohibited:



   A.   Spillage.  Any light that illuminates any vertical or
horizontal surface on adjacent property or rights-of-way at a level greater
than 0.3 footcandles.



   B.   Unauthorized Traffic Lighting.  Any light that resembles an
authorized traffic sign, signal, or device, or that interferes with,
misleads, or confuses vehicular traffic as determined by the City Engineer.



   C.   Beacon or Searchlights.  No beacon or searchlights shall be
permitted.



   D.   Drop Lens Fixtures.  Any drop lens fixtures.



   E.   Neon Tubing, Bare Bulbs, and Miniature Lighting.  Neon tubing,
bare bulbs, miniature lights, and similar technologies shall not be used to
illuminate or outline building façades, storefronts, door openings, windows,
or within window displays.  See Chapter 4, Article IV, Section 3.L.6. for
the prohibition of such material when used in signage and designed in an
unshielded manner.



   F.   Awnings.  No awnings, valances, or support structures shall be
internally-illuminated or backlit pursuant to Chapter 4, Article III, Section
3.E.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 6.   Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE VIII.  UTILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE DESIGN STANDARDS



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Short Title.  This article shall hereafter be known and cited
as the "City Required Improvements."



   B.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this article is to
establish standards for the development and subdivision of real estate within
the city in an effort to, among other things, ensure the coordination of land
development in the city in accordance with orderly physical patterns; ensure
safe and convenient traffic control; ensure adequate utilities; prevent
periodic and seasonal flooding by providing protective flood control and
drainage facilities; provide the authority to direct the construction of
improvements; ensure the purchaser of land in a subdivision that necessary
improvements of lasting quality have been installed.



   C.   Administration.  The City Engineer shall have the authority to
interpret and administer this article.  Tangible improvements are required
as described in this article for the development of real property within the
city limits, platted or unplatted.



   D.   Applicability.  The provisions of this article shall be
considered the minimum standards and are applicable to all new construction
projects or modifications to existing sites.



   E.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for
definitions regarding the required improvements with respect to utilities,
streets, and other types of infrastructure.



   F.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of this
Code are at conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply, unless
otherwise stated herein.



   G.   Relief from Standards.  In addition to the regulations of this
article, all lands shall be improved in conformance with the minimum
standards as set forth in the current Engineering Design Handbook and
Construction Standards or latest supplement thereof.  Any deviation from the
utility and infrastructure standards contained herein or within the
Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards requires the approval
of a waiver application, which is subject to review and approval by the City
Engineer.  A request for a waiver shall be reviewed in accordance with
Chapter 2, Article III, Section 5.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   City Approval Required.



   None of the required on-site and off-site improvements contained herein
(utility systems; streets; sidewalks; pedestrian and bicycle paths; bridges
and culverts; drainage, stormwater, and wastewater systems; and canals and
waterways) shall be constructed or modified without first securing the
necessary city approvals and permits as provided hereunder.  The following
processes and permits are intended to ensure that all required improvements
comply with the standards of this article:



   A.   Private Property and Public Lands.  The property owner or
agent shall file the following applications prior to commencement of
constructing any of the aforementioned required improvements:



      1.   Site Plan Review.  Except for individually platted lots
containing single-family and duplex homes located within single-family and
two-family residential zoning districts, the site plan review process shall
be required and reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 2, Article II, Section 2.F. prior to the issuance of any land
development permit.  For the purpose of this subsection, the term "site
plan" is construed to include master site plan and technical site plan
applications.



      2.   Land Development Permit.  The land development permit
process shall be required, and initiated only subsequent to the approval of
the following:  1) final plat application in accordance with the procedures
set forth in Chapter 2, Article III, Section 2, unless otherwise determined
by the City Engineer; and 2) site plan application, except in those instances
when site plan review is not required.  The land development permit
application shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 2, Article III, Section 3.  The issuance of a land development
permit shall not relieve any party from obtaining the necessary permits which
may be required by the various federal, state, or local government agencies.



   B.   City Rights-of-Way.  A right-of-way permit application shall
be required for any proposal to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or
grade in, or upon, any area within a city right-of-way in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Chapter 2, Article III, Section 4.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Standards.



   A.   General Standards for All Required Improvements.  The
following general standards shall apply to all required utility and
infrastructure improvements city-wide:



      1.   Engineering Principles.  The design of required
development improvements shall be in accordance with acceptable engineering
principles.  Design data, (calculations, analyses, etc.) shall be submitted
along with the land development construction plans covering important
features affecting design and implementation of same.  Such data shall
include, but not be limited to, high water, drainage facilities of all kinds,
subsurface soil data, alternate pavement and subgrade types, and radii at
intersections when minimum standards of the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials are inadequate.  Required improvements
shall be equal to or exceed current city standards and the following sections
within this article.



      2.   Impacts of Construction.  All construction activity
regulated by this code shall be performed in a manner so as not to adversely
impact the conditions of adjacent properties, unless such activity is
permitted to affect said property pursuant to a consent granted by the
adjacent property owner, under terms or conditions agreeable to the adjacent
property owner.  This includes, but is not limited to, the control of dust,
noise, water or drainage runoff, debris and the storage of construction
materials.  New construction activity shall not adversely impact historic
surface water drainage flows of adjacent properties, and may require special
drainage considerations complying with engineering standards to preserve the
positive drainage patterns of the affected sites.



      3.   Safety.  It shall be unlawful for any person to move,
remove, damage, destroy, or extinguish any barrier, warning light, sign or
notice erected, placed or posted in accordance with the provisions of this
article, except upon permission of the Director of Public Works.



   B.   Utilities.



      1.   General.  Utilities, including but not limited to power
and light, telephone, telegraph, water, sewer, cable television, wiring to
streetlights, and gas shall be installed underground in accordance with the
current Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards.  This
section shall apply to all cables, conduits or wires forming parts of an
electrical distributions system including service lines to individual
properties and main distribution feeder lines delivering power to local
distribution systems, except that it shall not apply to wires, conduits or
associated apparatus and supporting structures whose exclusive function is
transmission or distribution of electrical energy between subdivisions,
generating stations, substations and transmission lines of other utility
systems, or perimeter lines located adjacent to the parcel or subdivision. 
Appurtenances such as transformer boxes, pedestal mounted terminal boxes,
meter cabinets, service terminals, telephone splice closures, pedestal type
telephone terminals, or other similar "on the ground" facilities normally
used with and as a part of the underground distributions system may be placed
above ground, but shall be located so as not to constitute a traffic
hazard.  Easements shall be coordinated with requisite utility authorities
and shall be provided as prescribed by these Regulations for the installation
of underground utilities or relocating existing facilities in conformance
with the respective utility authority's rules and regulations.  The City
Engineer may waive the requirement for underground installation if the
service to the adjacent area is overhead and if it does not appear that
further development in adjacent areas with underground utilities is
possible.  Any new service which is allowed by the waiver herein to be
supplied by overhead utilities shall be connected to a service panel that is
convertible for underground utility service at a future date.  The developer
shall make necessary cost and other arrangements for such underground
installations with each of the persons, firms, or corporations furnishing
utility service involved.  Utilities shall be constructed in easements as
prescribed by these Regulations.



      2.   Installation.  After the subgrade for a street has been
completed, the remainder of the street right-of-way has been graded and
before any material is applied, all underground work for the water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, cable television, gas mains, telephone,
electrical power conduits and appurtenances and any other utility shall be
installed completely through the width of the street to the sidewalk area or
provisions made so that the roadway or right-of-way will not be disturbed for
utility installation.  All underground improvements installed for the
purpose of future service connections shall be properly capped and
backfilled.  All above-ground or underground improvements shall comply with
the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards.



         a.   Utility Transmission Lines.  Unless otherwise
deemed impractical by the City Engineer, all utility transmission lines,
conduits, conveyances or other devices or apparatus for the transmission of
utility services and products, including all franchised utilities, shall be
constructed and installed beneath the surface of the ground with the
exception of main overhead feeder lines.  Appurtenances to these systems
which require aboveground installation shall be effectively screened, and,
thereby, may be excepted from this requirement.



         b.   Water Systems.  Public water system for both
domestic use and fire protection must be installed in accordance with city
standards and other pertinent city ordinances.



         c.   Central Water System.  A complete water
distribution system shall be provided for all developments.  Water
transmission mains shall be provided by the developer to an approved
operating city water system.  The city Director of Utilities shall approve
all new connections to the existing city water system.



         d.   Fire Hydrants.  Fire hydrants shall be provided in
all residential, commercial, mixed use, and industrial developments in the
manner prescribed in these Regulations.  When annual fire hydrant fees are
to be levied according to ordinance, a special association for payment of
said fees will be required.



   Fire hydrants shall be no more than three hundred (300) feet apart and
the remotest part of any structure shall be no more than two hundred (200)
feet from a hydrant.  Connections shall be to mains no less than six (6)
inches in diameter.  In addition to domestic requirements at residual
pressures of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square inch, fire flow of
at least one thousand, five hundred (1,500) gallons per minute shall be
provided as a minimum standard.



   In one (1) and two (2)-story residential developments with not more
than ten (10) dwelling units per acre, fire hydrants may be spaced up to five
hundred (500) feet apart but not more than three hundred (300) feet from the
center of any lot in the development.  The system shall provide flow
capacity of at least five hundred (500) gallons per minute in addition to
maximum day domestic requirements at specified residual pressures.



      3.   Sanitary Sewer.  A complete sewage collection system
shall be provided for all developments in accordance with requisite
government regulations.  Sewage transmission facilities shall be provided by
the developer to an approved operating city collection or transmission
system.  Transmission systems shall include force mains and other
appurtenances associated with lift stations.  The Director of Utilities
shall approve all connections to existing city collection, transmission, and
sewer systems.  Sewage system will be furnished and installed in accordance
with city standards and other pertinent city ordinances.



      4.   Easements.  Easements, a minimum of twelve (12) feet in
width, shall be provided to accommodate all required utilities across lots
with convenient access for maintenance, and where possible shall be centered
on lot lines.  Easements ten (10) feet in width shall be provided for
underground utilities across that portion of a lot adjacent to a street. 
Additional utility easements or larger utility easements may be required by
the city when, in the opinion of the City Engineer, or his or her designee,
and/or the Utilities Engineer, such easements are necessary for continuity of
utility service between developments and where necessary for maintenance and
service.  Utility easements and drainage easements shall be separate unless
otherwise approved by the Director of Utilities or the City Engineer.  Where
easement crossings occur, drainage easements shall take precedent.



   The developer and/or owner shall dedicate to city any easement that
city deems necessary for public services and said dedication shall provide
that developer and/or owner shall hold city harmless for any of its acts
performed within or abutting said easements if any loss or damage is caused
to abutting property.  The City Engineer shall be authorized, on behalf of
the City Commission, to grant, accept, and vacate easements for municipal
purposes on both public and private properties.



   C.   Roadways and Streets.



      1.   General.  All streets and related facilities required to
serve the proposed development shall be constructed by the developer.  The
construction shall consist of, but not be limited to, street grading, base
preparation and surface course along with drainage, and shall be in
accordance with city regulations.



   Before any plat or deed or instrument conveying or dedicating any
street right-of-way to the city shall be accepted by the city, all roads
shall be improved so as to meet the minimum requirements set forth in this
article.



      2.   Designation System.  All streets, avenues or other
thoroughfares for vehicular traffic shall be designated in accordance with
city standards.  Such designation shall be vested in the Director of Public
Works or designee who shall also maintain the city's master roadway file and
allocate secondary street designations.



      3.   Naming System.  Street names shall be issued as per the
request of the originator of the street (or roadway) except in the case of a
section line, where roads will be given a route number in addition to the
assigned name as determined by either the Florida Department of
Transportation or Palm Beach County, whichever has jurisdiction of the street
(or roadway).  Proposed streets which are on the same alignment with other
existing named streets, shall bear the same name of the existing street. 
All street names shall have a suffix and in no case, except as indicated in
the preceding sentence, shall the name of the proposed street (or roadway) or
duplicate be phonetically similar to existing street names regardless of the
use of the suffix - street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc. 
The basic naming standards are as follows:



         a.   Curvilinear Streets.  Curvilinear streets shall be
named on the same basis as other streets and shall carry the same name
through their entire length.



         b.   Streets Crossing Ocean Avenue.  Streets crossing
Ocean Avenue shall have north and south added to their names accordingly.



         c.   Table 4-23.  Handicap Accessible Parking
Requirements.



 

North-South Direction
 
East-West Direction


Court
 
Avenue


Drive
 
Boulevard


Lane
 
Place


Parkway
 
Road


Street
 
Way



 



   The suffixes ‘boulevard' and ‘parkway' shall be reserved for
arterials and collectors.  The suffix ‘circle' is an option for either
direction, however, it should be used as the name implies, i.e., a
curvilinear roadway.  The use of 'terrace' and 'trace' shall be reserved for
minor streets, cul-de-sacs, etc.  Any other requested suffix shall be
approved by the Director of Public Works or designee prior to its inclusion
into any development.



         d.   Street Name Changes.



            (1)   Standard Street Name Changes.  Standard
street name changes shall conform to the standards and requirements for
naming streets as set forth in the preceding section, and shall be permitted
only under the following circumstances:



               (a)   In response to a City Commission
directive,



               (b)   To eliminate duplication or confusion
in street names, or



               (c)   To reduce confusion in addressing.



            (2)   Vanity Street Name Changes.  Name changes
which do not meet the criteria above are considered "vanity street names" for
the purposes herein and are permitted only under the following limited
circumstances:



               (a)   The desired name will not create
confusion;



               (b)   The desired name does not duplicate in
whole or in substantial portion, the name of any existing street;



               (c)   All property owners abutting the road
have signed a petition requesting the change and a completed application has
been submitted to the Engineering Division;



               (d)   The fee that has been established by
resolution;



               (e)   The entire length of the street must
be renamed; and



               (f)   The City Commissioner approves the
request.



         e.   Standard Street Name Numbering and Addressing.



            (1)   Uniform Addressing Procedure. Lot or parcel
addressing for individual tracts of land shall be designated in accordance
with the city's uniform addressing procedure policy.  Such designation shall
be vested in the Director of Public Works or designee, who shall also
maintain the city's master roadway file.



            (2)   Abutting Cities and Communities.  The
addressing number system currently in use within the corporate limits of the
city shall be maintained.  For those lots or parcels annexed into the city
will, if possible, be assigned in a manner that maintains:



               (a)   A logical sequence of numbers along
the street or roadway on which the property is located, and as established in
that neighboring government, and



               (b)   A consistent pattern of separation of
even and odd numbers.



            (3)   Direction of Street.  The establishment of
the exact number of a particular lot or parcel entails the dimensions of the
lot in question, and its distance from the nearest land line or street as
given in the legal description.  If the lot is on an east-west (E-W) street,
it will receive an E-W number (even numbers on the south side of the street
and odd numbers on the north side).  If the lot is located on a north-south
(N-S) street, it will receive a N-S number (even numbers on the east side of
the street and odd numbers on the west side).



         f.   Vanity Street Name Numbering and Addressing. 
Street numbering and addressing for commercial and residential properties
shall be based on the city's grid system as described.



   Requested addresses which do not adhere to the city's grid system are
considered "vanity addresses" for the purposes herein, are prohibited for
residential uses, and shall not be permitted for non-residential uses except
under the following circumstances:



            (1)   The entity requesting the "vanity address"
is a prominent commercial entity and has a location which is widely
recognized in the community;



            (2)   The requested number is not out of sequence
with any existing numbers on the same street.  (For example, the number one
hundred (100) would not be permitted on a lot which is located between two
existing lots with the addresses #500 and #550);



            (3)   Emergency medical services and the U.S. Post
Office would be able to locate the property;



            (4)   An individual with the assistance of a
generally distributed local street map would be able to locate the property
without undue difficulty;



            (5)   The requested address does not duplicate an
existing address on the same street;



            (6)   The requested address would, in no way, be
injurious to or infringe upon the existing rights of any other commercial
entity in the county;



            (7)   The requestor has submitted an affidavit
which acknowledges that the requested address may result in delays in mail
delivery and service provisions;



            (8)   The established fee has been paid and the
requestor has submitted a complete application to the Department of
Engineering Division; and



            (9)   The City Commission approves the request and
finds that the address request is related to a city goal, such as economic
development, which takes precedence over the goal of maintaining the city's
grid system.



      4.   Street Layout and Configuration.



         a.   General.  Street layout shall be coordinated with
the street system of the surrounding area.  Consideration shall be given to
existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public convenience,
safety, and relationship to the proposed use of the land to be served.  The
arrangement of streets in new developments shall provide for the continuation
of existing streets in adjoining areas not developed, and shall provide for
the proper projection of streets.  When a development adjoins undeveloped
land, then the new street, where necessary, shall be carried to the boundary
of the tract proposed to be developed to promote reasonable development of
adjacent lands, and provide continuity of street systems.  The new
development shall provide for the incorporation and compatible development of
present and future streets shown on the thoroughfare map adopted by the City
Commission.



         b.   Width of Ultimate Right-of-Way.



            (1)   (Table 4-24) General Standards.  The City
Commission shall not accept any street right-of-way dedication by plat or by
deed or other instrument unless the right-of-way width and paving comply with
the Land Development Regulations.



         Minimum street right-of-way width shall be as follows:



 

Street Type
 
Right-of-Way Width (in feet)




Expressway
 
300


Major arterial
 
200


Arterial
 
120


*Collector
 
80


*Local with mountable curb
 
50


*Local with swales
 
60


Marginal access
 
40




 



   *The right-of-way width may be reduced by up to eight (8) feet if the
provisions of Section 3.D below are met.



   All public and private streets herein shall be constructed in
conformance with the minimum standards as set forth in the current
Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards or latest supplement
thereof.



            (2)   Within All Planned Residential
Developments.  The minimum width of a right-of-way for a principal street
within a planned residential development district is forty (40) feet. 
Privately owned streets providing secondary vehicular circulation internal to
the development may be considered for approval with rights-of-way and
pavement widths less than the requirements stated in the city's Land
Development Regulations; however, in no case shall health, safety, welfare,
or efficiencies of public services be jeopardized.



      Privately owned streets providing secondary vehicular circulation
internal to the residential planned development district may be considered
for approval with rights-of-way and pavement widths less than the
requirements stated in the city's Land Development Regulations.  However, in
no case shall health, safety, and/or welfare be jeopardized.  Any reduction
in the width of a right-of-way and/or its pavement shall require the approval
of a waiver, which is subject to review and approval of the City Engineer. 
A request for a waiver shall be reviewed in accordance with Chapter 2,
Article III, Section 5.



      Roadways providing external connections to the city's street
network shall meet all requirements contained in the city's Land Development
Regulations.



            (3)   Within All Commercial and Industrial
Districts.  Commercial and industrial developments shall comply with all of
the requirements of these Regulations, except that all local streets shall be
designed and constructed according to the collector street typical section
contained in the current city standards.



         c.   Width of Pavement.  The minimum width of paving of
all new or rebuilt streets shall be in accordance with current city standards.



   Any reduction in the width of a right-of-way and/or its pavement shall
require the approval of a waiver, which is subject to review and approval of
the City Engineer.  A request for a waiver shall be reviewed in accordance
with Chapter 2, Article III, Section 5.



         d.   Dimensions of Blocks.  The length, width, and
shape of blocks shall be determined by the following:



            (1)   Provision of adequate building sites
suitable to the special needs of the type of planned use.



            (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot size and
dimensions.



            (3)   Need for convenient access, circulation,
control and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.



            (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.



               (a)   Block lengths shall not exceed one
thousand, three hundred twenty (1,320) feet between intersecting streets
except where special topographical conditions exist.  Greater lengths may be
approved by the City Engineer.



               (b)   In blocks nine hundred (900) feet in
length or over, crosswalks not less than eight (8) feet wide may be required
between streets where deemed essential by the City Engineer to provide
circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation and other community facilities.



         e.   Dead-end Streets.  Dead-end streets shall be
constructed in accordance with the Engineering Design Handbook and
Construction Standards.



         f.   Street Jogs.  Local street jogs with centerline
offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet are prohibited.



         g.   Half-streets.  Half or partial streets are
prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of a tract in
conformance with the thoroughfare plan and these Regulations.  In addition,
satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street
must be provided.  Whenever a tract to be developed borders on an existing
half or partial street, the other part of the street may be required to be
dedicated and constructed within such tract.  A proposed development that
adjoins or includes an existing street which does not conform to the minimum
right-of-way requirements of these Regulations shall dedicate right-of-way
along either one (1) or both sides of said street so that the minimum
right-of-way requirements of these Regulations can be met.



         h.   Marginal Access Streets.  Where a development
abuts an arterial or higher classification street and adjoining property
owners desire access other than at street connections, a marginal access
street shall be required from an intersection to the edge of the development.



         i.   Local Streets.  Local streets shall be laid out so
as to discourage through traffic.



         j.   Railroads Abutting Developments.  When a
development borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way may be
required so as to permit appropriate use of the intervening land for park
purposes in residential districts or for commercial or for industrial
purposes in appropriate districts.



         k.   Thoroughfare Intersections.  The number of
driveways and access roads which intersect thoroughfares shall be minimized
and designed to allow for signalization.



         l.   Alignment, Tangent, Deflection, Radii.  Streets
shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. 
Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two (2) streets
are prohibited.  The point of curvature of any local street shall not be
closer than one hundred (100) feet to any intersection.  All intersections
shall be designed to provide adequate stopping and sight distance in
accordance with the current city standards.



         m.   Traffic Calming Measures.



            (1)   The city shall consider placement of traffic
calming measures only upon completion of an initial traffic study.  Traffic
calming shall be considered:



               (a)   Only on those local streets with
average daily traffic volumes greater than five hundred (500) vehicles per
day; and



               (b)   Only when the 85th percentile speed is
greater than thirty (30) mph for those streets posted at twenty-five (25) mph
or greater than thirty-five (35) mph for those streets posted at thirty (30)
mph.



            (2)   Signing, striping and other devices
identifying traffic calming measures shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



         n.   Lot Access.  Individual lots shall have access to
an internal street system.



            (1)   Along Local Streets.  Along local streets,
the point of access to lots shall be at least thirty (30) feet from
intersecting right-of-way lines, providing the interior lot angle at the
intersecting lines is ninety degrees (90°) or greater.  If the interior lot
angle is less than ninety degrees (90°), the access point distance will
increase, and be determined by the City Engineer or designee.  On zero (0)
lot line corner lots, access points shall be located a minimum of twenty-
five (25) feet from the intersection of the projection of right-of-way lines
to the near edge of the driveway. Access to townhouse clusters may be via
parking lots and/or driveways designated on the plat as access or parking
tracts, provided the length of access does not exceed six hundred sixty (660)
feet.  Subdivisions shall be designed to provide access to all lots by the
use of local streets.



            (2)   Along Collector Streets.  Along collector
streets, the point of access to lots shall be at least fifty (50) feet from
the intersecting right-of-way lines, incorporating the same angular
parameters noted above.  Mid-block lots shall meet access point separations
in accordance with city standards.



            (3)   Along Arterial Streets.  Along arterial
streets, the point of access to lots shall be at least one hundred twenty
(120) feet from the intersecting right-of-way lines, incorporating the same
angular parameters noted above. It is the intent to minimize the number of
access points connecting to an arterial street.  However, if required for
access or circulation, a second access point may be permitted on the side of
the lot adjacent to the lanes departing the intersection.  The locations of
the access points shall be approved by the City Engineer or the designee.



            (4)   Secondary Point of Access.  In addition to
the main point of vehicular access, a secondary point of vehicular access
shall be considered for all residential developments with thirty (30) or more
dwelling units.  This secondary access point may be substituted with an
emergency access point if a secondary access point is unfeasible due to the
configuration or remote relationship of other improved and platted lands
surrounding the development.  In all circumstances, the secondary or
emergency access point shall be designed and located away from the primary
point of access in case the primary point is impeded or otherwise
inaccessible.



         o.   Driveway Spacing.  On all streets, the minimum
spacing between driveway centerlines shall be in accordance with city
standards.  If the street is under the jurisdiction of another agency,
spacing shall be in accordance with Palm Beach County standards for county
roads or FDOT standards for state roads, whichever is greater.



         p.   Street Connections.



            (1)   Local Streets to Collector Streets.  Local
street connections to collector streets shall be a minimum of six hundred
sixty (660) feet apart.



            (2)   Collector Streets to Arterial Streets. 
Collector street connections to arterial streets shall be a minimum of one
thousand, three hundred twenty (1,320) feet apart.



            (3)   Double Frontage Lots.  Double frontage lots
adjacent to a collector or arterial street shall front on a local street. 
The rear of the lot shall abut the collector or arterial street and be
buffered as required by these Land Development Regulations.



            (4)   Limited Access Easement.  Limited access
easements shall be provided along collector and arterial roads.



         q.   Cross Access Roads.  Cross access roads or drive
aisles shall be provided between commercial sites wherever practical to
minimize trips on nearby thoroughfares.



         r.   Median Strips.  Medians that are part of a
dedicated or deeded right-of-way may not be utilized for any purpose other
than by the city or a public utility.  If a developer desires to beautify a
median in a development, the developer may do so by placing grass and shrubs
of small root structure within the medians under the right-of-way permit
issued by the City Engineer.



         s.   Entrances to Developments.  Unless approved by the
City Engineer, entranceways consisting of walls, fences, gates, rock piles or
the like are not permitted within the median strip or other areas in a
dedicated or deeded right-of-way.  Decorative entranceways must be
constructed upon parcels of land adjacent to a right-of-way in compliance
with the zoning, building, and sign codes and must not constitute a traffic
hazard.  A guardhouse located so as not to create a traffic hazard may be
constructed at the entrance to a development having private streets.



         t.   Collector Road Dedication.  Collector roads within
developments shall be dedicated as public rights-of-way unless otherwise
approved by the City Engineer.



         u.   Visual Obstructions of Intersections.  No wall,
fence, sign, planting, hedge, shrubbery, or other visual obstruction shall be
created or maintained with a height between two (2) feet – six (6) inches
and eight (8) feet above the street level, within twenty-five (25) feet of
the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two (2) streets, in any zone,
except that open chain-link type fences may be a maximum of four (4) feet and
kept visually clear (see Chapter 3, Article II, Section 6 and Chapter 4,
Article II, Section 4.A.14.).



         v.   Right-of-Way Improvement & Construction
Standards.  All improvements to rights-of-way including but not limited to
the design of street grades, shoulders, swale and swale areas, traffic
control devices, street markers, materials used for surfaces and subgrades,
construction within muck or clay, and permanent reference monuments (PRM) or
permanent control points (PCP) shall be constructed in accordance with the
Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards or latest supplement
thereof.



      5.   Construction, Repair, or Alterations.



         a.   Street Access Permit.  All work performed in
public or private rights-of-way shall conform with the current Engineering
Design Handbook and Construction Standards.  Except as provided herein, any
person desiring to perform or have performed any of the activities covered by
this article wherein a permit is required shall secure such a permit in
accordance with the rules and regulations set forth in Chapter 2, Article
III, Section 4. 



         b.   Street Opening Permit.  Any person desiring to
plow, dig, scrape or in any way make or have made any hole, pit, ditch or
excavation in or upon any street, alley, roadway or public land shall proceed
with such work only after obtaining a permit therefore and in compliance with
all regulations contained in or promulgated under this article including the
Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards.  It shall be
conducted in accordance with Chapter 2, Article III, Section 4.



         c.   Alterations to Medians.  Whenever alterations of
medians are deemed necessary by the City Commission for the promotion and
protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the community, the
costs for such alterations shall be borne by the developers or property
owners of such land development projects.



         d.   Nuisance Abatement.  Applicant for clearing and
grubbing permit and/or land development permit shall describe in writing how
blowing sand, dust and other airborne matter will be controlled during
clearing, grading and filling and until such time as permanent ground cover
is installed.



      6.   Abandonment.  All requests to abandon a public or
private right-of-way shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 2, Article
II, Section 2.G.



   D.   Sidewalks.



      1.   General.



         a.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose and intent of
this subsection is to design rights-of-way by planning for, and providing
safe, orderly, and comprehensive pedestrian linkages throughout the city, and
to promote complete street initiatives.



         b.   Applicability.  Unless otherwise exempt or waived
by the City Engineer, no person shall improve any parcel of land within the
city, or change the occupancy classification (as defined by the Florida
Building Code), without installing a sidewalk in conformance with the
Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards and the standards
contained herein.  A right-of-way permit to construct a sidewalk shall be
required in accordance with Chapter 2, Article III, Section 4, prior to the
issuance of any certificate of occupancy/completion.



         c.   Exemptions.  The following improvements and
construction activities shall be exempt from the standards contained herein
and the permitting procedures of Chapter 2, Article III, Section 4:



            (1)   Unimproved Lots.  Any proposed improvement
to an undeveloped lot, platted or unplatted, and the cost of such improvement
is less than seventy percent (70%) of the current assessed property valuation.



            (2)   Improved and Developed Lots.



               (a)   The construction of any addition
proposed to a principal building located in single-family and two-family
residential zoning districts which is less than twenty-five percent (25%) of
the gross floor area of such existing building; or



               (b)   The construction of any accessory
building/structure, or the reconstruction or remodeling of any existing
residential building located in single-family and two-family residential
zoning districts, and the cost of such improvement is less than fifty percent
(50%) of the current assessed valuation.



         d.   Waivers.  Upon the recommendation of the City
Engineer, the sidewalk requirements contained herein may be waived for an
individual lot in accordance with Chapter 2, Article III, Section 5, when
adequate pedestrian circulation is provided by bicycle or pedestrian paths,
or where the sidewalk requirement would not be compatible or in harmony with
adjacent or nearby previously developed without sidewalks.



      2.   Standards.



         a.   Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all
local and collector streets, and on one (1) side of marginal access streets
in all areas. 



         b.   Sidewalks constructed within public or private
rights-of-way shall conform to the Florida Department of Transportation
Standards Specifications and Roadway and Traffic Design Standards (as
applicable), the Manual of Uniform Control Devices (MUTCD) as applicable, and
the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards, or the latest
supplements thereof. 



         c.   Except as provided herein, any person desiring to
perform or have performed any of the acts covered by these Land Development
Regulations wherein a right-of-way permit is required shall secure such
permit in accordance with the following standards:



            (1)   If any street abutting the property on which
such construction is to occur is depicted on the map or schedule on file in
the Public Works Department of the city as a street on which sidewalk
construction is to be required, sidewalks shall be constructed along the
entire street frontage of such parcel; in the case of a corner lot, the
sidewalk shall be constructed also along the access side.



            (2)   If any street abutting the property on which
such construction is to occur is not depicted on the map or schedule on file
in the Public Works Department of the city as a street on which sidewalk
construction is required, the property owner shall pay a fee equal to the
cost to the city per square foot of construction of the sidewalk abutting the
property, as such fee is determined annually by the Director of Public Works.



         d.   A dual system consisting of sidewalks within pubic
rights-of-way and bicycle/pedestrian paths outside of the public right-of-way
may be required to provide adequate pedestrian circulation.  Paths shall be
constructed concurrently with the other required improvements in accordance
with the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards, and be
included in the surety described in Chapter 2, Article III, Section 6.



      3.   Construction, Repair, or Alterations.  All new
construction of sidewalks or repair and/or alteration of existing sidewalks
shall require a permit in accordance with Section 4 of this Article and with
Chapter 2, Article III, Section 4.



      4.   Abandonments.  Any request to abandon a public or
private right-of-way shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 2, Article
II, Section 2.G.



      5.   Miscellaneous.  The control, jurisdiction, and
maintenance obligation of bicycle/pedestrian paths not located within a
public right-of-way shall be placed in a property owner's association or an
improvement district.  Bicycle/pedestrian paths shall be constructed
concurrently with other required improvements.



      6.   Community Design.  See Chapter 4, Article III, Sections
6 and 7 for additional community design standards related to sidewalks and
pedestrian pathways.



   E.   Pedestrian and Bicycle Paths.  Bicycle/pedestrian paths shall
be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width.  In driveway and commercial areas,
the surface, base and subgrade requirements of the Engineering Design
Handbook and Construction Standards shall be met.  In other areas, one
(1)-inch Type II asphaltic concrete on a four (4)-inch thick compacted base
of locally approved limerock or shellrock shall be used.  When
bicycle/pedestrian paths are not located within road rights-of-way, the base
shall extend six (6) inches from each side of the surface and muck shall be
completely removed below the base.  Three-quarter (3/4) inch thick Type I
asphaltic concrete may also be used.  The cross slope shall be one-quarter
(1/4) inch per foot.



   F.   Bridges & Culverts.  Bridges or culverts shall be provided as
necessary to facilitate the proposed street system whenever a development is
traversed by or contains canals, watercourses, lakes, streams, waterways or
channels.  Bridges or culverts are subject to approval by agencies having
jurisdiction.  Bridges shall be designed in general accord with current
Florida Department of Transportation practices and shall include planning for
utility installation.



   G.   Drainage, Stormwater, and Wastewater Management.



      1.   Drainage.



         a.   Applicability.  Any proposed building addition,
swimming pool, patio, driveway, deck, or similar structure or improvement
that decreases the permeable land area in excess of eight hundred (800)
square feet on any parcel shall provide a professionally prepared drainage
plan.



   In addition, an adequate storm, surface and ground water drainage
system, including necessary ditches, canals, swales, percolation areas,
detention ponds, storm sewers, exfiltration trenches, drain inlets, manholes,
headwalls, endwalls, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances shall be
required in all subdivisions.



   Any development that is part of an overall master stormwater plan may
have the provisions of this paragraph waived at the sole discretion of the
City Engineer or designee.



         b.   Design Standards.  Construction plans  and
certified drainage design data includes but is not limited to the method of
control of storm water and groundwater; drainage plan; existing water
elevations; recurring high water elevations; proposed design water
elevations; drainage structures; canals; ditches; and any other pertinent
information pertaining to the system.  Provide for drainage of lots,
streets, roads and other public areas including surface waters which drain
into or through the property.  The drainage design must provide adequate
surface water drainage of naturally occurring or existing adjacent
contributory areas.  All drainage areas shall be designed in accordance with
the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards or latest
supplement thereof.  Where additional ditches and canals are required to
accommodate contributory surface waters, right-of-way shall be dedicated for
future needs.  An exception exists where a developer may excavate or open
sufficient capacity to provide for existing drainage needs whenever the
developed or undeveloped status of adjacent areas so warrants, subject to
approval by the City Engineer.



         c.   Drainage Easement.  Drainage easements shall be
provided where necessary at a width adequate to accommodate the drainage
facilities in accordance with the Engineering Design Handbook and
Construction Standards.  Utility easements and drainage easements shall be
separate unless otherwise approved by the Director of Utilities and the City
Engineer.  Where easement crossings occur, drainage easements shall take
precedent.



      2.   Stormwater Management.  When approved positive drainage
is not available, on-site containment of stormwater run-off shall be provided
by the developer.  Details of the on-site system shall be approved by the
City Engineer.



         a.   Applicability.  Storm water shall be treated in
the development by providing on-site percolation and/or detention or any
appropriate treatment technique acceptable to the South Florida Water
Management District (SFWMD).



         b.   Design Standards.  Rainfall runoff, surface
waters, and groundwaters shall be managed in developments to optimize water
quality and maximize percolation and detention to promote the re-use of this
resource.  All stormwater/wastewater areas shall be designed in accordance
with the Engineering Design Handbook and Construction Standards or latest
supplement thereof.  However, pervious areas shall be sodded and irrigated
unless other landscaping is approved by the Director of Planning and Zoning. 



   H.   Canals and Waterways.



      1.   General.



         a.   Applicability.  When a developer designs a
development containing/adjoining waterfront property either existing or
proposed, such as canals, water courses, lakes, streams, drainage ways or
channels, such development shall comply and conform to the requirements of
this article and this chapter.



         b.   Exemptions.  This article shall not apply either
to drainage easements containing subsurface drainage systems or to the
operation or activities of a governmental water control agency.



      2.   Design.  Where canals, watercourses, lakes, streams,
drainage ways or channels are adjacent to or exist upon the property to be
developed, they shall retain natural characteristics or design and protect
waterways so as to not present a hazard to life and safety.  Access
waterways proposed in conjunction with a development shall have a minimum
water depth of six (6) feet for a continuous bottom width of twenty (20)
feet.  Where seawalls, bulkheads or retaining walls are not required, the
design shall incorporate a minimum of a four to one (4:1) slope from existing
ground to a depth of six (6) feet.



      3.   Dedications.



         a.   Rights-of-Way.  Prior to the construction or
alteration of watercourses as prescribed in Section 3.H.5. below,
rights-of-way or easements required for such work must be appropriately
dedicated.  Where such construction or alteration affects a governmental
agency, the dedication, deed, or easement shall be to such agency.



         b.   Easements.  Where, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, public rights for drainage purposes are necessary, an easement
shall be dedicated to the city.  This dedication shall be in conformance
with Section 7.A.3.a.



         c.   Waterways.  Waterways, except for public drainage
easements, shall be dedicated to a property owners' association or reserved
for the use of the residents of a development developed as a condominium or
cooperative development as defined by Florida Law.  In lieu of the
foregoing, waterways may be dedicated to a legally constituted drainage
agency.



      4.   Maintenance.  Perpetual maintenance of rights-of-way or
easements for canals, watercourses, lakes, streams, channels or other water
management areas shall be dedicated to a property owners' association unless
the right-of-way or easement is public.  In those cases maintenance may be
dedicated to the city for the limited purpose of providing minimum drainage
as determined by the City Engineer.



      5.   Construction, Repair, or Alterations.  No person, firm,
corporation, or any other association shall alter, reroute, deepen, widen,
change, or construct any waterway without first submitting construction plans
and an application for a land development permit in accordance with Chapter
2, Article III, Section 3.  Prior to the issuance of such a permit, the
plans shall be approved by the City Engineer.



   Where the dredge, fill, or excavation affects public property or
sovereign land, the construction plans shall, prior to issuance of permit, be
approved by the governing agencies having control over public property or
sovereign lands such as the South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD),
Trustees of Internal Improvement Fund (TIFF), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(ACOE), Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP), Lake Worth
Drainage District (LWDD), or any other public agency having jurisdiction in
such matters.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 4.   Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



ARTICLE IX.  BUILDING, CONSTRUCTION, AND HISTORIC PRESERVATION REQUIREMENTS



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of the article is to provide
for adequate building, construction, and historic preservation regulations. 
The intent is to secure the public safety, health, and general welfare
through structural strength, stability, sanitation, light and ventilation,
and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the
built environment.



   B.   Administration.  The Building Official shall have the
authority to interpret and administer this article.



   C.   Applicability.  The provisions of these Regulations shall
apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy,
location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building and
structure or any appurtenance connected or attached to such buildings or
structures.



   D.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for
definitions and terms associated with building, construction, and historic
preservation requirements.



   E.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of this
Code conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply, unless otherwise
stated herein.



   F.   Relief from Requirements.  Unless described otherwise, any
deviation from the building, construction, and historic preservation
requirements contained herein shall require approval of a variance
application, which is subject to review and approval by the Building Board of
Adjustment and Appeals.  A request for a variance shall be reviewed in
accordance with Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 4.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   City Approval Required.



   A.   Private Property and Public Lands.  No structure or building
shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or structurally altered on
private property or public lands without first securing a building permit
from the Building Division in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 2, Article IV, Section 2.  The building permit process shall be
required and initiated only subsequent to the approval of a site plan
application, except in those instances when site plan review is not
required.  For the purposes of this subsection, the term "site plan" is
construed to include master site plan and technical site plan applications. 
Any building permit application that proposes demolition activities is
subject to the Tree Preservation Ordinance of Chapter 4, Article I.  Such
application shall address the possible removal, relocation, or replacement of
existing trees and plant material in connection with the demolition activity,
which may result in the requirement to obtain a land development permit from
the Engineering Division in accordance with Chapter 2, Article III, Section
3.  In all instances, however, the issuance of a building permit shall not
relieve any party from obtaining the necessary permits which may be required
by the various federal, state, or local government agencies.



   B.   City Rights-of-Way.  A right-of-way permit application shall
be required for any proposal to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or
grade in, or upon, any area with a city right-of-way in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Chapter 2, Article III, Section 4.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Certificate of Occupancy or Completion.



   No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in
the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion
thereof shall be made until the Building Official has issued a certificate of
occupancy or certificate of completion as provided herein.  Issuance of a
certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall not be construed
as an approval of a violation of the provisions of these or other city
regulations or the Florida Building Code.



   Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy/completion for
any improvement exceeding  seventy percent (70%) of its current assessed
property valuation, the owners of all undeveloped lots, platted or unplatted,
and the owners of all plots not subject to platting, shall construct a
sidewalk within the right-of-way in conformance with Chapter 4, Article VIII,
Section 3.  This requirement shall also apply when a change in occupancy as
defined in the Florida Building Code occurs and/or when any building is
reconstructed in an amount which exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its current
assessed valuation.



   No certificates of occupancy or certificates of completion will be
issued for buildings in the platted development or subdivision until all
required improvements are completed, approved, and/or accepted by the city,
except that a developer may, at his option, post additional one hundred ten
percent (110%) surety in compliance with Chapter 2, Article III, Section 6
for work which may be more prudently put in place subsequent to building



construction such as sidewalks and landscaping.  Certificates of occupancy
will not be issued for the final ten percent (10%) of the buildings until
such work is approved and/or accepted by the city as completed.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Florida Building Code Requirements.



The Florida Building Code 2017, Gas, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes, 2010
Edition, and the 2008 National Electrical Code including future editions or
revisions as adopted by the city, are hereby adopted as the minimum Building
Code for the City of Boynton Beach.  The Boynton Beach Amendments to the
Florida Building Code include the following:



   A.   Administration.  Chapter 1, Administration, as described in
the Boynton Beach Amendments, and is incorporated herein in the Florida
Building Code 2017, Gas, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes, 2010 Edition, and the
2008 National Electrical Code.



   B.   City Amendments.  The City of Boynton Beach Administrative
Amendments to the 2017 Florida Building Code, Plumbing, Mechanical, Gas, and
2008 National Electrical Code are incorporated in this document and made a
part hereof. Copies shall be maintained on file in the Office of the City
Clerk and shall be available to the public.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-003, passed 3-6-12; Am. Ord.
13-010, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord. 15-016, passed 7-21-15; Am. Ord. 17-034,
12-19-17)



Sec. 5.   Coastal Building Zone Requirements.



   The coastal building zone for the city is the land area from the
seasonal high-water line landward to a line one thousand, five hundred
(1,500) feet landward from the coastal construction control line as
established pursuant to F.S. § 161.053.  Development projects within this
zone must utilize best management construction techniques for natural
resource protection and must conform to the goals, objectives and policies of
the Coastal Management Element of the Comprehensive Plan.



   The coastal construction code was adopted on August 19, 1986 and
applies to all construction within the coastal building zone, and is
incorporated herein by reference.  A copy is on file and available for
inspection in the offices of the City Clerk and Director of Development.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 6.   Historic Preservation Requirements.



   A.   General.



      1.   Purpose and Intent. These provisions are designed to
identify, protect, restore and encourage the reuse of Resources, all of which
are essential to the City's health, safety, morals and its economical,
educational, cultural, and general welfare. These valid public purposes shall
be fulfilled by the ordinance, to achieve the following goals:



         a.   Preserve, protect, enhance and perpetuate Resources
which represent distinctive and significant elements of the City's historical
cultural, social, economical, political, archaeological, and architectural
identity; and/or serve as visible reminders of the City's culture and
heritage;



         b.   Ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient
growth, prosperity and development of the City through retention and reuse of
its historic and cultural Resources;



         c.   Strengthen civic pride and cultural stability
through neighborhood conservation;



         d.   Contribute to the stabilization of the economy of
the city through the continued use, preservation, conservation and
revitalization of its Resources;



         e.   Protect and enhance the city's historic, cultural
and architectural attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and
stimulus to business and industry thereby provided;



         f.   Promote the use of Resources for the education,
pleasure, and welfare of the people of the City;



         g.   Provide a review process for the continued
preservation and appropriate, compatible and sensitive development of new
construction and additions with in the city's historic districts and
neighborhoods;



         h.   Protect an enhance the scale, character and
stability of existing neighborhoods, and protect against destruction of or
encroachment upon areas which contribute to the character of the City;



         i.   Facilitate the creation of a convenient, harmonious
and attractive community, and protect the  architectural beauty, special
architectural features, and special landscape features of the City;



         j.   Avoid demolition, or other adverse effect on
historic properties (Properties) and Districts, which would cause an
irreparable loss to the City;



         k.   Assist neighborhoods to achieve a positive
neighborhood identity and sense of place.



         In addition, these provisions are designed to implement, be
consistent with, and assist in the achievement of the goals, objectives and
policies, as specifically required by the City's Comprehensive Plan, with
respect to historic, conservation, and neighborhood Resources.



      2.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for
all applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the historic
preservation regulations and standards contained herein.



      3.   Certified Local Government Review.  The City Commission
is a Certified Local Government (CLG) approved by the Florida Department of
State, Division of Historical Resources.  The City Commission as a CLG is
required to participate in the Florida National Register of Historic Places
nomination process, be involved in the Section 106 process, and is eligible
to receive grants from the Certified Local Government Section of the Florida
Department of State, Historical Resources Grants-In-Aid program.



      4.   Unsafe Buildings and Structures.  Should the Building
Official determine that a Historic Property or a Property within a Historic
District is unsafe, the Planning and Zoning staff and Historic Resources
Preservation Board shall be notified of such findings. Within applicable laws
and regulation, the Building Official shall endeavor to have the Resource
repaired rather than demolished and shall take into account any comments and
recommendation by the Board. The Board may take appropriate actions to Effect
and accomplish the preservation of the Resource, including, but not limited
to, negotiations with the owner and other Interested Parties, provided that
such actions do not interfere with the Florida Building Codes.



      In the case where the Building Official determines that there are
emergency conditions dangerous to the life, health or property affecting a
Historic Property or a Property within a Historic District and timely
Demolition is the only course of action, the Building Official may order the
Demolition and notify the Planning and Zoning Division of the impending
action.  In this instance, a Certificate of Appropriateness will not be
required and the Historic Resources Preservation Board will promptly be
notified of the action being taken.



      5.   Waiver of Technical Requirements.  The provisions of the
technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair,
enlargement, restoration or moving of Buildings may not be mandatory for
those Resources listed in the Boynton Beach Register of Historic Places and
the National Register of Historic Places, when evaluated by a Florida
registered architect or engineer and demonstrated to the Building Official to
be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.



      Resources or portions thereof that do not strictly comply with
the Florida Building Code may be considered to be in compliance, if it can be
shown to the satisfaction of the Building Official that equivalent protection
has been provided or that no hazard will be created or continued through
noncompliance. (Life safety and property conservation shall be provided in
accordance with Chapter 11, Sections 1105 and 1106 of the 2007 Florida
Building Code, or as subsequently amended).



      Alterations to Resources listed in the Boynton Beach Register of
Historic Places and the National Register of Historic Places may receive
exemption from accessibility requirements. (Pursuant to Chapter 11, Section
11-4.1.7 of the 2007 Florida Building Code, or as subsequently amended, the
Building Official may determine that compliance for accessible routes
(exterior and interior), ramps, entrances, or toilets would threaten or
destroy the historic significance of the Building, in which case the
alternative requirements in Chapter 11, Section 11-4.1.7(3) may be utilized).



      6.   Administrative and Board Approval of Zoning Code
Variances. Alterations to Resources listed in the Boynton Beach Register of
Historic Places and the National Register of Historic Places may receive
variances to zoning code regulations, if such regulations would adversely
impact or threaten the historic significance of the Resource. The
responsibility for review and approval of an application for a variance in
association for a Certificate of Appropriateness for Alterations of Resources
listed in the Boynton Beach Register of Historic Places and the National
Register of Historic Places will rest with staff, unless the corresponding
Certificate of Appropriateness requires Historic Resources Preservation Board
(HRPB) action, in which case the HRPB will have review and approval
responsibility. Such requests for variance shall be made on a separate
application, approved by the Board. Said application fee and other applicable
charges shall be established by resolution adopted by the City Commission.



      7.   Sustainable Building Practices. The application of
sustainable, energy efficient and green building practices to improvements
associated with historic properties is encouraged whenever they are
compatible with best historic preservation practices. Whenever possible,
equipment such as solar panels, wind generation devices, mechanical equipment
etc., should not be affixed to the building, but sited in the rear or side
yard locations and fully screened with landscaping, fence or wall. When
placement upon the building is unavoidable, such equipment as well as
skylights, shall be located on a non-character defining elevation or roof
slope that is not visible from the street. In no instance, shall the
equipment be allowed to be placed upon any character defining feature.
Expedited review shall be afforded to those applicants who propose the
placement of such equipment on other than the building facades or roof.



   B.   Designation of Historic Properties and Districts.



      1.   Guidelines for Historic Designation.  To qualify as a
Property or a District, individual properties must have significance in
American history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture and
possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association. For Districts, eligibility is based on the
establishment of historic contexts or themes which describe the historical
relationship of the Properties within the district. Individual Buildings
shall normally be at least 50 years old and, in the case of a District at
least 50% of the Buildings shall normally be at least fifty years old.
Buildings shall also be significant in one or more of the following areas:



         a.   Association with events that have made a
significant contribution to the broad patterns of the City's history; or



         b.   Association with the lives of persons significant
in the City's past; or



         c.   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period or method of construction, or represents the work of a master, or
possesses high artistic values, or represents a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction;



         d.   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information
important in prehistory or history; or



         e.   Is listed in the National Register of Historic
Places.



      2.   Criteria Considerations. Ordinarily cemeteries,
birthplaces, graves of historical figures, properties owned by religious
institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that have been moved
from their original locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties
primarily commemorative in nature, and properties that have achieved
significance within the past 50 years shall not be considered eligible for
the Boynton Beach Register of Historic Places. However, such properties will
qualify if they are integral parts of districts that do meet the criteria or
if they fall within the following categories:



         a.   A religious property deriving primary significance
from architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance; or



         b.   A building or structure removed from its original
location but which is primarily significant for architectural value, or which
is the surviving structure most importantly associated with a historic person
or event; or



         c.   A birthplace or grave of a historical figure of
outstanding importance if there is no appropriate site or building associated
with his or her productive life; or



         d.   A cemetery that derives its primary importance from
graves of persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive
design features, or from association with historic events; or



         e.   A reconstructed building when accurately executed
in a suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a
restoration master plan, and when no other building or structure with the
same association has survived; or



         f.   A property primarily commemorative in intent if
design, age, tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own
exceptional significance; or



         g.   A property achieving significance within the past
50 years if it is of exceptional importance.



      3.   Procedures.  See Chapter 2, Article II, Section 6.



      4.   Removal of Designation.  A designation may be removed by
the City Commission based upon the Board's recommendation.  Such
recommendation shall be based upon new and compelling evidence and evaluation
of work or natural cause producing an adverse effect to a Property or
District. The same guidelines and the same procedures established for
designation shall be considered for a removal of designation.



      5.   Designation of County, State or Other Political
Subdivision Properties.  County, state or political subdivision entity-owned
Properties may be designated as a Property or District if such designation is
not prohibited or preempted by law, or otherwise provided for in the
Intergovernmental Coordination Element of the Comprehensive Plan.  In the
absence of prohibition, preemption, or other agreement, such other government
may only avoid designation of its Property by bearing the burden of proof
that public interests, on balance, are best served by avoiding such
designation.  Such determination shall be established by the process as set
forth in this ordinance.  Once designated, unless reversed upon appeal, such
designated Property or District shall comply with and be regulated by all
regulations contained in this ordinance.



      6.   Maintenance and Repair of Designated Properties;
Demolition by Neglect Prohibited.



         a.   Ordinary Maintenance or Repair.  Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of
any exterior elements of any building or structure that does not involve a
change of design, appearance or material, and which does not require a
building permit.



         b.   Affirmative Maintenance Required.  The owner of a
property designated pursuant to this chapter either individually or as part
of a district or zone shall comply with all applicable codes, laws and
regulations governing the maintenance of property. It is the intent of this
section to preserve from deliberate or inadvertent neglect the exterior
features of such properties and the interior portions thereof when
maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of the property.
All such properties shall be preserved against decay and deterioration and
shall be free from structural defects though prompt corrections of any of the
following defects:



            (1)   Facades that fall and injure the subject
property, adjoining property or members of the public;



            (2)   Deteriorated or inadequate foundations,
defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports, deteriorated walls or
other vertical structural supports;



            (3)   Members of ceilings, roofs ceiling and roof
supports or other structural members that may rot, sag, split or buckle due
to defective material or deterioration;



            (4)   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of
exterior walls, roofs, foundations or floors, including broken, unsecured or
missing windows or doors.



            (5)   Any fault or defect in the property that
renders it structurally unsafe, insufficiently protected from weathering, or
not properly watertight.



      7.   Nominations to the National Register of Historic Places.
As part of the duties under the Certified Local Government program, the
Historic Resources Preservation Board shall receive all nominations of local
property to the National  Register of Historic Places following the
regulations of the State Historic Preservation Office.



         a.   Appropriate local officials, owners of record, and
applicants shall be given a minimum of thirty calendar days and not more than
seventy-five calendar days prior notice to Historic Resources Preservation
Board meetings in which to comment on or object to the listing of a property
in the National Register.



         b.   Objections to being listed in the National Register
by property owners must be notarized and filed with the State Historic
Preservation Officer.  Within thirty (30) days after its meeting the Board
shall forward to the State Historic Preservation Officer its action on the
nomination and the recommendations of the local officials. Appropriate local
officials, the owner and the applicant shall be notified of the board's
action.



         c.   The State Historic Preservation Officer will take
further steps on the nomination in accordance with federal and state
regulations. If either the Board or the local officials or both support the
nomination, the State Historic Preservation Officer will schedule the
nomination for consideration by the state review board for the National
Register at its next regular meeting. If both the Board and the local
officials recommend that a property not be nominated to the National
Register, the State Historic Preservation Officer will take no further action
on the nomination unless an appeal is filed with the State Historic
Preservation Officer.



      8.   Designated Historic Sites.  The following Historic Sites
have been established:



         a.   National Register.



            (1)   Boynton Woman's Club, 1010 South Federal
Highway, located on Lots 4, 5, 6, and 7 less the West 35 feet thereof, Parker
Estate, according to the plat thereof recorded in Plat Book 10, Page 37 of
the Public records of Palm Beach County, Florida. (Published 4/26/1979).



            (2)   Boynton School, 141 East Ocean Avenue,
located on Lot 3, Block 4 of Sawyer's Addition, City of Boynton Beach,
Florida. (Published 3/7/1994).



   C.   Certificate of Appropriateness.  The Board or staff shall
review actions affecting the exterior of Properties and all Resources,
including non-contributing Properties, within Districts.



      1.   Secretary of the Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation.  In reviewing an application, the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation (as may be amended from time to time)
shall be applied. The current version is as follows:



         a.   A Property shall be used for its historic purpose
or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining
characteristics of the Building and its site an environment.



         b.   The historic character of a Property shall be
retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of
features and spaces that characterize a Property shall be avoided.



         c.   Each Property shall be recognized as a physical
record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of
historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural
elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.



         d.   Most Properties change over time; those changes
that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained
and preserved.



         e.   Distinctive features, finishes, and construction
techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be
preserved.



         f.   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired
rather than replaced.  Where the severity of deterioration requires
replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in
design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible,
materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by
documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence.



         g.   Chemical or physical treatments, such as
sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The
surface cleaning of Structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the
gentlest means possible.



         h.   Significant archaeological resources affected by a
project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be
disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.



         i.   New additions, exterior Alterations, or related new
construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the
Property.  The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be
compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to
protect the historic integrity of the Property and its environment.



         j.   New additions and adjacent or related new
construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the
future, the essential form and integrity of the historic Property and its
environment would be unimpaired.



      2.   Additional Criteria.  The above Standards for
Rehabilitation shall be supplemented by the following criteria specific to
certain types of requests:



         a.   New Construction and Alterations. All new
construction and Alterations to existing buildings within a designated
historic district or on an individually designated property shall be visually
compatible, and meet the following guidelines.



            (l)   Setting, Orientation and Setbacks.  The
Building should be situated approximately the same distance from the street
as adjacent Buildings, to create a continuous street edge.  The orientation
of the Building should be visually compatible with that of the buildings in
the Historic District.  The Setting should be designed with the overall
environment in mind.  It should take into account the compatibility of
landscaping, parking, service areas, walkways, and accessory structures.



            (2)   Building Height.  The height of the
Building at street level should be visually compatible in comparison or
relation to the height of the existing contributing buildings in the Historic
District.



            (3)   Design Styles.  New Buildings should take
their design cues from the prevailing architectural styles within the
Historic District.  Traditional or contemporary design standards and
elements should relate to the existing styles.



            (4)   Proportion of Openings.  The openings of
any building within a Historic District should be visually compatible with
the openings in existing contributing buildings within the Historic
District.  The relationship of the width of windows and doors to the height
of windows and doors should be visually compatible with the existing
contributing buildings within the Historic District.



            (5)   Rhythm of Solids to Voids.  The
relationship between solids (walls) and voids (windows and doors) of a
Building should be visually compatible with the Surrounding Buildings.



            (6)   Rhythm of Spacing along the Street.  The
relationship of Buildings to the open space between them should be compatible
with the other Buildings on each side of the street in that block.



            (7)   Relationship of Materials and Textures. 
The materials and textures of a Building should be chosen with the
predominant materials of the Historic District in mind.  Simplicity in such
use is preferable.



            (8)   Roof Shapes.  The roof shape of a Building
is a major distinguishing feature.  The roof shape of a Building should be
compatible with the roof shape of existing contributing buildings within the
Historic District.  The roof shape shall be consistent with the
architectural style of the Building.



            (9)   Size, Scale, Bulk, Mass and Volume.  The
physical size, scale, bulk, mass and volume should be compatible with the
existing contributing buildings within the Historic District without
overwhelming them.



         b.   Additions.  All additions to historic structures
or structures within a Historic District shall meet the following guidelines.



            (1)   Locate an addition to the rear or least
visible sides of historic structures. Locating an addition on the front
elevation should be avoided.



            (2)   Minimize the loss of historic materials from
the historic structure and protect character-defining features.



            (3)   Design the addition to be compatible in
terms of massing, size, scale, relationship of solids to voids, and
architectural features.  An addition should be subordinate to the historic
building.



            (4)   Differentiate the addition from the historic
structure.



            (5)   If permitted, rooftop additions should
generally be limited to one story in height, should be set back from the wall
plane and should be as inconspicuous as possible.



            (6)   Continue the design elements on all
elevations of the new construction, not only those elevations that can be
viewed from the street.



            (7)   Design and construct the addition so that,
if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic
structure will be unimpaired.



            (8)   Limit the size and number of openings
between the old and new building by utilizing existing doors or by enlarging
existing windows.



         c.   Demolition.  All demolitions of historic
structures within a Historic District shall comply with the following:



            (1)   Simultaneous certificates required.  No
Building or Structure on a Property or located within a District shall be
demolished without first receiving a Certificate of Appropriateness for new
construction. The applications for demolition and new construction shall be
reviewed by the Board simultaneously. The requirement of a Certificate of
Appropriateness for new construction may be waived by the Board upon a good
cause showing that such requirement would be unduly harsh or would result in
a substantial hardship to the Property owner.



            A showing of good cause may include, but is not
limited to, evidence that the Property owner is unable to comply with the
requirement for simultaneous new construction due to advanced age, infirmity,
physical or other debilitating handicap, or financial hardship.



            If an application for Certificate of Appropriateness
for Demolition is approved, the owner shall, at his/her expense, fully record
the building prior to Demolition. At a minimum, the owner shall provide an
architectural description, floor plan with interior and exterior dimensions,
interior and exterior photographs, and any other information requested by the
Board. Said record shall be deposited in the local archives, where it will be
made available to the public.



            Upon approval by the Board of a Certificate of
Appropriateness for Demolition, the demolition permit shall not be issued
until all demolition and new construction plans for the Property have
received all other required governmental approvals.



            The existence of one or more of the following
conditions may be the basis for denial of a demolition application:



               (a)   The Resource contributes significantly
to the historic character of a designated Property or District.



               (b)   The Resource is listed on the National
Register.



               (c)   The Resource is one of the last
remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or City.



               (d)   The Resource is capable of being
repaired and reused in a practical and feasible manner.



               (e)   Retention of the Resource would
promote the general welfare of the City by providing an opportunity to study
local history, architecture and design, or by developing an understanding of
the importance and value of a particular culture or heritage.



               (f)   Granting a Certificate of
Appropriateness for the Demolition would result in an irreparable loss to the
City of a significant Resource.



               (g)   The plans for the simultaneous new
construction (if the Demolition is granted) are not compatible with the
Property or District.



            (2)   Demolition Delay Period.  The Board may
grant a Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolition which may contain a
delayed effective date.  The effective date will be determined by the Board
based on the relative significance of the Resource and the probable time
required to arrange a possible alternative to demolition.  The Board may
delay demolition for up to three (3) months.  During the demolition delay
period, the Board may take such steps as it deems necessary to preserve the
Resource.  Such steps may include, but are not limited to: consultations
with community groups, public agencies and interested citizens;
recommendations for acquisition of the Property by public or private bodies,
or agencies; an exploration of the possibility of moving the Resource.



            (3)   Salvage and Preservation of Specific
Features.  The Board may require the Property owner to salvage and preserve
specified classes of building materials, architectural details, ornaments,
fixtures and the like.



            (4)   Authority to Initiate Designation.  If an
undesignated property warrants it and it is otherwise authorized under this
ordinance, staff may initiate, or recommend that the Board initiate, the
designation application and review process. Staff may further request that
the Board require that the issuance of a demolition permit be stayed pending
the Board's review of the application and the City Commission's decision to
designate or deny designation of the property. However, the maximum period
during which the issuance of a demolition permit may be stayed pursuant to
this paragraph is one hundred twenty (120) days, unless extended by the City
Commission.  If for any reason the designation process is not completed and
the demolition application is approved, the owner shall, at his/her expense,
fully record the building prior to Demolition and attempt to salvage and
preserve specified classes of building materials, architectural details,
ornaments, fixtures and the like.



         d.   Relocation.  The existence of one or more of the
following conditions may be the basis for denial of a relocation application:



            (1)   The historic character or aesthetic interest
of the Resource contributes to its present setting in such a manner that
relocation would result in a substantial loss to the setting or District.



            (2)   There are no definite plans for the area to
be vacated.



            (3)   There are definite plans for the area to be
vacated that may adversely affect the character of the District.



            (4)   The Resource cannot be moved without
significant damage to its physical integrity.



            (5)   The proposed relocation area is not
compatible with the historic, cultural, and architectural character of the
Resource.



            (6)   Little or no effort has been made to
consider relocation within the same District or within another District with
compatible historic, aesthetic, cultural, or design qualities with the
relocated Resource.



         e.   Changes in Approved Work.  Any change in the
proposed work following the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness
shall be reviewed by staff.  If the proposed change does not materially
affect the historic character or the proposed change is in accordance with
the Board's decision, staff may administratively approve the change.  If the
proposed change is not in accordance with the Board's decision, a new
Certificate of Appropriateness application for such change must be submitted
for review.



   D.   Historic Preservation Property Tax Exemption Program.



      1.   General.



         a.   The granting of tax exemptions to owners who make
improvements to Historic Properties was authorized by an amendment to the
Florida Constitution and codified in Section 196.1997 and 196.1998 Florida
Statute (1992).  The ad valorem tax exemption program was established by
Palm Beach County in 1995 (Ordinance 95-41), and may be implemented in the
City through an interlocal agreement with the County and a local Tax
Abatement Exemption ordinance.  The Tax Abatement Exemption Ordinance
authorizes granting exemptions from increases to ad valorem taxes for
qualified improvements to qualifying properties.



         b.   Exemptions.  Exemptions for Historic Properties
are intended for the physical improvements necessary to Restore or
Rehabilitate the Historic Resource, which may include additions, Alterations
and new construction.  The improvements must comply with the Secretary of
the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation.



         The City and County will process the application following
mutually established procedures through both the City and County
Commissions.  This program will provide an exemption from tax increases on
the improvements to the Property for up to a 10 year period.  The exemption
is conveyed through a covenant that accompanies the deed of the Property and
may be transferred to future owners during the abatement period.



      2.   Tax Exemption for Historic Properties.



         a.   The City Commission hereby creates a tax exemption
for the appropriate restoration, renovation or rehabilitation of qualifying
historic properties designated herein.  Qualifying property shall be exempt
from that portion of ad valorem taxation levied by the City on one hundred
percent (100%) of the increase in assessed value resulting from any
appropriate renovation, restoration or rehabilitation of the qualifying
property made on or after the effective date of this ordinance.



         b.   The above exemption does not apply to:



            (1)   Taxes levied for payment of bonds;



            (2)   Taxes authorized by a vote of the electors
pursuant to section 9(b) or section 12, Article VII, of the Florida
Constitution; or



            (3)   Personal property.



      3.   Qualifying Properties and Improvements.



         a.   The following real property in the City is
qualifying property for the purposes of this subsection if at the time the
exemption is approved by the City Commission, the property:



            (1)   Is individually listed in the National
Register of Historic Places pursuant to the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966, as amended; or



            (2)   Is a contributing property to a national
register-listed district; or



            (3)   Is designated as a historic property, or as
a contributing property to a historic district, under the terms of the City's
historic preservation ordinance; and



            (4)   Has been certified by the Board as
satisfying subparagraphs (l)(a), (l)(b), or (l)(c) above.



            The exemption does not apply to improvements made to
non-contributing principal buildings or non-contributing accessory structures.



         b.   For an improvement to a historic property to
qualify the property for an exemption, the improvement must:



            (1)   Be consistent with the United States
Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, as amended.



            (2)   Be determined by the Board to meet criteria
established in rules adopted by the Department of State, Division of
Historical Resources, FAC 1A-38, as amended, and



            (3)   Be consistent with any ordinance of the city
designating the property as historic or designating the historic district in
which the property is located.



      4.   Evaluation of Property Used for Government or Nonprofit
Purpose.  Pursuant to Title XIV, Chapter 196.1998, Florida Statutes, which
allows for exemption from ad valorem taxation of up to one hundred percent
(100%) of the assessed value of the property as improved, a property is being
used for government or nonprofit purposes if the sole occupant of at least
sixty-five percent (65%) of the useable space is an agency of the federal,
state or a local government unit or a nonprofit organization certified by the
Department of State under Chapter 617.013, Florida Statutes. As for being
"regularly and frequently open" for public access, the property shall be open
to the public not less than twelve (12) days per year on an equitably spaced
basis, and at other times by appointment. Nothing herein shall prohibit the
owner from charging a reasonable nondiscriminatory admission fee, comparable
to fees charged at similar facilities in the area.



      5.   Application for Exemption; Fees.  An applicant desiring
an ad valorem tax exemption for proposed improvements to a historic property
must file a request accompanied by its corresponding fee and all
documentation required by the application checklist.  The request shall be
made on the two-part Historic Preservation Property Tax Exemption
Application, approved by the State of Florida, Division of Historical
Resources and promulgated in accordance with Rule 1A-38, Florida
Administrative Code, and include additional information and documentation of
the cost of the qualifying improvement.  Part 1 of the application, the
Preconstruction Application shall be submitted before qualifying improvements
are initiated and Part 2, the Final Application/Request for Review of
Completed Work, shall be submitted to the City for review upon completion of
the qualifying improvements.  The Final Application/Request for Review of
completed Work shall contain the Historic Preservation Exemption Covenant as
established by the Department of State, Division of Historical Resources and
applicable for the term for which the exemption is granted.



      6.   Preconstruction Application.  The review process shall
be initiated with the submittal of a Preconstruction Application to the
City.  The Preconstruction Application shall contain a copy of the
application for Certificate of Appropriateness, information on project cost,
and a copy of the most recent tax bill for the subject property from the Palm
Beach County Property Appraiser.  Upon the receipt of the Preconstruction
Application by the City, the City shall conduct a review for eligibility in
accordance with the requirements stated herein.



      7.   Review of Preconstruction Application.  A review of the
Preconstruction Application shall be completed by the City in accordance with
the established schedule and process.



         a.   Once the City determines that the work as proposed
is a qualifying improvement and is in compliance with the review standards
contained herein, the City shall approve the Preconstruction Application and
issue a written notice to the applicant with a copy to the Board.



         b.   If the City determines that the work as proposed is
not a qualifying improvement or is not in compliance with the review
standards contained herein, a written notice shall be provided to the
applicant, including recommendations concerning the changes to the proposed
work necessary to make it a qualifying improvement and bring it into
compliance with the review standards.



      8.   Appeals to the Historic Resources Preservation Board.



         a.   Within ten (10) days of receipt of notice that the
City has denied a Preconstruction Application, the applicant may file a
written notice of appeal of the denial to the Board.  The appeal shall be
processed in accordance with the public meeting and notification procedures
required of the City's quasi-judicial hearing process, except that public
notices need only be mailed to owners of abutting or adjacent property as
determined by the Historic Preservation Planner.



         b.   If the Board denies the appeal, the applicant may
appeal the action of the Board to the City Commission.



      9.   Issuance of Other Permits or Approval.  If all or part
of the proposed improvements require a building permit or other necessary
approval of the City or any other governmental agency, the improvements shall
also be reviewed pursuant to any other applicable code provisions of the City
and require such corresponding approval. A Preconstruction Application shall
not be approved by the City and issued until such permit or other approvals
have been granted.



      No certificate of occupancy or completion shall be issued by the
City until the Final Application has been approved by the City Commission and
all appeal proceedings have been completed.



      10.   Completion of Work.  An applicant must complete all
work within two (2) years following the date of approval of a Part 1,
Preconstruction Application by staff.  A Preconstruction Application shall
be automatically revoked if the property owner has not submitted a Final
Application/Request for Review of Completed Work within two (2) years
following the date of approval of the Preconstruction Application.



      The Board, upon the recommendation of the City, may extend the
time for completion of a substantial improvement in accordance with the
procedures of the City's Building Code.



      11.   Final Application and Request for Review of Completed
Work.



         a.   The Final Application/Request for Review of
Completed Work shall be accompanied by documentation of the total cost of the
qualifying improvements.  Appropriate documentation may include, but is not
limited to paid contractor's bills, cancelled checks, and an approved
building permit application listing the cost of work to be performed.  Upon
the receipt of a Final Application/Request for Review of Completed Work and
all required supporting documents, the City shall inspect the completed
improvements to ensure compliance with the Preconstruction Application,
Certificate of Appropriateness, and any approved amendments.



         b.   If the City determines that the work is a
qualifying improvement and is in compliance with the review standards
contained herein, the Final Application/Request for Review of Completed Work
shall be approved and forwarded to the Board for review, and written notice
shall be provided to the applicant.



         c.   If the City determines that the work as completed
is not in compliance with the Preconstruction Application or the established
timeframe as described in this section, the applicant shall be given written
explanation for such findings, including recommendations concerning the
changes to the proposed work necessary to make it a qualifying improvement
and bring it into compliance with the review standards.  The application
will be forwarded to the Board for review once the applicant makes the
adequate changes necessary for compliance, or upon receiving notice from the
applicant that no further changes will be made to the project.



      12.   Recommendations to Historic Resources Preservation Board
and City Commission.  On completion of the review of a Final
Application/Request for Review of Completed Work, the City shall present such
Final Application in a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board and recommend
that such Board grant or deny the exemption.  The recommendation and
explanation shall be provided in writing to the applicant and Board for
consideration at a public meeting. The application, along with a
recommendation of approval or denial shall subsequently be forwarded by the
Board to the City Commission for final consideration.



      13.   Approval by the City Commission.  Upon approval of a
Final Application/Request for Review of Completed Work by the Board, the
Final Application shall be placed by resolution on the agenda of the City
Commission for approval. The resolution to approve the Final Application
shall indicate the property owner, property address and legal description,
time period that exemption will remain in effect and expiration date, and
shall require the owner to record the restrictive covenant in the Official
Record Book of Palm Beach County. The applicant shall provide the City with
two (2) certified copies of the recorded covenant.



      14.   Notice of Approval to the Property Appraiser.  The City
shall transmit the following certified copies to the Palm Beach County
Property Appraiser: 1) recorded restrictive covenant; 2) approved Final
Application/Request for Review of Completed Work; and the resolution of the
City Commission approving the Final Application and authorizing the tax
exemption.



      15.   Effective Date and Duration of Tax Exemption.  When the
City Commission approves a historic preservation tax exemption, the covenant
shall be in effect for ten (10) years; however, the City Commission has the
discretion to approve a shorter time frame if petitioned by the property
owner. The effective date of the exemption shall be January 1 of the
following year from when the covenant and resolution are recorded with the
Palm Beach County Clerk of the Court.



      16.   Property Maintenance, Penalty, and Revocation.  The
character of the property and qualifying improvements are to be maintained
during the period that the exemption is granted. Such covenant shall be
binding on the current property owner, transferees, and their heirs, assigns
and successors. A violation of the covenant shall result in the revocation of
the granted tax exemption, and the property owner being subject to the
payment of taxes that would have been owed had the exemption not been
initially granted (see subparagraph (2) below). The revocation process shall
occur as follows:



         a.   Revocation Proceedings.



            (1)   Staff or the Board may initiate proceedings
to revoke the ad valorem tax exemption provided herein, in the event the
applicant, or subsequent owner or successors in interest to the property,
fails to maintain the property according to the terms and conditions of the
covenant;



            (2)   The Board shall provide notice to the
current owner of record of the property and hold a revocation public hearing,
and make a recommendation to the City Commission;



            (3)   The City Commission shall review the
recommendation of the Board and make a determination as to whether the tax
exemption shall be revoked.  Should the City Commission determine that the
tax exemption shall be revoked, a written resolution revoking the exemption
and notice of penalties as provided herein shall be provided to the owner,
the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser and filed in the fficial records of
Palm Beach County;



            (4)   Upon receipt of the resolution revoking the
tax exemption, the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser shall discontinue the
tax exemption on the property as of January 1 of the year following receipt
of the notice of revocation; and



         b.   Notice of Penalties.  The resolution revoking the
tax exemption shall include a statement that a penalty equal to the total
amount of taxes that would have been due in March of each of the previous
years in which the tax exemption and covenant were in effect had the property
not received the exemption, less the amount of taxes actually paid in those
years, plus interest on the difference calculated as provided in Section
212.12, Florida Statutes shall be imposed by the Palm Beach County Tax
Collector for violation of the terms, conditions and standards of the
Historic Preservation Exemption Covenant.



      17.   Annual Report. The City shall prepare an annual report
to the City Commission regarding the tax exemption proposed in this article.
The report shall be filed in January of each calendar year, and shall
summarize the activities of the City and Board related to this article during
the previous calendar year. The information shall include, but not be limited
to, a list of the properties for which a Part 1, Preconstruction Application,
and Part 2, Final Application/Request for Review of Completed Work were made
during the preceding year; an explanation of the disposition of each
application; the expenditures on each approved qualifying improvement during
the calendar year; the total number of properties currently participating in
the program provided within this article; and any other information requested
by the City Commission.



   E.   Standards for Archeological Work; Discovery of Archeological
Site.



      1.   The Historic Preservation Planner shall be responsible
for identifying, protecting, managing and promoting all cultural resources
(historic and prehistoric sites and districts) within the municipal bounds.



      2.   Archaeological Work.  Archeological surveys,
assessments, excavations, and other work required by this ordinance shall be
conducted by a qualified, professional archeologist and be consistent with
the guidelines for such work promulgated by Palm Beach County that are
consistent with accepted professional standards and regulations developed by
the Florida Department of State Division of Historical Resources and the
United States Department of the Interior, or their successor agencies.



      3.   Site Discovered During the Development Process.  In the
event that archaeological materials are discovered by ground disturbing
activities on any property within the City, such activities in the immediate
vicinity of the archaeological site shall be discontinued immediately and the
Planning & Zoning Department notified. The site shall be inspected and may be
required to be assessed by a qualified professional archaeologist at the
expense of the property owner.



      4.   Unmarked Human Graves. If a discovery is made of an
unmarked human grave or graves, then the procedures for notifying the State
Archaeologist and County Medical Examiner shall be followed, consistent with
state law.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 11-006, passed 2-15-11; Am. Ord.
12-008, passed 5-15-12; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



Sec. 7.   Enforcement and Penalties.



   The City or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-016, passed 10-2-12)



ARTICLE X.  FLOOD PREVENTION REQUIREMENTS



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Short Title.  This article shall hereafter be known and cited
as the "City Flood Prevention Code."



   B.   Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this article and the flood
load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building
Code (FBC) are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public
health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to:



      1.   a.   Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce,
access, and public service during times of flooding;



         b.   Require the use of appropriate construction
practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage;



         c.   Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving,
excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other
development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential;



         d.   Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas,
watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the
natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain;



         e.   Minimize damage to public and private facilities
and utilities;



         f.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for
the sound use and development of flood hazard areas;



         g.   Minimize the need for future expenditure of public
funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood
events;



         h.   Meet the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) for community participation as set forth in the
Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations (44 CFR); and



         i.   To insure that potential homebuyers are notified
that property is in a flood area.



      2.   Methods of Reducing Flood Loss.  In order to accomplish
its objectives, this article includes methods and provisions that are
designed to:



         a.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to
health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result
in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



         b.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including
facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction;



         c.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains,
stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters;



         d.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other
development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and



         e.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood
barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase
flood hazards to other lands.



      3.   This article is intended to be administered and enforced
in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to
the edition of the standard that is referenced in the Florida Building Code.



   C.   Administration.



      1.   Administrator.  The Building Official is designated the
Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator shall have the
authority to interpret and administer this article and may delegate
performance of certain duties to other employees. The Floodplain
Administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this
article consistent with the intent and purpose of this article and may
establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its
provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the
effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this article without
the granting of a variance issued in accordance with Chapter 2, Article IV,
Section 4.



      2.   Duties.  Duties of the administrator or his designee
shall include, but not be limited to:



         a.   Review all development permits to determine whether
proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas to assure that
the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied.  This includes
reviewing applications for modifications of any existing development in flood
hazard areas.



         b.   Advise permittee that additional federal or state
permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known,
require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with
the development permit. Such permits include but are not limited to:



            i.   The South Florida Water Management District;
section 373.036, F.S.



            ii.   Florida Department of Health for onsite
sewage treatment and disposal systems; section 381.0065, F.S. and Chapter
64E-6, F.A.C.



            iii.   Florida Department of Environmental
Protection for construction, reconstruction, changes, or physical activities
for shore protection or other activities seaward of the coastal construction
control line; section 161.141, F.S.



            iv.   Florida Department of Environmental
Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit: section
161.055, F.S.



            v.   Florida Department of Environmental
Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows,
in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the
Clean Water Act.



            vi.   Federal permits and approvals.



         c.   Notify adjacent communities and the state division
of emergency management prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



         d.   Assure that maintenance is provided within the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.



         e.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions), the administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.  The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
Chapter 1, Article VIII, Section 1.D.2.



         f.   Determine whether additional flood hazard data
shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant.



         g.   Review applications to determine whether proposed
development will be reasonably safe from flooding.



         h.   Issue development permits or approvals for
development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the FBC,
including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the FBC, when
compliance with this article is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the
event of noncompliance.



         i.   Coordinate with and provide comments to the
Building Official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections
for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable
provisions of this article.



      3.   Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage
Determinations.  For applications for building permits to improve buildings
and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations,
substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other
improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain
Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall:



         a.   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant
to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified
independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of
construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of
the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage
occurred and before any repairs are made;



         b.   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the
cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the
combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market
value of the building or structure;



         c.   Determine and document whether the proposed work
constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and



         d.   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the
work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and
that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the FBC
and this article is required.



      4.   Modifications of the strict application of the
requirements of the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall
review requests submitted to the Building Official that seek approval to
modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant
construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether
such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Chapter 2,
Article IV, Section 4.



      5.   Notice and Orders.  The Floodplain Administrator shall
coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary
notices or orders to ensure compliance with this article.



      6.   Inspections. The Floodplain Administrator shall make the
required inspections for development that is not subject to the Florida
Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the
Florida Building Code and manufactured homes. The Floodplain Administrator
shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken
without issuance of a permit.



      7.   Other Duties.  The Floodplain Administrator shall have
other duties, including but not limited to:



         a.   Establish, in coordination with the Building
Official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of
substantial improvement and substantial damage;



         b.   Require that applicants proposing alteration of a
watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency
Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such
notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);



         c.   Require applicants who submit hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to
FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM) if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood
hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be
made within six (6) months of such data becoming available;



         d.   Review required design certifications and
documentation of elevations specified by this article and the FBC and this
article to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete;



         e.   Notify FEMA when the corporate boundaries of the
city are modified; and



         f.   Advise applicants for new buildings and structures,
including substantial improvements, that are located in any unit of the
Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources
Act (Pub. L. 97-348) and the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (Pub. L.
101-590 that federal flood insurance is not available on such construction;
areas subject to this limitation are identified on the FIRM as "Coastal
Barrier Resource System Areas" and "Otherwise Protected Areas."



         g.   Floodplain Management Records.  Regardless of any
limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the
Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make
available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the
administration of this article and the flood resistant construction
requirements of the FBC, including FIRM; Letters of Map Change; records of
issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed
work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage;
required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by
the FBC and this article: notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and
the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood
carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation
related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or
denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this article and
the flood resistant construction requirements of the FBC.  These records
shall be available for public inspection at the Development Department.



   D.   Applicability.



      1.   Scope.  This article applies to all development of real
property located within the city, including areas of special flood hazard. 
Development shall include but not be limited to the subdivision of land;
filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations;
construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement,
repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities
that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or
replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or
replacement of tanks; installation of swimming pools; and any other
development.



      2.   Basis for Establishing Flood Hazard Areas.  The Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Palm Beach County, Florida and Incorporated Areas
dated October 5, 2017, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the
accompanying FIRMs, and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps,
are adopted by reference as a part of this article and shall serve as the
minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas.  Studies and maps that
establish flood hazard areas are on file in the Development Department at the
city.



      3.   Additional Data to Establish Flood Hazard Area.  To
establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations pursuant to this
article the Floodplain Administrator may require submission of additional
data.  Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed
professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community
indicates that ground elevations:



         a.   Are below the closest applicable base flood
elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a
FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the
requirements of this article and, as applicable, the requirements of the FBC.



         b.   Are above the closest applicable base flood
elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless
the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change (LOMC) that removes the area
from the special flood hazard area.



   E.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the regulations and
standards contained herein.



   F.   Rules.



      1.   Compliance.  No structure or land shall hereafter be
located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance
with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.



      2.   Abrogation.  This article supersedes any ordinance in
effect for management of development in flood hazard areas.  However, it is
not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not
limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater
management regulations, or the FBC.  In the event of a conflict between this
article and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern.  This
article shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any
land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this article.



      3.   Interpretation.  In the interpretation and application
of this article all provisions shall be:



         a.   Considered as minimum requirements;



         b.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body;
and



         c.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statutes.



   G.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of this
article conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply, unless
otherwise stated herein.  The provisions of this article shall not be deemed
to nullify any provisions of local, state, or federal law.



   H.   Relief from Requirements.  Unless described otherwise, any
deviation from the flood prevention regulations contained herein shall
require approval of variance application, which is subject to review and
approval by the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals.  A request for a
variance shall be reviewed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article IV, Section
4.



   I.   Warning and Disclaimer.  The degree of flood protection
required by this article and the FBC, as amended by this community, is
considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations.  Larger floods can and will
occur.  Flood heights may be increased by man made or natural causes.  This
article does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard
areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free
from flooding or flood damage.  The flood hazard areas and base flood
elevations contained in the FIS and shown on FIRM and the requirements of 44
CFR may be revised by the FEMA, requiring this community to revise these
regulations to remain eligible for participation in the NFIP.  No guaranty
of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by
compliance with this article.  This article shall not create liability on
the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that results from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 13-013, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord.
13-020, passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 17-029, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 2.   City Approval Required.



   Any owner or owner's authorized agent who intends to undertake any
development activity within the scope of this article, which is wholly within
or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the
Floodplain Administrator or designee and shall obtain the required permit(s)
and approval(s).  No such permit or approval shall be issued until
compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable
codes and regulations has been satisfied.  Flood zone elevation
certification shall be required for improvements in applicable flood zones,
and reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 2,
Article IV, Section 2 for any type of building permit application that upon
its completion, would result in the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
With respect to building and land development permits, the site plan or
construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of
this article shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the
proposed development:



   A.   Development in Flood Hazard Areas.



      1.   Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries
and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if
necessary for review of the proposed development.



      2.   Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not
included on the FIRM or in the FIS, they shall be established in accordance
with Section 2.B. or Section 2.C. below.



      3.   Where the parcel on which the proposed development will
take place will have more than fifty (50) lots or is larger than five (5)
acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the
FIS, such elevations shall be established in accordance with Section 2.B.
below.



      4.   Location of the proposed activity and proposed
structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal
high hazard areas, new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of
mean high tide.



      5.   Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of
any filling, grading, or excavation.



      6.   Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount,
type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description
of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed
fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose.



      7.   Delineation of the Coastal Construction Control Line
(CCCL) or notation that the site is seaward of the coastal construction
control line, if applicable.



      8.   Extent of any proposed alteration of sand dunes or
mangrove stands, provided such alteration is approved by the Florida
Department of Environmental Protection.



      9.   Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed
alteration of a watercourse.



      The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to waive the
submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are
required by this article, but that are not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed
development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to
ascertain compliance with this article.



   B.   Information in Flood Hazard Areas without Base Flood Elevations
(Approximate Zone A).  Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM
and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the Floodplain
Administrator shall:



      1.   Require the applicant to include base flood elevation
data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices.



      2.   Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other
source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source.



      3.   Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not
available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the
Floodplain Administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or
where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically
incorrect or otherwise inadequate:



         a.   Require the applicant to include base flood
elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering
practices; or



         b.   Specify that the base flood elevation is two (2)
feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development,
provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be
greater than two (2) feet.



      4.   Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to
support a LOMC from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be
prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and
that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal
requirements and pay the processing fees.



   C.   Additional Analyses and Certifications.  As applicable to the
location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to
the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following
analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with
the site plan and construction documents:



      1.   For development activities proposed to be located in a
regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that
the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in
base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development
activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit
such analysis to FEMA as specified in Section 2.C.6. below and shall submit
the Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR), if issued by FEMA, with the
site plan and construction documents.



      2.   For development activities proposed to be located in a
riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in
the FIS or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation
more than one (1) foot at any point within the community.  This requirement
does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine
flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH.



      3.   Where small streams exist, but where no base flood data
has been provided or where no floodways have been provided, no encroachments,
including fill material or structures, shall be located within a distance of
the stream bank equal to five (5) times the width of the stream at the top of
bank or twenty (20) feet on each side from top of bank, whichever is greater,
unless certification by a Florida registered engineer is provided
demonstrating that such encroachments will not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



      4.   For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis
prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates
that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the
watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered
watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's
flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as
specified in Section 2.C.6. below.



      5.   For activities that propose to alter sand dunes or
mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), an engineering
analysis that demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the
potential for flood damage.



      6.   When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other
engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support
an application, the applicant has the right to seek a Letter of Map Change
from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or
change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such
data to FEMA for such purposes.  The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida
licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA.  Submittal requirements and
processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 13-013, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord.
13-020, passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 17-029, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 3.   Minimum Finished Floor Elevation (Non-Flood Hazard Area).



The finished floor elevation of all habitable space of new construction not
located in a flood hazard area shall be elevated a minimum of twelve (12)
inches above the average crown height of the adjacent roadway.  The finished
floor elevation of all habitable space of building additions and/or
substantial improvements not located in a flood hazard area shall be no lower
than the existing finished floor elevation.



(Ord. 13-013, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord. 13-020, passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 17-029,
passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 4.   Minimum Lowest Floor in Areas of Indeterminate Drainage (Zone
AO).



In areas of indeterminate drainage subject to sheet flow (Zone AO), lowest
floors shall be at or above the elevation specified in the Florida Building
Code or at least 2 feet above the average crown of road, whichever is higher.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 13-013, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord.
13-020, passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 17-029, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 5.   Specific Requirements by Type of Improvement or Development.



   A.   Site Improvements, Utilities and Limitations.



      1.   General.  All proposed new development shall be reviewed
to determine that:



         a.   Such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding;



         b.   All public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and



         c.   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.



      2.   Sanitary Sewage Facilities.  All new and replacement
sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all
pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems
shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage
treatment and disposal systems in FAC Chapter 64E-6 and ASCE 24, Chapter 7 to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and
discharge from the facilities into floodwaters, and impairment of the
facilities and systems.



      3.   Water Supply Facilities.  All new and replacement water
supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well
construction standards in FAC Chapter 62-532.500 and ASCE 24, Chapter 7 to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.



      4.   Limitations on Placement of Fill.  Subject to the
limitations of this article, fill shall be designed to be stable under
conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of
floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related
erosion and scour.  In addition to these requirements, if intended to
support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the
requirements of the FBC.



      5.   Limitations on Sites in Regulatory Floodways. No
development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land
disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the
regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in
Section 2.C.1 of this article demonstrates that the proposed development or
land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood
elevation.



   B.   Subdivision Standards.



      1.   General.  The following provisions shall apply for all
subdivision proposals:



         a.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with
the need to minimize flood damage.



         b.   All subdivision proposals shall have public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



         c.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



         d.   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contains more than
fifty (50) lots or is larger than five (5) acres.



         e.   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.



      2.   Subdivision Plats.  Where any portion of proposed
subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within
a flood hazard area, the following shall be required:



         a.   Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway
boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate,
shall be shown on preliminary plats;



         b.   Where the subdivision has more than fifty (50) lots
or is larger than five (5) acres and base flood elevations are not included
on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with the
requirements contained herein; and



         c.   Compliance with the site improvement and utilities
requirements contained herein of this article.



   C.   Manufactured Homes.



      1.   General.  All manufactured homes installed in flood
hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to
F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of FAC Chapter 15C-1
and the requirements of this article.  If located seaward of the CCCL, all
manufactured homes shall comply with the more restrictive of the applicable
requirements.



      2.   Foundations.  All new manufactured homes and replacement
manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on
permanent, reinforced foundations that:



         a.   In flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal
high hazard areas, are designed in accordance with the foundation
requirements of the FBC, Residential Section R322.2 and this article.
Foundations for manufactured homes subject to Section 5.C.6 below are
permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least
equivalent strength.



         b.   In coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), are designed
in accordance with the foundation requirements of the FBC, Residential
Section R322.3 and this article.



      3.   Anchoring.  All new manufactured homes and replacement
manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.  Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.  This anchoring requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind
resistance.



      4.   Elevation.  Manufactured homes that are placed,
replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with Section 5.C.5. or
Section 5.C.6. below, as applicable.



      5.   General Elevation Requirement.  Unless subject to the
requirements of Section 5.C.6. below, all manufactured homes that are placed,
replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: 1) outside of a
manufactured home park or subdivision; 2) in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision; 3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or 4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon
which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of
a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above
the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the FBC,
Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V).



      6.   Elevation Requirement for Certain Existing Manufactured
Home Parks and Subdivisions.  Manufactured homes that are not subject to
Section 5.C.5. of this article, including manufactured homes that are placed,
replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial
damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either
the:



         a.   Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at
or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in
the FBC, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V); or



         b.   Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
not less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade.



      7.   Enclosures.  Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured
homes shall comply with the requirements of the FBC, Residential Section R322
for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area.



      8.   Utility Equipment.  Utility equipment that serves
manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with
the requirements of the FBC, Residential Section R322, as applicable to the
flood hazard area.



   D.   Tanks.



      1.   Underground Tanks.  Underground tanks in flood hazard
areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the
design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty.



      2.   Above-Ground Tanks, Not Elevated.  Above-ground tanks
that do not meet the elevation requirements of Section 5.D.3. below shall:



         a.   Be permitted in flood hazard areas (Zone A) other
than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise
designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the
design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty
and the effects of flood-borne debris.



         b.   Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (Zone
V).



      3.   Above-Ground Tanks, Elevated.  Above-ground tanks in
flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design
flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design
flood.  Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of
the applicable flood hazard area.



      4.   Tank Inlets and Vents.  Tank inlets, fill openings,
outlets and vents shall be:



         a.   At or above the design flood elevation or fitted
with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the
contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and



         b.   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the design flood.



   E.   Buildings and Structures.



      1.   Buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt
from the Florida Building Code. Buildings, structures, and facilities that
are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement
or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities,
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood
resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the
Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply
with the requirements of Section 5.F below.



      2.   Buildings and structures seaward of the coastal
construction control line. If extending, in whole or in part, seaward of the
coastal construction control line and also located, in whole or in part, in a
flood hazard area:



         a.   Buildings and structures shall be designed and
constructed to comply with the more restrictive applicable requirements of
the Florida Building Code, Building Section 3109 and Section 1612 or Florida
Building Code, Residential Section R322.



         b.   Minor structures and non-habitable major structures
as defined in section 161.54, F.S., shall be designed and constructed to
comply with the intent and applicable provisions of this ordinance and ASCE
24.



   F.   Other Development.



      1.   General Requirements for Other Development. All
development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate
for which specific provisions are not specified in this article or the
Florida Building Code, shall:



         a.   Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;



         b.   Meet the limitations of Section 5.A.5 of this
article if located in a regulated floodway:



         c.   Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood;



         d.   Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials;
and



         e.   Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems
above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except
that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric
code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it
conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet
locations.



      2.   Fences in Regulated Floodways. Fences in regulated
floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such
as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of
Section 5.A.5 of this article.



      3.   Retaining Walls, Sidewalks and Driveways in Regulated
Floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the
placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of
Section 5.A.5 of this article.



      4.   Roads and Watercourse Crossings in Regulated Floodways.
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts,
low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel
from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into
regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of Section 5.A.5 of this
article. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse
crossing shall meet the requirements of Section 2.C.1 of this article,



      5.   Concrete Slabs Used as Parking Pads, Enclosure Floors,
Landings, Decks, Walkways, Patios and Similar Nonstructural Uses in Coastal
High Hazard Areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used
as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and
similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and
structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be:



         a.   Structurally independent of the foundation system
of the building or structure;



         b.   Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize
debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any
structure; and



         c.   Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four
(4) inches.



      6.   Decks and Patios in Coastal High Hazard Areas (Zone V).
In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high
hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in
compliance with the following:



         a.   A deck that is structurally attached to a building
or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member
at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend
below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation
requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed
to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck.



         b.   A deck or patio that is located below the design
flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or
structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and
constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood
conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during
flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or
structure or to adjacent buildings and structures.



         c.   A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of
more than twelve (12) inches or that is constructed with more than the
minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved
unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional
demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave
reflection that would increase damage to the building or structure or to
adjacent buildings and structures.



         d.   A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of
twelve (12) inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural
fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the
minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring
analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave
reflection.



      7.   Other Development in Coastal High Hazard Areas (Zone
V).  In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than
buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the
appropriate federal, state or local authority; if located outside the
footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and
if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate
no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that
would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other
development activities include but are not limited to:



         a.   Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments,
and similar erosion control structures;



         b.   Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to
trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood
conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid
obstruction of floodwaters; and



         c.   On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems
defined in 64E-6.002, F.A.C., as filled systems or mound systems.



      8.   Nonstructural Fill in Coastal High Hazard Areas (Zone V).
In coastal high hazard areas:



         a.   Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities
of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage
purposes under and around buildings.



         b.   Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are
steeper than one unit vertical to five units horizontal shall be permitted
only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional
demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave
reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures.



         c.   Where authorized by the Florida Department of
Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction
and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are
permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the
diversion of floodwater or wave runup and wave reflection if the scale and
location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and
the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the
lowest horizontal structural member of the building.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 13-013, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord.
13-020, passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 17-029, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 6.   Appeals.



   The Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall hear and decide on
requests for appeals from the strict application of this article and of the
flood resistant construction requirements of the FBC, excluding Section 3109
or latest supplement thereof.



(Ord. 13-020, passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 17-029, passed 9-19-17)



Sec. 7.   Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 13-013, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord.
13-020, passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 17-029, passed 9-19-17)



ARTICLE XI.  EXCAVATION AND FILL REGULATIONS



Sec. 1.   General.



   A.   Short Title.  This article shall hereafter be known and cited
as the "City Excavation and Fill Regulations."



   B.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this article is to provide
a set of regulations which govern the excavating, dredging, filling, and/or
grading materials on privately owned land within the City of Boynton Beach. 
It is intended that these Regulations provide a minimum set of standards to
be followed when excavating, dredging, filling, and/or grading materials is
proposed within the city in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare
of current and future residents.  The issuance of a permit by the city
pursuant to this chapter shall not relieve any party from obtaining the
necessary excavation, dredge and fill permits from other state, federal or
local governmental agencies which may have jurisdiction over the proposed
fill, dredge or excavation, and it shall not permit the destruction of ocean
front dunes seaward of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL)
established by the State of Florida (see also Chapter 4, Article I, Section
2; Chapter 3, Article IV, Section 1.H.; and City Code of Ordinances Part II,
Chapter 10, Sections 10-23, 10-26(d), and 10-30).  It is intended that
requirements contained herein apply to all excavating, dredging, filling, and
grading activities whether they are performed as part of the improvements
required in the platting process; when associated with simultaneous building
construction; or when performed as a separate operation.  The objectives of
these Regulations include, but are not limited to, the following:



      1.   Safety.  To provide a maximum degree of safety and
protection for the public through the orderly control of excavation
operations;



      2.   Mitigation.  To mitigate nuisances and reduce the
negative impact of excavation operation on the residents and the environment;



      3.   Hazards.  To provide a living environment for future
residents that is relatively free from hazards which could result from
misdirected excavation operations;



      4.   Order.  To provide for the orderly excavation of land
consistent with the public health, safety and welfare; and



      5.   Ecosystems.  To prohibit land clearing practices that
destroy native Florida ecosystems in whole or in part.



   C.   Administration.  The City Engineer or designee shall have the
authority to interpret and administer this article.



   D.   Applicability.  These Regulations shall be applicable to all
lands within the corporate limits of the city.  It is intended that
requirements contained herein apply to all excavating, dredging, filling, and
grading activities whether they are performed as part of the improvements
required in the platting process; when associated with simultaneous building
construction; or when performed as a separate operation.



   E.   Exemptions.  The construction of a single-family or duplex
dwelling unit on an individually platted lot within single-family or
two-family residential zoning districts.



   F.   Terms and Definitions.  See Chapter 1, Article II for all
applicable terms and definitions which pertain to the regulations and
standards contained herein.



   G.   Conflict.  Whenever the regulations and requirements of this
Code conflict with any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply, unless otherwise
stated herein.



   H.   Relief from Standards.  In addition to the regulations of this
article, all lands shall be improved in conformance with the minimum
standards as set forth in the current Engineering Design Handbook and
Construction Standards or latest supplement thereof.  Any deviation from the
excavation and fill regulations contained herein or within the Engineering
Design Handbook and Construction Standards requires the approval of a waiver
application, which is subject to review and approval of the City Engineer. 
A request for a waiver shall be reviewed in accordance with Chapter 2,
Article III, Section 5.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 2.   City Approval Required.



   No excavating, dredging, filling, and grading activities shall commence
without first securing the necessary city approvals and permits as provided
hereunder, except in instances when exempt from these Regulations in
accordance with Section 1.D. above.  The following processes and permits are
intended to ensure that all excavating, dredging, filling, and grading
activities comply with the standards of this article:



   A.   Private Property and Public Lands.  The property owner or
agent shall file the following applications prior to commencement of any of
the aforementioned improvements:



      1.   Site Plan Review.  The site plan review process shall be
required and in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 2,
Article II, Section 2.F. prior to the issuance of any land development
permit.  For the purpose of this subsection, the term "site plan" is
construed to include master site plan and technical site plan applications.



      2.   Land Development Permit.



         a.   The land development permit process shall only be
initiated subsequent to the approval of the following: 1) final plat
application in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 2, Article
II, Section 2, unless otherwise determined by the City Engineer; and 2) site
plan application, except in those instances when site plan review is not
required. 



         b.   The land development permit application shall be
processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 2, Article
III, Section 3.  The applicant must secure approval from the City Commission
for all work involving the movement of material one thousand (1,000) cubic
yards or greater beyond the property lines. 



         c.   Any excavation or fill activity that includes the
removal, relocation, or replacement of existing plant material shall be
subject to the environmental protection standards of Chapter 4, Article I. 
For clarification, a community garden shall be exempt from the Tree
Preservation Ordinance with respect to the fruits, vegetables, nuts, and
herbs growing on the subject property in connection with the approved
activity.



         d.   The issuance of a land development permit shall not
relieve any party from obtaining the necessary permits which may be required
by the various federal, state, or local government agencies.



   B.   City Rights-of-Way.  A right-of-way permit application shall
be required for any proposal to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or
grade in, or upon, any area within a city right-of-way in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Chapter 2, Article III, Section 4.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 3.   Classifications of Excavation and Fill Activities.



   For the purpose of this section, excavating, filling, dredging, and
grading activities are further classified as follows:



   Activity involving the excavation and filling of materials not more
than two (2) feet below existing grade with no materials moved beyond the
project property lines.



   A.   Category 1.  Activity involving the excavation and/or filling
of materials not more than two (2) feet below existing grade with excavated
materials moved beyond the project property lines.



   B.   Category 2.  Activity involving the excavation and filling of
materials more than two (2) feet below existing grade or excavation below the
water table with no materials moved beyond the project property lines.



   C.   Category 3.  Activity involving the excavation of materials
more than two (2) feet below existing grade or excavation beyond the water
table with materials being moved beyond the project property lines.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 4.   Standards.



   The following standards shall apply to all applications for "Excavation
and Fill Permits":



   A.   Water Bodies.  Creation of water bodies.  In instances
involving the creation of water bodies as a result of excavating materials,
work shall comply with the requirements of the South Florida Water Management
District (SFWMD) except the city may impose more stringent requirements when
judged to be in the public interest.  Those requirements include but are not
limited to littoral and upland plantings in accordance with Chapter 4,
Article II, Section 4.A.9.



   All water bodies such as lakes, canals, and other stormwater detention
areas used for stormwater management shall be placed in water management
tracts shown on recordable documents and dedicated to the entity responsible
for their maintenance.  All water management tracts shall be constructed in
accordance with city standards.



   The ownership and maintenance responsibility for drainage facilities,
including lakes, shall be clearly stated in documents recorded in the County
Clerk's records.  Official copies of the recorded documents will be given to
the city prior to issuance of a certificate of completion.



   B.   Inspections.  In connection with the administration of this
section, inspections shall be requested by the developer as prescribed by the
City Engineer.



   C.   Reports.  A certified report shall be submitted each month by
the applicant's Florida registered engineer.



   Each report shall certify that the work is (or is not) conforming with
the requirements of the permit.  If the work is not in conformance, then the
report must list each item of work not consistent with the stipulations of
the permit and the remedial action that the engineer has taken concerning
each item.



   D.   Mitigation.  If building construction on the site is to be
delayed more than sixty (60) days after the site is cleared or partially
cleared, all disturbed portions of the site shall be seeded and mulched as
described in Chapter 4, Article I, Section 4.E.  The intention of this
paragraph is to provide adequate ground cover to all portions of a disturbed
site until permanent ground cover is installed.



   The applicant shall control blowing sand, dust and other airborne
particulate matter during clearing, grubbing, excavation and filling and
until such time as permanent ground cover is installed.  All Melaleuca,
Brazilian Pepper and Australian Pine which occurs on the site shall be
removed.



   E.   Archeological Artifacts.  Construction must immediately cease
upon discovery of archeological artifacts, and certified notification must be
forwarded within twenty-four (24) hours to the Division of Archives, History
and Records Management, Florida Department of State.  Artifacts must be
protected by the developer to the satisfaction of the division prior to
recommencement of construction in the immediate area of the discovery.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 5.   Restoration Surety.



   Applicant must submit surety as outlined in Chapter 2, Article III,
Section 6 in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the engineer's
certified cost for work according to this section.  The city shall, at all
times, have the authority to draw upon the surety and complete the work
should the applicant be in default of the permit requirements.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)



Sec. 6.   Penalties.



   The city or any other legal authority shall enforce any violation of
this article pursuant to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1,
Article I, Section 7 of these Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. 10-025, passed 12-7-10)


