CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF HIALEAH GARDENS, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published in 1996 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
HIALEAH GARDENS, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Gilda Cabrera de Corzo 
Mayor 
____________ 
Juan Carlos "J. C." Alvarez 
Guillermo "Bill" Cabrera 
Luciano "Lucky" Garcia 
Miguel Haddad 
Louise "Lucy" Valdes 
City Council 
____________ 
Neil Flaxman 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Charles E. Blazek 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
HIALEAH GARDENS, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Yioset De La Cruz (Group I) 
Mayor 
____________ 
Luciano "Lucky" Garcia (Chairman, Group II) 
Rolando Piña (Vice Chairman, Group V) 
Jorge A. Merida (Finance Director, Group III) 
Elmo L. Urra (Group IV) 
Jorge Gutierrez (Group VI) 
City Council 
____________ 
Charles A. Citrin 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Maria Joffee 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1985 Code, as supplemented through October 10, 1989, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1985 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Charles Vignos, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Charles Blazek, City Clerk, and Neil Flaxman, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida. 1996. 
ORDINANCE NO. 99-41 
AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING, APPROVING AND ADOPTING THE CODIFICATION OF THE CHARTER AND CODE OF THE CITY OF HIALEAH GARDENS ATTACHED HERETO AS EXHIBIT "A", EXCEPTING, HOWEVER, PROVISIONS RELATED TO LAND USE REGULATION AND LICENSING; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR EFFECTIVE DATE 
WHEREAS, the City of Hialeah Gardens Charter and Code have been codified in accordance with certain Charter amendments that have been adopted and ordinances which have been amended; and 
WHEREAS, attached hereto and made a part hereof is a true copy of the codification of said Code; and 
WHEREAS, with the exception of the Land Use Regulations and the licensing provisions contained in said Code, the City of Hialeah Gardens desires to accept said Charter and Code to be the Charter and Code of the City of Hialeah Gardens; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HIALEAH GARDENS, FLORIDA, AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1: The City of Hialeah Gardens does hereby accept, approve and adopt the Charter and Code, as prepared by Municipal Code Corporation and as attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein, with the exception of the chapter referred to as Land Use Regulations and Licensing. 
Section 2: The ordinances of the City of Hialeah Gardens, as it relates to Land Use Regulations and Licensing, together with codification of such ordinances in prior Codes, be and the same is hereby accepted, approved and adopted. 
Section 3: Should any section, paragraph, sentence, phrase, clause or other part or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the one part so declared to be invalid. 
Section 4: This ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption in accordance with law. PASSED AND ADOPTED this 4 th day of January, 2000. 
ATTEST: 
_____
Charles Blazek, City Clerk 	_____
Chairperson of the Council 
	
	_____
FATIMA R. MOREJON 
Acting Mayor of Hialeah Gardens, Florida 
 
Vote of the Council: 
	First Reading 	Second Reading 
Luciano Garcia 	Yes 	Yes 
Miguel Haddad 	Absent 	Yes 
Juan C. Alvarez 	Yes 	Yes 
Lucy Valdes 	Absent 	Yes 
Fatima R. Morejon 	Yes 	Yes 
		
		
		
 
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND SUFFICIENCY: 
      CITY ATTORNEY 	
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida, as adopted by referendum on March 6, 1984. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166. 
 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION 
 
Sec. 1. - Name. 
The present government existing under the name of "City of Hialeah Gardens" shall continue to exist and shall continue to be known as "City of Hialeah Gardens."  
Sec. 2. - Charter to prevail. 
This Charter, adopted by the electors of the City of Hialeah Gardens, shall supersede all previous Charters, and incorporate all provisions of the previous Charters of the City of Hialeah Gardens which are not embraced herein, and which are not inconsistent with this Charter, and which shall become ordinances of the City of Hialeah Gardens, subject to modification or repeal in the same manner as other ordinances of the City. This Charter, being adopted pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Florida, and F.S. ch. 166, eff. October 1, 1973, and amended, shall supersede all general laws of the State of Florida under which the City was heretofore organized.  
Sec. 3. - Existence and boundaries. 
The municipal corporation for which this Charter is adopted shall be known as the City of Hialeah Gardens, the inhabitants of which shall be and constitute a body, corporate and politic, with perpetual existence, within the boundaries and territorial limits of the County of Dade, State of Florida, as follows: 
All that part of Section 10, 53 South, 40 East, lying North and East from the center line of the Miami Canal. 
All that part of Section 3, 53 South, 40 East, lying North and East from the center line of the Miami Canal. 
All that part of Section 4, 53 South, 40 East, lying North and East from the center line of the Miami Canal. 
All that part of Section 33, 52 South, 40 East, lying North and East from the center line of the Miami Canal. 
All that part of Section 32, 52 South, 40 East, lying North and East from the center line of the Miami Canal. 
All that part of Section 29, 52 South, 40 East, lying North and East from the center line of the Miami Canal, less the North 330 feet of said section. 
City of Hialeah Gardens 
The procedures for adjusting the boundaries of Hialeah Gardens through annexations or contractions of its corporate limits will be as prescribed by F.S. ch. 171, as amended. 
State Law reference— Municipalities adopt annexation ordinances pursuant to the Dade County Charter, F.S. § 171.071.  
Sec. 4. - Powers of the municipality. 
A.  The City of Hialeah Gardens shall have governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions, and render municipal services, and may exercise any power for municipal purposes except where expressly prohibited by law. 
B.  The powers of the City of Hialeah Gardens shall be construed liberally in favor of the City, limited only by the State Constitution, general law, the Dade County Charter, and specific limitations contained herein. Through the adoption of this Charter, it is the intent of the electors of the City of Hialeah Gardens to grant the broadest exercise of home rule powers permitted under the State Constitution and State Law to the municipal government established herein. 
State Law reference— Home rule powers, F.S. § 166.021.  
ARTICLE II. - SUCCESSION 
 
Sec. 1. - Succession of rights. 
This municipality shall succeed to the title, rights, and ownership of property, uncollected taxes, claims, judgments, decrees, and choses in action, including any and all property rights, personal or mixed, of any nature whatsoever held or owned by the City prior to the adoption of this Charter, all of which shall pass to and be vested in the City under this Charter.  
Sec. 2. - Continuance of contractual obligations. 
This Charter shall not be construed in any manner to impair any obligations or contracts, debts, or obligations heretofore binding upon the City, and the same shall continue to be binding on the City under this Charter.  
Sec. 3. - Pending matters. 
All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings involving the City shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this Charter.  
Sec. 4. - Ordinances and resolutions preserved. 
All ordinances and resolutions in effect upon the adoption of this Charter, to the extent not inconsistent with it, shall remain in force until repealed or changed as provided herein.  
ARTICLE III. - GOVERNMENT 
 
Sec. 1. - Form of government. 
The form of government of the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida, provided for under this Charter shall be known as the "Mayor-Council form of Government." All legislative powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council. All executive powers of the City shall be vested in the Mayor. The Council shall consist of five (5) citizens, who are qualified voters of the city, and who shall hold no other elective public office, and who shall be elected in a manner hereinafter provided (Article III, Section 9). The individual Council members shall have one (1) vote in all matters before the City Council. The Mayor shall be a qualified voter of the City, and shall hold no other elective public office, and shall be elected in a manner hereinafter provided (Article III, Section 9). In the event of a tie vote by the members of the City Council, the issue shall be considered defeated; however, the Mayor shall have the right, at his discretion, to call a special Council meeting within ten (10) days to reconsider this particular issue. In the event a vacancy exists in the Council, the Mayor shall have the right to cast one (1) tie-breaking vote.  
Sec. 2. - Powers of the City Council. 
A.  The City Council shall constitute the governing body of the City with all governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers of the City of Hialeah Gardens. The Council shall have the power to pass ordinances, resolutions, and to adopt regulations to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions, and to render municipal services. 
B.  The City Council shall be the legislative and governing body of the City, with the assistance of such officers, servants, agents, and employees as may be deemed necessary. The Council shall by resolution provide for and set the compensation of all employees. Each member of the City Council may appoint to any board or committee one (1) member, who is a registered voter of the City of Hialeah Gardens, or is the proprietor of an established business in the City of Hialeah Gardens, to serve at the discretion of the Council without compensation, with such duties as provided by resolution as the Council may deem necessary. 
C.  The City Council shall elect by majority vote from within itself a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson, and a Financial Director, at the organizational meeting following each election. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166.  
Sec. 3. - Powers of the Mayor. 
A.  The Mayor shall constitute the executive head of the City, with all the necessary powers and authority to enforce all laws, ordinances, and resolutions of the City Council. 
B.  The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the City for all ceremonial purposes, by the Courts for the purpose of serving civil process, and by the Governor for all military or Civil Defense purposes. In time of public danger or emergency, the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, may take command of the police to maintain order and enforce the laws. 
C.  During the Mayor's absence or disability, the duties of Mayor shall be performed by the Chairperson of the City Council. 
D.  The Mayor shall be responsible for the preparation of an annual budget in a manner hereinafter provided (Article IV, Section 2). 
E.  The Mayor shall advise the City Council as to the needs of the City. It shall be the duty of the Mayor to keep the City Council well informed as to the financial condition of the City. 
F.  The Mayor may appoint to any board or committee, with the exception of the Zoning Board, two (2) members to serve at the discretion of the Council without compensation, with such duties as provided by resolution as the Council may deem necessary. 
G.  The Mayor shall be responsible for the day to day operation of the City by overseeing all City Departments. 
H.  The Mayor shall have the right and the responsibility to appoint and remove all officers, servants, agents and employees of the City, without the right of veto by the Council. In the event of demotion, suspension, or discharge of an employee, the employee, with written notice, is entitled to appeal to the Personnel Review Board, subject to the rules and regulations thereof. 
I.  The Mayor shall attend meetings of the City Council, with the right to take part in discussion on all matters before the Council, but not to vote, except as heretofore provided (Article III, Section 1). 
J.  The Mayor shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Charter, ordinances, or resolutions of the City Council. 
K.  The Mayor shall have the right and responsibility to appoint and remove all officers, servants, agents and employees of the City. 
(Ord. No. 97-19, § 2, 11-18-97/3-3-98)  
Sec. 4. - Rate of compensation of the City Council members and the Mayor. 
A.  The rate of compensation paid to Councilpersons shall be set by ordinance, provided, however, that there shall be at least a required four-fifths vote of the Council for adoption of any such ordinance. 
B.  The rate of compensation paid to the Mayor shall be set by ordinance, provided, however, that there shall be at least a required four-fifths vote of the Council for adoption of any such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 97-21A, § 2, 11-18-97/3-3-98; Ord. No. 97-20, § 2, 11-18-97/3-3-98; Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 12-7-99/3-14-00; Ord. No. 99-34, § 1, 12-7-99/3-14-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. Nos. 99-33 and 99-34 superseded and replaced Ord. Nos. 99-12 and 99-13, respectively. Ord. Nos. 99-12 and 99-13 affected the same portions of this Charter (art. III, §§ 4A and 4B) as Ord. Nos. 99-33 and 99-34.  
Sec. 5. - General and Run-off elections. 
Nonpartisan General Elections for the nomination of candidates shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in March of each year. Run-off elections shall be held fourteen (14) days following the General Election. 
(Ord. No. 99-38, § 1, 12-7-99/3-14-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-38 superseded and replaced Ord. No. 99-10. Ord. No. 99-10 affected the same portions of this Charter (art. III, § 5) as Ord. No. 99-38, but was never voted upon and was therefore omitted from notation within this Code. 
State Law reference— Florida Election Code, F.S. chs. 97—106.  
Sec. 6. - Qualifications of candidates. 
A.  Candidates for public office shall reside in the City of Hialeah Gardens for a period of at least one (1) year preceding the general election for which said candidate qualifies for and, in addition, candidates shall have been registered on the City Voters Registration Books as being eligible to vote at such general election. 
B.  The name of any qualified elector of the City shall be placed on the general election ballot as a candidate for nomination to the office of Mayor or as a candidate for nomination to a seat on the City Council upon: 
1.  Submitting to the City Clerk a petition signed by at least twenty-five (25) registered voters of the City, on a form supplied by the City Clerk, not more than seventy-five (75) days or less than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the general election. 
2.  Paying a qualifying fee to the City of Hialeah Gardens of one hundred ($100) dollars if qualifying for the office of Mayor, and fifty ($50) dollars if qualifying for a seat on the City Council. 
3.  Submitting to the City Clerk, on a form supplied by the City Clerk, a sworn statement as to the applicant's full name, address, occupation, and willingness to serve if elected to office (in accordance with Section 6, Paragraph A, hereof.) 
(Referendum, 3-3-87; Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 12-7-99/3-14-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-37 superseded and replaced Ord. No. 99-11. Ord. No. 99-11 affected the same portion of this Charter (art. III, § 6A) as Ord. No. 99-37, but was never voted upon and was therefore omitted from notation within this Code.  
Sec. 7. - Supervisor of City elections. 
A.  Every municipal election shall be conducted by and be under the personal supervision of the City Clerk, who is hereby empowered and directed to exercise all of the powers and to perform all of the duties and functions appropriate to the conduct of such election, including the establishment, promulgation, and enforcement of such rules and regulations relating to such election and the establishment, maintenance, filing, and preservation of such election records as the City Clerk may deem necessary, or which may be required by City, County, or State Law. 
B.  Prior to each municipal election, the Mayor shall designate a Clerk of Election and one inspector of election, and each Council member shall appoint one inspector of election and the names of such clerks and inspectors shall be published by posting at City [Hall]. All persons who shall serve as clerks of election or as inspectors of election at any municipal election held in the City shall have the status of casual and temporary employees not entitled to the status or to any of the rights or benefits of regular or permanent City employees.  
Sec. 8. - Judge of City elections. 
The City Council shall be the judge of all City elections, and the qualifications of all applicants for all elected City offices.  
Sec. 9. - Election of City officials and terms of office. 
A.  The office of Mayor shall be a nonpartisan office. The Mayor shall be elected by a majority vote of the City's electorate. All candidates seeking the office of Mayor shall file to run in Group I. All qualified candidates' names shall be placed on the general election's ballot. The names of the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be placed on the Run-off election's ballot, except if one candidate received a clear majority vote at the general election, in which case the candidate receiving the majority vote would be declared Mayor-elect. The candidate receiving the majority vote at the Run-off election shall be declared Mayor-elect. 
B.  The Mayor, Group I, shall be elected at the City's Run-off election in 1981, and thereafter shall be elected each odd numbered year for a four (4) year term of office. 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2244, § 2, adopted Mar. 18, 2008 set out provisions, affecting Sec. 9B., that the term of office of the Mayor be extended from a two-year term to a four-year term, commencing with the mayoral election to be held on Mar. 6, 1997. Election for said provisions was held on Sept. 3, 1996. 
C.  The five (5) seats that make up the City Council shall be nonpartisan offices. The five (5) members of the City Council shall be elected at large by a majority vote of the City's electorate. All candidates seeking a seat on the City Council shall file to run in any one (1) of the five (5) groups that represent the five (5) City Council seats, Group II, Group III, Group IV, Group V or Group VI. All qualified candidates filing for the same group shall have their names placed together on the general election's ballot. There shall be as many separate groups as there are seats on the Council open for election. The names of the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes in each group shall be placed on the Run-off election's ballot, except if one candidate received a clear majority vote over the other candidates in the group at the general election. In that case, the candidate receiving the majority vote would be declared Council-member-elect in that group. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes at the Run-off election shall be declared Council-member-elect in that group. 
D.  Commencing with the election in March 1997, all council groups shall serve a four year term, with one seat continuing to be two years. 
Editor's note— Ord No. 98-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1998, set out provisions to implement § D, as follows: "That all councilpersons elected at the next election (March 3, 1998) shall serve for a period of four years and at councilpersons elections after March 3, 1998, all councilperson's term of office shall be for four years, with the councilperson who receives the least votes in such election to serve for a two year term." 
E.  The City's Council members in Groups II, III, and IV shall be elected at the City's general or Run-off election in 1981. The City's Council members in Groups V and VI, shall be elected at the City's primary or Run-off election in 1982. 
F.  All elected City officials, Mayor, and City Council members, shall remain in office until their successors are elected and sworn into office. 
G.  Any incumbent City Council member seeking the office of Mayor, Group I, shall submit a written resignation to the City Clerk not less than ninety (90) days prior to the date of the City's Run-off election, and said resignation shall become effective on the date of the Run-off election. Upon receipt of a written resignation, the City Clerk shall make a public announcement of the resignation and will accept candidates to run for election to the remaining unexpired term of the City Council member's seat. 
H.  Any elected City Official, Mayor, or City Council member, seeking some other elective public office outside the City, shall submit a written resignation to the City Clerk upon qualifying for the other elective public office. Should the City official refuse or fail to submit a written resignation upon qualifying for another elective public office, the official shall be ousted from office and the office shall be declared vacant. 
I.  Any elected official, Mayor or City Council member, who no longer remains a resident and qualified elector of the City during their term in office, shall submit a written resignation to the City Clerk. Should the City Official refuse or fail to submit a written resignation, the official shall be ousted from office immediately, and the office shall be declared vacant. 
J.  The Mayor shall serve full time during regular City Hall business hours to fulfill the mayoral powers. Such mayoral service shall be the Mayor's only full time employment. 
(Referendum, 3-3-87; Ord. No. 90-50, § 2, 12-20-91/3-3-92; Ord. No. 90-53, § 2, 12-20-91/3-3-92; Ord. No. 94-09, § 1, 1-17-95/3-7-95; Ord. No. 96-20, § 1, 11-5-96/3-4-97; Ord. No. 98-01, § 1, 2-3-98; Res. No. 2244, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 10. - Recall of an elected City Official. 
The Mayor or any member of the City Council may be removed from office by the City's electorate in accordance with the recall procedure as established by F.S. § 100.361. Should the Florida State Legislature amend or adopt a new statute establishing recall proceedings, then the amended or new statute shall automatically be adopted by this section of the Hialeah Gardens City Charter. 
State Law reference— Recall of elected officials, F.S. § 100.361.  
Sec. 11. - Standards of conduct for City Officials and employees. 
A.  The standards of conduct for City Officials, both elected and nonelected, servants, agents, and other employees, shall be in accordance with The Standards of Conduct Law, F.S. § 112.311 et seq., and as amended. 
B.  No member of the immediate family of the Mayor, and no member of the immediate family of a City Council member, shall be chosen as the City Clerk, or to any other city office or employment. Further, this Charter adopts all the provisions of F.S. § 116.111. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.  
Sec. 12. - Rules for the City Council. 
A.  Should any elected official of the City fail to attend three (3) consecutive City Council meetings, the elected official shall be considered to have resigned the office. However, illness, absence from the City, or other reasonable excuse, may be offered in writing, for purposes of record, by the elected official, to the City Council. If such be accepted by the City Council, this provision shall not be invoked. 
B.  A minimum of three (3) members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum to do City business. 
C.  A minimum of three (3) affirmative votes is necessary for the City Council to act on any matter brought before the Council. 
D.  The City Council may determine its own rules of procedure and may punish its own members for misconduct. 
E.  The latest published and released edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall be the official parliamentary guide for all meetings of the City Council when it is not in conflict with the Charter or other rules adopted by the City Council. 
F.  All motions to be voted on by the City Council at a regular or special meeting must be pertinent to the items on the official agenda for that specific City Council meeting. This requirement may be waived by the unanimous consent of the City Council in order to conduct matters of an emergency nature. 
G.  Forty-eight (48) hours after the close of the polls on the date of the City's Run-off election, the City Council shall meet in the Council Chambers of the City for the purpose of swearing in the newly elected City officials. Thereafter the City Council shall meet at such time and place as shall be prescribed by resolution of the City Council. 
H.  All meetings of the City Council and all sessions of any Board or Committee of the City shall be public. 
I.  No member of the City Council shall be excused from voting except on matters involving the consideration of his or her own official conduct, or where his or her financial interests are involved. 
(Referendum, 3-3-87) 
State Law reference— Voting conflicts, F.S. § 112.3143.  
Sec. 13. - Manner of passage of ordinances. 
A.  All ordinances, except concerning appropriations or budget, shall be confined to one subject which shall be clearly expressed in the title. Any ordinance concerning appropriations or budget shall be confined to the subject of appropriations or budget. 
B.  No ordinance shall be passed until it has been read into the public record by title, or in full, on two separate occasions, separated by at least a period of twenty-four (24) hours. Ordinances shall be read by title only unless a motion to read an ordinance in its entirety is duly made and seconded, and at least two-thirds of the Council members present agree to the reading in its entirety. 
C.  Copies of all proposed ordinances shall be furnished to each Council member and the Mayor, at least seven (7) days before the first reading of the ordinance. This requirement may be waived by a unanimous consent of the City Council. Copies of all proposed ordinances shall be made available to all interested persons at City Hall during normal business hours. 
D.  The "Yes" and "No" votes of the City Council members shall be taken and placed into the public record on the consideration of all ordinances. Every ordinance shall require, on each reading, a minimum of three (3) affirmative votes for passage. 
E.  All ordinances passed by the City Council shall be submitted before going into effect, to the Mayor or person acting as such, for his approval. If approved he shall sign the same, when it shall become a law. If vetoed, he shall return the same with his objections in writing to the City Council, at their next regular meeting, who shall cause the same to be entered in full upon the record of their proceedings, and proceed to consider the Mayor's objections, and to act upon the same. If, upon consideration, the City Council shall pass the same by a two-thirds vote of the members present, which vote shall be entered upon the records, the ordinance or ordinances shall then become a law, the Mayor's objections to the contrary notwithstanding. Any ordinance which shall not be returned to the City Council at the next regular meeting of the Council after its passage, shall become a law in like manner as if signed by the Mayor or person acting as such. 
F.  All procedures for adoption of ordinances and resolutions as set forth in F.S. § 166.041 shall be adopted by this Charter, and should the State of Florida Legislature amend or adopt a new statute establishing procedures for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, then the amended or new statute shall automatically be adopted by this Section of the City of Hialeah Gardens Charter. 
State Law reference— Minimum mandatory procedure for adoption of ordinances, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 14. - The initiative. 
A.  Power to initiate ordinances. The people shall have power at their option to propose ordinances, including ordinances granting franchises or privileges and to adopt the same at the polls, such power being known as the "initiative." A petition, meeting the requirements hereinafter provided and requesting the City Council to pass an ordinance, therein set forth or designated, shall be termed an initiative petition and shall be acted upon as hereinafter provided. 
B.  Preparation of initiative petition; affidavit of genuineness of signatures. Signatures of initiative petitions need not all be on one paper, but the circulator of every such paper shall make an affidavit that each signature appended to the paper is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, which affidavit shall be substantially in the following form: 
STATE OF FLORIDA 	) 	
	) 	SS. 
COUNTY OF DADE 	) 	
 
___________ being duly sworn, deposes and says that he is the circulator of the foregoing petition paper containing _____ signatures, and that the signatures appended thereto were made in his presence and are the signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
	(Signed) _____ 
 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this _____ day of ________ 19___. 
	_____
Notary Public 
 
With each signature shall be stated the place of residence of the signer, giving the street, number or other description sufficient to identify the place. All such papers pertaining to any one measure shall have written or printed thereon the names and addresses of at least fifteen (15) registered voters who shall be officially regarded as filing the petition, and shall constitute a committee of the petitions for the purposes hereinafter named. All such papers shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk as one instrument. 
C.  Filing of petitions. Within twenty (20) days after the filing of the petition, the City Clerk shall ascertain by examination the number of registered voters whose signatures are appended thereto and whether this number is at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of the registered voters as shown by the City registration books, and the City Clerk shall attach to said petition a certificate showing the result of such examination. If, by the City Clerk's certificate, of which notice in writing shall be given to one or more of the persons designated, the petition is shown to be insufficient, it may be amended within ten (10) days from the date of said certificate by filing supplementary petition papers with additional signatures. The City Clerk shall within ten (10) days after such amendments make examination of the amended petition, and if the City Clerk's certificate shall show the same to be insufficient, the Clerk shall file the petition in the City Clerk's office and shall notify each member of the committee of that fact. The final finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
D.  Submission of petition to City Council. If the petition shall be found to be sufficient, the City Clerk shall so certify and submit the proposed measure to the City Council at its next meeting. Upon receiving the proposed measure the City Council shall at once proceed to consider it and shall take final action thereon within thirty (30) days from the date it is filed with them. 
E.  Election on initiated measures. If the City Council shall fail to pass the proposed measure, or shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the petition, then the measure shall be submitted by the City Council to the vote of the electors at the next election occurring not less than thirty (30) days after the date of the final action by the City Council, and if no election is to be held within six (6) months from such date, then the City Council shall call a special election to be held not less than thirty (30) days nor more than forty-five (45) days from such date. When submitted the measure shall be in its original form. 
F.  Initiative ballots. The ballots used when voting upon any such proposed measure shall state the Title of the Measure, with a run-off statement of the substance thereof. When a measure proposed by initiative petition is passed by the City Council, but not in its original form, and is to be submitted to a vote of the electors, the measure as passed by the City Council shall not take effect until after such vote, and, if the measure so submitted be approved by a majority of electors voting thereon it shall thereupon become an ordinance of the City and the measure as passed by the City Council shall be deemed repealed. If a majority of the electors voting on any such measure shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon become an ordinance of the city, and may not be overturned except by referendum. 
G.  Number of measures to be initiated. Any number of proposed measures may be voted upon at the same election in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.  
Sec. 15. - Vacancies and filling vacancies. 
A.  Should a seat on the City Council become vacant due to the death, resignation, or removal from office in any manner authorized by law, the remaining unexpired term shall be filled by: 
1.  If the unexpired term of office is less than one hundred eighty (180) days until the next Run-off election, the office shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor, approved by a majority vote of the City Council, at its next meeting. 
2.  If the unexpired term of office is one hundred eighty (180) days or more until the next Run-off election, the office shall be filled by a special election. 
3.  The special election, if necessary, shall be held not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days after such vacancy occurred. 
4.  For the purpose of counting days after a vacancy, the count shall start on the day of the death, the day that the resignation is submitted to the City Clerk, or the day that the removal from office takes effect. 
B.  Any temporary vacancy of a seat on the City Council, created by suspension by virtue of a Grand Jury Indictment, shall be filled by: 
1.  For the first thirty (30) days after the suspension, no action shall be taken to fill the vacancy. 
2.  After thirty (30) days, at the next meeting of the City Council, the office shall be filled by a temporary appointment by the Mayor, approved by a majority vote of the City Council. 
3.  After one hundred eighty (180) days the office shall be declared vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled as per paragraph A of this section. 
4.  Any person serving as a temporary appointee shall have all the duties and powers of a City Council member. 
5.  Should the suspended official be acquitted or cleared of the charges contained in the indictment, the official shall be restored to office if the term of office has not expired. 
C.  Should the office of Mayor become vacant due to the death, resignation, or removal from office in any manner authorized by law, the remaining unexpired term shall be filled by: 
1.  If the unexpired term of office is less than one hundred eighty (180) days until the next Run-off election, the Chairperson of the City Council shall assume the office of Mayor. The Vice-Chairperson shall then become the Chairperson of the City Council, and the vacancy on the City Council shall be filled as per paragraph A.1 of this section. 
2.  If the unexpired term of office is one hundred eighty (180) days or more until the next Run-off election, the Chairperson of the City Council shall become acting Mayor, along with retaining the duties of the Chairperson of the City Council, until the office shall be filled by a special election. 
3.  The special election, if necessary, shall be held not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days after such vacancy occurred. 
4.  For the purpose of counting days after a vacancy, the count shall start on the day of the death, the day that the resignation is submitted to the City Clerk, or the day that the removal from office takes effect. 
D.  Any temporary vacancy of the office of Mayor, created by suspension by virtue of a Grand Jury Indictment, shall be filled by: 
1.  For the first one hundred eighty (180) days the Chairperson of the City Council shall become Acting Mayor, along with retaining the duties of the Chairperson of the City Council. 
2.  After one hundred eighty (180) days the office of Mayor shall be declared vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled as per paragraph C.1 or C.2 of this section. 
E.  Should the suspended Mayor be acquitted or cleared of the charges contained in the Indictment, the Mayor shall be restored to office if the term of office has not expired. 
(Referendum, 3-3-87)  
Sec. 16. - Oath of office. 
Every elected officer of the City before entering the duties of office shall take and subscribe to the following oath before any judicial officer of the State of Florida, to be filed and kept in the office of the City Clerk: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support, protect and defend the Constitution and Government of the United States and the State of Florida, and that I will in all respects observe the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City of Hialeah Gardens; that I am fully qualified to hold office under the Constitution of the State; and that I will well and faithfully perform the duties of (title of office) on which I am now about to enter. So help me God." 
State Law reference— Oath, F.S. § 876.05.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Financial matters, F.S. §§ 166.101 et seq., 218.30 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the City shall commence on the first day of October of each calendar year and shall end on the thirtieth (30th) day of September of the following year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. 
State Law reference— Mandatory fiscal year, F.S. §§ 166.241, 218.33.  
Sec. 2. - Preparation of budget. 
The Mayor shall be responsible for the preparation of an annual budget which shall contain estimates of contemplated revenues and expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year, and which shall itemize separately the sums contemplated as revenues, according to their respective sources, and itemized as to contemplated expenditures in accordance with the offices, departments, divisions, or other separable units as may be related to the administration of the financial affairs of the City. The preparation of the annual budget shall further be in accordance with the Uniform Accounting System Manual for the State of Florida.  
Sec. 3. - Adoption of budget. 
A.  The preliminary budget shall be prepared and presented to the Council no later than the last day of July of each year. The Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget in accordance with State and County requirements, at which time interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The City Clerk shall post a notice of the place and time of the public hearing. Copies of the proposed budget shall be available in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection at the time of posting such notice. 
B.  During such public hearing the Council may insert new items or may increase, decrease, or delete any items in the budget. 
C.  The budget shall be finally adopted by majority vote of the Council no later than the last day of September of each year, and the millage or rate of taxation necessary to pay all outstanding debts in the ensuing fiscal year shall be fixed according to the provisions of F.S. ch. 200. Upon adoption, by ordinance, the budget shall constitute an appropriation of the amounts set forth herein. 
D.  Transfer of funds or revisions which may be required to conduct the affairs of the City, where unanticipated changes in revenues and expenses occur, reasonably requiring a revision of the budget, shall be adopted by resolution. 
E.  A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be certified by the City Council and the budget so certified shall be filed for the use of all offices and departments of the City. 
State Law reference— Mandatory procedure for adoption of budget, F.S. § 200.065.  
Sec. 4. - Independent audit. 
Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the Council shall designate a certified public accountant who shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the City Government as of the end of the fiscal year, and who shall submit a report to the Council and to the State of Florida, as may be required by law. 
State Law reference— Requirement for annual audit, F.S. § 218.32.  
ARTICLE V. - BONDED INDEBTEDNESS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Finance and taxation, bonds, F.S. § 166.101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1. - Referendum requirement. 
The City of Hialeah Gardens shall not incur any form of bonded indebtedness any portion of which is backed by the full faith and credit or taxing power of the City, nor shall the City issue bonds, notes, or obligations of any nature, type, or form which are backed in whole or in part, by the full faith and credit or taxing power of the City, unless issuance of such bonds has been approved by vote of the majority of the electors voting on the issuance of such bonds in a Run-off election. In any Run-off or special election in which a bond issue appears, the bond issue shall be called, noticed, and conducted and the results thereof determined and declared in a manner required by Florida State Law. 
(Referendum, 3-3-87)  
Sec. 2. - Special assessment district. 
Special assessments shall be in the method provided for by Florida Statutes, or by majority vote or a petition signed by a majority of the owners of property within the District to be assessed consenting to the special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 99-35, § 1, 12-7-99/3-14-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-35 superseded and replaced Ord. No. 99-14. Ord. No. 99-14 affected the same portion of this Charter (art. V, § 2) as Ord. No. 99-35, but was never voted upon and was therefore omitted from notation within this Code.  
Sec. 3. - Ordinance for bond issue. 
Upon a majority vote of the electors approving the issuance of bonds, the City Council may by ordinance, issue bonds of the City of Hialeah Gardens for the payment of all or any part of such costs, for which the bonds were established, including the reimbursement of any funds that the City used to pay any part thereof.  
Sec. 4. - Conditions for sale of bonds. 
Bonds approved as herein provided may be sold by the City at public or private sale at the discretion of the Mayor and Council. If sold at public sale, the sale shall be made pursuant to advertisement published in a newspaper of run-off circulation in Dade County which publication shall be made once a week for three consecutive weeks. The sale shall be held on a date and time fixed in the advertisement, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the last publication. Such bonds shall be sold for such prices as the City Council shall determine; provided the amount is not less than 96 percent of face value plus accrued interest. If sold at private sale, the bonds shall be sold for cash at not less than 96 percent of the face value plus accrued interest. The interest and principal on such bonds shall be payable at some responsible bank or trust company designated by the City Council. The interest rate limitations on bond issues shall be provided by Florida State Law.  
Sec. 5. - Annual tax. 
The City Council shall levy an annual tax upon all the taxable property in the City of Hialeah Gardens sufficient to pay the principal of such bonds as they mature and interest on outstanding bonds.  
Sec. 6. - Liberal construction. 
The requirements of this Article are to be construed as additional or supplemental requirements and shall not be deemed to preclude the issuance of bonds by the City pursuant to other authority provided by law and are not in derogation of any powers of the City provided by law for the same or similar purposes.  
ARTICLE VI. - PLANNING AND ZONING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local government comprehensive planning and land development regulation act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1. - Authority to regulate and restrict. 
The City Council shall have the power to regulate and restrict the location, height, size, cubic contents, construction and areas of buildings and other structures, including billboards and advertising devices, the percentage and portion of lots of land that may be occupied or built on, the size of yards, courts and other open structures, the density of population and the use of buildings, structures and land for trade industries, residences, apartment houses and any other purpose and for any of the said purposes, in promoting the safety, health, comfort, morals, convenience, peace, prosperity or run-off welfare of the City or its inhabitants, to divide the City into zones of such number, shapes and areas as may be deemed best suited to effectuate the purposes of this section and within such zones to regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, destruction, or removal of buildings, land and structures. The regulations in one or more zones may differ from those in other zones and the City Council shall have reasonable regard for the character of buildings and other structures in each zone and the use for which the land is suitable, to the end that economic prosperity and the enhancement of the health, comfort, convenience and run-off welfare of the inhabitants of the City may be promoted. To insure that the regulations so established are complied with, the City shall have all of the powers accorded it by law to take such legal action necessary to enforce such regulations, including the power to declare any violation a public nuisance and to seek judicial action for the abatement of same.  
Sec. 2. - Power to create administrative departments. 
The Mayor and City Council shall have the power to create and budget for such departments as it deems necessary to administer the power established in this Article and to delegate to any such departments the power and authority to accomplish such purpose, pursuant to Article IV, Section 3.  
Sec. 3. - Creation of a Planning and Zoning Board. 
There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Board, consisting of five (5) members, who shall be residents of Hialeah Gardens. Each member of the City Council shall appoint one (1) citizen of the City as a member of the Planning and Zoning Board. The Board members shall elect from among themselves a Chairperson. 
This Board shall be appointed at the first regular meeting of the City Council following the Run-off Election each year. 
It shall be mandatory that this Board meet as a Planning Board within thirty (30) days following its appointment, together with the City's Building Inspector, for the sole purpose of reviewing the City's Comprehensive Plan and to make written recommendation to the City Council of any action they believe should be taken. It shall further be mandatory that this Planning Board meet every six (6) months, together with the City's Building Inspector, or at any time deemed necessary. 
This Board shall have the duty to hear all matters concerning zoning and zoning variances. After hearing the matter before them, the Board shall make a written recommendation to the City Council of the action they believe should be taken. 
(Referendum, 3-3-87)  
Sec. 4. - Original and appellate jurisdiction of Council. 
The City Council shall have final jurisdiction in all matters related to the granting or denial of variances and changes in zoning and shall sit in an appellate capacity to review decisions rendered by the Planning and Zoning Board.  
Sec. 5. - Building and zoning legislation. 
The City shall have the power to make and enforce ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations necessary or expedient for effectuating the powers granted by this Article and to impose penalties for violations thereof as provided for by the Laws of the State of Florida.  
ARTICLE VII. - PERSONNEL REVIEW BOARD 
 
Sec. 1. - Creation of a Personnel Review Board. 
There is hereby created a Personnel Review Board, the controlling rules and regulations thereof to be established by ordinance, which ordinance shall not be amended except by a four-fifths ( 4/5 ) vote of the City Council.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND SEWER 
 
Sec. 1. - Establishment of a Department of Water and Sewers. 
The is hereby established a Department of Water and Sewers of the City of Hialeah Gardens. The Department shall be administered by a Department Head who shall be appointed by the Mayor with 4/5 's approval of all members of the City Council in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the City, relating to the officers and employees of the City generally. 
(Referendum, 12-1-87)  
Sec. 2. - Duties of Department. 
The Department of Water and Sewers shall manage, develop and maintain all water and sewer systems of the City in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances, at such rates and under policies adopted by the City Council. 
(Referendum, 12-1-87)  
Sec. 3. - Accounts kept separate; expenses; bonds. 
The water and sewer systems of the City shall be administered separate and apart from the general fund as a public utility enterprise and shall budget and account for all income received, expenses and costs incurred in its operation including all funding and capital expenditures which shall be necessary and proper to operate, develop and maintain the systems. The City Council may issued bonds, contract loans and incur indebtedness related to the development of the water and sewer systems of the City in accordance with the provisions of F.S. §§ 166.101 through 166.141. 
(Referendum, 12-1-87)  
Sec. 4. - Revenues. 
All revenues of the water and sewer systems shall be kept separate from the general administrative funds of the City and used exclusively to meet the operation, maintenance, depreciation, labor, interest, bond retirement, sinking funds requirements, capital expenditures, additions and improvements and other necessary expenses and indebtedness of the water and sewer systems. All expenses incurred by the Department and by the Board in exercising their powers and performing their functions and duties, including the payment of salaries, shall be paid solely from the revenues of the water works system of the City or from both of such sources; and no liability or obligation not payable from the revenues of either or both of said systems shall at any time be incurred in connection with the operation thereof. 
(Referendum, 12-1-87)  
Sec. 5. - Membership of Board; terms of membership; appointment of successor Board members. 
The Board shall consist of five (5) members, four (4) of which shall be electors of the City of Hialeah Gardens. Existing members of the Water and Sewer Board having been duly appointed and qualified pursuant to provisions applicable are composed of the following with terms expiring as follows: 
Michael Kemp 	7th day of March, 1989 
George Hameetman 	7th day of March, 1989 
Romilio Garcia 	6th day of March, 1990 
Martin Goodman 	6th day of March, 1990 
Roman Piloto 	5th day of March, 1991 
 
The members of the Board shall serve until the expiration date of the term of each and no member of the Board shall serve for a period to exceed six (6) consecutive years. 
At the conclusion of each term of office, the successor shall be appointed to hold office for a term of three (3) years from the date thereof, except that any person appointed to fill any vacancy shall serve only for the unexpired term. 
Within ten (10) days prior to the date of the expiration of the term of any member of the Board, or within ten (10) days after the death, resignation or removal of any such member, his/her successor shall be named and appointed by the City Council. 
(Referendum, 12-1-87; 3-7-89; Ord. No. 97-22, § 2, 11-18-97/3-3-98)  
Sec. 6. - Powers of Department Head and Water and Sewer Board. 
The Department Head and the Water and Sewer Board shall have such powers and authority as may be authorized by Ordinance and the Charter of the City of Hialeah Gardens. 
(Referendum, 12-1-87)  
Sec. 7. - Transition. 
A.  The term of office of Board members of the Water and Sewer Board in existence at the time of the passage of this Charter amendment shall terminate upon passage of the Ordinance. Each member of the City Council shall thereafter appoint one Board member and subsequent Board members as provided by Charter Section 5. 
B.  All Ordinances in effect upon adoption of this Charter amendment to the extent not inconsistent with it shall remain in force and effect until repealed or amendment. 
C.  The City Council shall have the power, by Resolution, to delete this section from the Charter or any portion thereof including this entire section, when all events of transition have occurred. 
(Referendum, 12-1-87)  
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - Public records. 
All records and accounts of Hialeah Gardens shall be open for personal inspection and examination by any person desiring to do so during office hours under reasonable conditions and under supervision of the City Clerk. 
State Law reference— Public records act, F.S. ch. 119.  
Sec. 2. - Publication of notice. 
Any notices required to be published by provisions of State Law or this Charter shall be published in accordance with the applicable Laws of the State of Florida. 
State Law reference— Notice of public meetings, F.S. ch. 286.  
Sec. 3. - Tort liability. 
No suit shall be maintained against the City of Hialeah Gardens or its Agencies for damages to persons or property or for wrongful death arising out of any tort unless six (6) months have elapsed after notice to the City of such tort. 
State Law reference— Tort liability, F.S. § 768.28.  
Sec. 4. - Surety bonds. 
The City Council may require by resolution any officer or employee to give bond in such amount and with such surety as deemed necessary and approved by the City Council. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the City.  
Sec. 5. - Separability. 
If any article, section, or part of a section of this Charter shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder of this Charter shall remain in full force and effect.  
Sec. 6. - Manner of adoption of Charter. 
This Charter shall be adopted as the Charter of the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida, pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Florida, and F.S. ch. 166, eff. October 1, 1973, and amended and shall become effective at 12:00 noon following the day on which this Charter has been approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the City of Hialeah Gardens voting thereon. The ballot to be used in the referendum election to be held on this Charter shall be substantially as follows and shall be printed in English and Spanish. 
BALLOT 
SHALL THE NEW CHARTER OF THE CITY OF HIALEAH GARDENS, FLORIDA, DATED THE 17TH DAY OF JANUARY, 1984, PROPOSED BY THE COUNCIL, WHICH CHARTER PROVIDES FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A MAYOR-COUNCIL FORM OF GOVERNMENT FOR THE CITY OF HIALEAH GARDENS, PROVIDES FOR THE JURISDICTION AND POWERS OF THE SAID CITY AND PROVIDES FOR THE MANNER OF ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT OF THE CITY BE APPROVED AND ADOPTED? 
YES 394 
NO 237  
Sec. 7. - Charter amendments. 
Amendments to this Charter shall be enacted in the manner provided by the Dade County Charter, and Florida State Law.  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES/REFERENDUM 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number 	Adopted 
 Date 	Election 
 Date 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
		 3- 3-87 		Art. I, § 6 
				Art. II, § 9 
				Art. IV, § 12 
				Art. VI, § 15 
				Art. VII, § 1 
				Art. VIII, § 3 
		 12- 1-87 		Art. VIII, §§ 1—7 
		 3- 7-98 		Art. VIII, § 5 
90-50 	12-20-91 	 3- 3-92 	2 	Art. II, § 9 
90-53 	12-20-91 	 3- 3-92 	2 	Art. II, § 9 
94-09 	 1-17-95 	 3- 7-95 	1 	Art. II, § 9 
96-20 	11- 5-96 	 3- 4-97 	1 	Art. III, § 9 D. 
97-19 	11-18-97 	 3- 3-98 	2 	Art. III, § 3 K. 
97-20 	11-18-97 	 3- 3-98 	2 	Art. III, § 4 B. 
97-21A 	11-18-97 	 3- 3-98 	2 	Art. III, § 4 A. 
97-22 	11-18-97 	 3- 3-98 	2 	Art. VIII, § 5 
98-01 	 2- 3-98 		1 	Art. II, § 9 D.(note) 
99-33 	12- 7-99 	 3-14-00 	1 	Art. III, § 4A 
99-34 	12- 7-99 	 3-14-00 	1 	Art. III, § 4B 
99-35 	12- 7-99 	 3-14-00 	1 	Art. V, § 2 
99-37 	12- 7-99 	 3-14-00 	1 	Art. III, § 6A 
99-38 	12- 7-99 	 3-14-00 	1 	Art. III, § 5 
2244(Res.) 	 3-18-08 	 9- 3-96 		Art. III, § 9B 
  
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the Code of Ordinances, City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida, and may be so cited. 
(Code 1985, § 10.01)  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
And/or. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Charter. The word "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida, printed as part I of this volume. 
City. The word "city" means the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida, including its officers, boards, committees, commissions, and employees. 
City council. The term "city council" means the city council of Hialeah Gardens. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by ordinance the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, Fla. Rules of Civ. Proc., Rule 1.090(a). 
County. The term "county" means the County of Dade. 
State Law reference— Dade County boundary description, F.S. § 7.13. 
F.S. Whenever the abbreviation "F.S." is used, it shall refer to the official Florida Statutes and all amendments and supplements adopted by the state legislature. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Interpretation. All words, matters, and phrases contained in this Code shall, except as otherwise provided in this Code, be interpreted in the manner provided by the laws of the state for the interpretation of like words, matters, and phrases occurring therein, and as far as applicable the provisions contained in the state laws for the construction of the provisions thereof shall apply to the provisions of this Code. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, employees, boards, committees, commissions. The title of any office, officer, employee, board, committee or commission shall be used as though the words "of Hialeah Gardens" were added. Whenever a provision appears authorizing or requiring a particular officer or employee of the city to do some act, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or employee to delegate, designate and authorize subordinates to do the act unless the terms of the provisions or section specify otherwise. 
Owner. The word "owner," when applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall include associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means every species of property except real property. 
Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
(Code 1985, §§ 10.02, 10.04, 10.05, 10.08) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, F.S. § 1.01 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines and headings. 
The headings and captions of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of the sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections, including the captions, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1985, § 10.03)  
Sec. 1-4. - Internal references to chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
Whenever in one section of this Code reference is made to another section of this Code, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
(Code 1985, § 10.07)  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-6. - References to chapters or sections. 
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-7. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections of this Code are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-9. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Appropriating funds or establishing or relating to the annual budget; 
(3)  Imposing taxes which are not inconsistent with this Code; 
(4)  Establishing positions, classifying employees or setting salaries and any personnel regulations, pension or deferred compensation plans or other benefits; 
(5)  Any right of franchise granted by the city; 
(6)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, or vacating any street or public way; 
(7)  Establishing or prescribing street grades; 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Prescribing through streets, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way streets, speed limits, load limits or loading zones not inconsistent with this Code; 
(10)  Which rezones specific property; 
(11)  Dedicating, accepting or rejecting any plat or subdivision; 
(12)  Annexing or deannexing property; 
(13)  Which is special although permanent; 
(14)  Which is temporary, although general; 
(15)  Regarding any fees, charges, rates, or deposits. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code and are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1985, § 10.13)  
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1985, § 10.11)  
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or as omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
State Law reference— Minimum procedural requirements for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-13. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1985, § 10.14)  
Sec. 1-14. - Errors and omissions. 
If a manifest error is discovered in this Code, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention of the city council, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error. 
(Code 1985, § 10.09)  
Sec. 1-15. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 10.06)  
Sec. 1-16. - General penalty. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, any person violating any of the provisions of the Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1985, § 10.99) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, F.S. § 162.21.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration of the flood hazard reduction regulations, § 70-61 et seq.; administration and enforcement of the land use regulations, § 78-41 et seq.; administration of the sign regulations, § 82-31 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - City flag adopted. 
Ordinance No. 2000-05 adopted an official flag for the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida. This flag will be on display in city hall. 
(Ord. No. 2000-05, § 1, 7-19-00)  
Secs. 2-2—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Compensation, art. III, § 4; election, art. III, § 9; legislative powers vested in city council, art. III, § 1; powers of city council, art. III, § 12; rules governing city council, art. III, § 12; standards of conduct, art. III, § 11; vacancies, art. III, § 15. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Requirements for holding elective office. 
Under the power granted by F.S. § 166.021, the city council hereby declares that a necessary requisite for the holding of an elective office of the city shall be faithful devotion to the duties inherent in the office. These duties include, but are not limited to, faithful attendance at all meetings, regular and special, of the city council by the members of the council, the mayor, and the city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 31.01) 
Charter reference— Qualifications, art. III, § 6.  
Sec. 2-32. - Certification of elected officials. 
After the certification of elected officials by the board of elections, the officials shall take their oath of office within 48 hours after the close of the polls on the date of the city's runoff election. Such officials shall assume their respective duties in compliance with F.S. § 166.021. 
(Code 1985, § 31.02)  
Sec. 2-33. - Group insurance benefits. 
Elected officials of the city shall be eligible to participate in the city's group insurance program, in the same manner and to the same extent as if the elected official were an employee of the city. Elected officials may include their spouse and/or any other eligible dependents under the group insurance coverage in the same manner and to the same extent as if the elected official were an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-31, § 1(31.03), 4-2-91; Ord. No. 92-09, § 1(31.03), 12-1-92)  
Sec. 2-34. - Continuation of group insurance. 
(a)  Former elected officials who have served at least one year with the city shall be eligible to participate in the city's group insurance program in like manner as an employee, upon payment by the former elected official of the total premium required for such coverage. This section is intended to permit former elected officials to enjoy participation in the city's group insurance program to the same extent as city employees. 
(b)  The full cost of the premium authorized by this section for coverage of the former elected official and/or his spouse and any other eligible dependents shall be paid by the former elected official. 
(c)  The former elected official may include his spouse and/or any other eligible dependents under the group insurance coverage to the same extent that he would have been able to include them if he were still an elected official of the city, merely by the payment of the full premium for himself, his spouse and/or eligible dependents by the former official. 
(d)  If the former elected official should predecease his spouse, or should die leaving other surviving eligible dependents, and if the spouse and/or other eligible dependents were covered by the city's group insurance at the time of the former elected official's death, then the spouse and/or other eligible dependents may elect to continue coverage for as long as they would have been eligible had the former elected official survived, merely by the payment of the full premium for such spouse and/or other eligible dependents. 
(Ord. No. 90-31, § 1(31.07), 4-2-91; Ord. No. 92-09, § 3, 12-1-92)  
Sec. 2-35. - Appropriation of funds. 
The city shall appropriate and provide in its annual budget sufficient moneys to meet the requirements of sections 2-33 and 2-34. 
(Ord. No. 90-31, § 1(31.08), 4-2-91; Ord. No. 92-09, § 4, 12-1-92)  
Sec. 2-36. - Expenses and reimbursement. 
The rate of compensation paid to councilpersons shall be set by ordinance, provided, however, that there shall be at least a required four-fifths vote of the council for adoption of any such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 98-14, § 3, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 99-08, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Editor's note— By direction of the city, § 2-36 has been revised to be consistent with § 4 of the Charter.  
Secs. 2-37—2-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Compensation, art. III, § 4; authority to break tie vote, art. III, § 1; powers, art. III, § 3; election, art. III, § 9; filling of vacancy, art. III, § 15; preparation of budget, art. III, § 2; full-time position, art. III, § 9. 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Term; duties upon leaving office. 
(a)  The mayor shall serve for a term as provided in the Charter, article III, section 9B. If for some reason the mayor shall not be able to complete his term in office, the office of mayor shall be filled for the incompleted term in accordance with Charter, article III, section 15C.2. 
(b)  Whenever a person has been elected and taken the oath of office of mayor, he shall be required, on termination of his term of office, to present to the city council, at the last regular meeting before expiration of his term of office, a final accounting of any funds, books, records, or any other matters or items belonging to the city which he had possession of as a result of such office. The council shall, if all is in order, approve the final accounting, thus allowing the person next assuming the office to be in a position of being fully aware of the obligations which that person shall assume. 
(Code 1985, § 31.11(A))  
Sec. 2-52. - Resignation. 
If the office of mayor becomes vacated by tendered resignation, the resignation shall not be accepted until a final accounting has been approved. 
(Code 1985, § 31.11(B))  
Sec. 2-53. - Expenses and reimbursement. 
The rate of compensation paid to the mayor shall be set by ordinance, provided, however, that there shall be at least a rewquried four-fifths vote of the council for adoption of any such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 98-14, § 2, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 99-08, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Editor's note— By direction of the city, § 2-53 has been revised to be consistent with § 4 of the Charter.  
Secs. 2-54—2-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MEETINGS AND RULES OF PROCEDURE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Rules of city council, art. III, § 12. 
 
Sec. 2-71. - Adoption of rules. 
(a)  It is necessary that every deliberative body be governed by rules of procedure in order that the will of a majority of its members may be determined and revealed in an orderly manner. 
(b)  The city council must have rules to promote the orderly and businesslike consideration of the questions which come before it for determination. These rules shall determine the priority and manner of consideration of questions, and will provide an orderly and methodical plan so that all business may receive proper consideration, thus eliminating confusion and waste of time and effort. 
(c)  The city council has an inherent right to regulate its own procedure, subject to provisions of the state constitution, Florida Statutes, the City Charter, or other controlling authority. 
(d)  Sections 2-73 through 2-90 are the rules of procedure and shall govern all meetings of the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 30.01)  
Sec. 2-72. - Copy of rules available. 
The rules of procedure shall be made available for inspection by concerned parties at the city hall during normal business hours of city business. 
(Code 1985, § 30.02)  
Sec. 2-73. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. The city council, at its organizational meeting following the runoff election, shall fix the day to hold regular meetings. When the day fixed for any regular meeting falls on a day designated by law as a legal holiday, the meeting may be held on the next succeeding day or may be canceled, at the discretion of the city council. Regular meetings may be otherwise postponed or canceled by resolution or motion adopted at a regular meeting by a majority of the councilmembers present. Notice of the postponement or cancellation of any regular meeting shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation by the city clerk for at least one publication. All regular meetings shall be held in the council chambers in city hall or at a place as approved by resolution or motion adopted at a regular meeting by a majority of the councilmembers present, and shall be open to the public and all news media. 
(b)  Special meetings. A special meeting of the city council may be called by the mayor, council chairperson, or by a majority of the members of the council. Whenever a special meeting is called, a notice in writing signed by the mayor, the council chairperson, or a majority of the members of the council shall be served on the city clerk. The city clerk shall forthwith serve verbal and written notice on each member of the council, the mayor, and the city attorney, stating the date, hour, and place of the meeting, and the purpose for which the meeting is called. No other business shall be transacted at such meeting. At least 48 hours must elapse between the time the city clerk receives notice in writing of such meeting and the time the meeting is to be held. 
(c)  Emergency meetings. An emergency meeting of the city council may be called by the mayor or the council chairperson, whenever in their opinion an emergency exists which requires immediate action by the city council. Whenever an emergency meeting is called, the mayor or the council chairperson shall notify the city clerk, who shall forthwith serve verbal (telephone) and written notice on each member of the city council, the mayor, and the city attorney. Such notice shall state the date, hour, and place of such meeting, and the purpose for which it is called. No other business shall be transacted at such meeting. At least 24 hours shall elapse between the time the city clerk receives notice of such meeting and the time the meeting is to be held. 
(d)  Notice requirements for special or emergency meetings; meetings open to public. If after reasonable diligence, it was impossible to give notice of a special or emergency meeting to each city councilmember, the failure shall not affect the legality of the meeting if a quorum is in attendance. The minutes of each special or emergency meeting shall show the manner and method by which notice of the special or emergency meeting was given to each member of the city council, or shall show a waiver of notice. All special or emergency meetings shall be open to the public and all news media. Anything to the contrary in this section notwithstanding, notice of any special or emergency meeting of the city council shall be waived only by not less than a majority of the entire membership of the city council. No special or emergency meeting shall be held unless notice is given in compliance with the provisions of this section, or notice is waived by a majority of the entire membership of the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 30.04) 
State Law reference— Open meetings, F.S. ch. 286.  
Sec. 2-74. - Agenda. 
(a)  There shall be an official agenda for every meeting of the city council, which shall determine the order of business conducted at the meeting. The city council shall not take action on any matter, proposal, or item of business which is not listed upon the official agenda, unless all of the city councilmembers present shall have first agreed to amend the agenda to include such item. No ordinance, resolution, or other matter listed on the agenda for public hearing or the vote thereon may be deferred until a later time unless two-thirds of the city council present shall vote in favor of the deferral. 
(b)  The agenda shall be prepared by the city clerk in appropriate form approved by the city council. Matters may be placed on the agenda by any councilmember, the mayor, the city attorney, or the city clerk. 
(c)  The deadline for placing matters on the agenda for regular meetings of the city council shall be noon of the seventh day preceding the day of the meeting. 
(Code 1985, § 30.05)  
Sec. 2-75. - Presiding officer. 
(a)  The chairperson of the city council shall preside at all meetings at which he is present. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson of the city council shall preside. The chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be selected by the city council pursuant to the guidelines set forth in the Charter, article III, section 2C. The presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all meetings of the city council. He shall state every question coming before the city council and announce the decision of the council on all matters coming before it. 
During periods when the chairperson is also the acting mayor, the chairperson may, at any meeting such chairperson desires, delegate to the vice chairperson the duties required to preside over city council meetings to facilitate the acting mayor's consideration of issues before the council, provided it shall always be the chairperson's responsibilities to preserve strict order and decorum at all meetings of the city council. 
(b)  A majority vote of the city councilmembers present shall govern and conclusively determine all questions of order not otherwise covered. The presiding officer shall vote on all questions, his name being called last. The presiding officer shall be further permitted to offer any motion or resolution from the chair. 
(c)  In the absence of the chairperson, or in the event of his inability to serve by reason of illness or accident, the vice-chairperson shall perform the duties and functions of the chairperson until his return to the city or recovery and resumption of duty. 
(Code 1985, § 30.06; Ord. No. 99-42, § 1, 1-4-00)  
Sec. 2-76. - City attorney as parliamentarian. 
The city attorney, or his designee in his absence, shall act as parliamentarian, and shall advise and assist the presiding officer in matters of parliamentary law. The city attorney, or a member of his office as he may designate, shall be available to the city council at all meetings. 
(Code 1985, § 30.07)  
Sec. 2-77. - Call to order. 
The presiding officer shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall call the city council to order immediately. In the absence of the chairperson and vice-chairperson of the city council, the city clerk shall then determine whether a quorum is present and in that event shall call for the election of a temporary chairperson. Upon the arrival of the chairperson or the vice-chairperson, the temporary chairperson shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 30.08)  
Sec. 2-78. - Roll call. 
Before proceeding with the business of the city council, the city clerk shall call the roll of the members of the city council, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If the roll call reflects the absence of any councilmember on official city business, that fact shall be noted in the minutes. Any councilmember who intends to be absent from any council meeting shall notify the city clerk of the intended absence as soon as the member conveniently can do so. 
(Code 1985, § 30.09)  
Sec. 2-79. - Quorum; conflict of interest. 
(a)  A majority of the whole number of members of the city council shall constitute a quorum. No ordinance, resolution, or motion shall be adopted by the city council without the affirmative vote of the majority of all the members present. 
(b)  A member of the city council who has a conflict of interest on a particular matter before the council shall comply with the provisions in F.S. § 112.3143(3)(a) where applicable. 
(c)  If a quorum is not present within 30 minutes after the hour appointed for the meeting of the city council, the chairperson, the vice-chairperson, or in their absence the city clerk, may adjourn the meeting until the next day, unless by unanimous agreement those members present select another hour or day. The names of the members present and their action at the meeting shall be recorded in the minutes by the city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 30.10) 
State Law reference— Voting conflicts, F.S. §§ 112.3143(3), 286.012.  
Sec. 2-80. - Order of business. 
All meetings of the city council shall be open to the public. Promptly at the hour set for each meeting, the members of the city council, the city attorney, the mayor, and the city clerk shall take their regular stations in the meeting room, and the business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in accordance with the agenda for the meeting. 
(Code 1985, § 30.11)  
Sec. 2-81. - Rules of debate. 
(a)  When a motion is presented and seconded, it is under consideration by the council and no other motion shall be received thereafter, except to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone, or to amend, until the question is decided. These motions shall have preference in the order in which they are mentioned and the first two shall be decided without debate. Final action upon a pending motion may be deferred until a date certain by a majority of the councilmembers present. 
(b)  The chairperson, the vice-chairperson, or other member of the council as may be presiding, may move, second, and debate, subject only to the limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed upon all councilmembers. 
(c)  Every councilmember desiring to speak for any purpose shall address the presiding officer, and upon recognition, shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. The consequences of a measure may be denounced in strong terms; but to attack the motives of those who propose or advocate it shall not be in order. 
(d)  A councilmember once recognized shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is to call the member to order or as otherwise provided in this section. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, the member shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined by the presiding officer, and, if in order, the member shall be permitted to proceed. Any member may appeal to the city council from the decision of the chairperson upon a question of order, when without debate the chairperson shall submit to the council the question, "Shall the decision of the chair be sustained?" The council shall decide such question by a majority vote. 
(e)  The councilmember moving the adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate. 
(f)  Upon any roll call there shall be no discussion by any member voting, and he shall vote yes or no. Any member, upon voting, may give a brief statement to explain his vote. A member shall have the privilege of filing with the city clerk a written explanation of his vote. 
(g)  An action of the city council may be reconsidered only at the same meeting at which the action was taken or at the next regular meeting thereafter. A motion to reconsider may be made only by a member who voted on the prevailing side of the question and must be concurred in by a majority of those present at the meeting. A motion to reconsider shall not be considered unless at least the same number of members are present as participated in the original vote under consideration, or upon affirmative vote of two-thirds of those members present. Adoption of a motion to reconsider shall rescind the action reconsidered. 
(h)  Any member of the council may change his vote before the next item is called for consideration, or before a recess or adjournment is called, whichever occurs first, but not thereafter. 
(i)  Once action is taken on a proposed ordinance or resolution, which action was by four votes, neither the same matter nor its repeal or rescission may be brought before the city council again during the six-month period following such action, subject to the provisions of subsection (g) of this section, unless application by a majority of the councilmembers is first submitted to the mayor. If an ordinance or resolution is proposed that raises the same previously resolved matter, or its repeal or rescission, in different or modified form during such six-month period, the chairperson may declare the proposal out of order. 
(Code 1985, § 30.12)  
Sec. 2-82. - Reading of the minutes. 
(a)  Unless a reading of the minutes of a meeting is requested by a majority of the city council, the minutes, when approved by the council and signed by the chairperson and the city clerk, shall be considered approved without reading, provided that the clerk shall have given each member of the council a copy. The minutes of prior meetings may only be approved by a majority of the councilmembers present at a meeting of the council, and upon approval shall become the official minutes. 
(b)  The minutes of each council meeting shall be corrected or amended informally, the presiding officer directing the correction to be made when suggested, but if objection is made, the correction or amendment must be approved by the majority of the councilmembers present. Minutes of prior meetings may be corrected whenever the error is noticed, regardless of the time which has elapsed, and a majority vote of the councilmembers present is required for the adoption of the corrections or amendments, even though the minutes have previously been approved and it is too late to reconsider that vote. 
(Code 1985, § 30.13)  
Sec. 2-83. - Voting. 
On every roll call vote, the surname of the city councilmember present shall be called by the city clerk, who will tabulate the votes and announce the results. The vote on every ordinance shall be taken by roll call. The vote on any resolution, motion, or other matter may be by voice vote, unless the presiding officer or any councilmember desires a roll call vote to be taken on the resolution or motion. 
(Code 1985, § 30.14)  
Sec. 2-84. - Addressing the council. 
(a)  All proceedings and the order of business at all meetings of the city council shall be conducted in accordance with the official agenda. Any departure from the order of business set forth in the official agenda shall be made only upon majority vote of the members of the council present at the meeting. Any citizen shall be entitled to be placed on the official agenda of a regular meeting of the council and be heard concerning any matter within scope of the jurisdiction of the council. City councilmembers, the mayor, and the city clerk may place a citizen on the official agenda. The deadline for placing a citizen on the agenda is noon on Tuesday of the week preceding the week of the meeting at which the citizen wishes to be heard. Any citizen shall be entitled to speak on any matter appearing on the official agenda, but only when recognized by the presiding officer, and only on the subject matter under consideration at the time by the council. 
(b)  No citizen shall be permitted to address the council on any matter not appearing on the official agenda, unless the council first grants permission to be heard by a two-thirds vote of the entire council. 
(c)  Each person, other than a salaried member of the city, who addresses the city council shall stand before the council and shall give the following information in an audible tone of voice for the minutes. 
(1)  Such person's name. 
(2)  His address. 
(3)  Whether he speaks for himself, a group of persons, or a third party. If the person says that he represents an organization, he shall also indicate the number of members in the organization, the date of the most recent meeting of the organization's board or governing council, and whether the views expressed by the speaker represent an established policy of the organization approved by the board or governing council. 
(4)  Whether he is being compensated by the persons for whom he speaks. 
(5)  Whether he or any member of his immediate family has a personal financial interest in the pending matter, other than that set forth in subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
(d)  Unless further time is granted by the city council, the citizen shall limit his address to five minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a body and not to any member thereof. No person, other than councilmembers and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the council, without the permission of the presiding officer. No question shall be asked a councilmember or the mayor except through the presiding officer. 
(Code 1985, § 30.15)  
Sec. 2-85. - Decorum. 
Any person making impertinent or slanderous remarks or who becomes boisterous while addressing the city council shall be barred from further audience before the council by the presiding officer, unless permission to continue or again address the council is granted by the majority vote of the councilmembers present. 
(Code 1985, § 30.16)  
Sec. 2-86. - Sergeant-at-arms. 
The chief of police or his designee, or any other city official or employee as the city council may designate, shall be the sergeant-at-arms of the council meeting. The sergeant-at-arms shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the meetings. 
(Code 1985, § 30.17)  
Sec. 2-87. - Persons authorized on dais. 
No person, except city councilmembers, the mayor, and the city attorney, shall be permitted on the dais, and no person shall be permitted to disturb any councilmember while on the dais during any meeting without the express permission of the presiding officer. 
(Code 1985, § 30.18)  
Sec. 2-88. - Committees. 
(a)  There shall be no committees of the city council, other than those provided for in subsection (b) of this section, except that the council may resolve itself into a committee of the whole at any regular or special meeting and select a chairman to preside over the meeting of the committee of the whole. In addition thereto, whenever the council deems it necessary or desirable that the council shall be represented at meetings, conferences, or other occasions involving other governmental entities, agencies, officials or groups, or nongovernmental organizations, departments, agencies, officials or groups, the mayor, or the chairperson of the city council in his absence, may designate members of the council, or himself, to represent the council at the meetings, conferences, or other occasions, with the consent of the designee. A majority of the councilmembers present may disapprove any such appointment. The representatives shall have no power to act for or on behalf of the council, or to make any commitment or binding obligation on behalf of the council or the city. The representatives shall report in writing to the council with regard to the meeting, conference, or other occasion. 
(b)  The city council may establish ad hoc committees from time to time as specific needs arise. The mayor, or chairperson of the council in his absence, shall make appointments to the committees with the consent of the appointees. A majority of the councilmembers present may disapprove any appointment. Any special ad hoc committees may be abolished by the mayor, or the chairperson of the council in his absence, when its continued existence no longer is necessary. A majority of the councilmembers present may disapprove the abolition of any such committee. 
(Code 1985, § 30.19)  
Sec. 2-89. - Ordinances, resolutions, contracts, motions. 
(a)  The city attorney, when requested by the city council, shall prepare ordinances and resolutions which shall be delivered to the city clerk. Ordinances shall be introduced and adopted pursuant to the guidelines set forth in article III, section 13, of the Charter. 
(b)  All ordinances, resolutions, and contract documents, before presentation to the council, shall have been reduced to writing and shall have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney. Prior to the presentation to the city council, all such documents may be referred to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction the administration of the subject matter of the ordinance, resolution, or contract document would devolve. 
(c)  Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters and subjects requiring action by the city council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the city council, except that either the mayor or the city attorney may present ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects to the council for consideration. Any councilmember may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that the ordinance, resolution, matter, or subject be adopted in accordance with law; without such sponsorship, they shall not be considered. 
(d)  All actions of the city council may be taken by resolution or ordinance, except that any action of the council which provides for raising revenue, appropriating funds, or incurring indebtedness, or which provides a penalty or establishes a rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, shall be by ordinance, and except that approval of purely administrative matters may be accomplished by motion duly adopted and recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 
(Code 1985, § 30.20) 
Charter reference— Ordinance adoption procedure, art. III, § 13; three votes necessary to act on any matter, art. III, §§ 12C., 13D.  
Sec. 2-90. - Adjournment. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate. 
(Code 1985, § 30.21)  
Sec. 2-91. - Duties of city clerk. 
The city clerk, or designated deputy clerk, shall act as clerk of the city council. The city clerk shall duplicate the minutes and all resolutions and ordinances, and for a reasonable charge shall furnish copies to persons desiring them. The city clerk shall make available to the members of the city council a copy of the agenda 24 hours before the meeting. 
(Code 1985, § 30.22)  
Secs. 2-92—2-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-111—2-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY CLERK[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor appoints employees, exception, art. III, § 3H.; duties of city clerk as to elections, art. III, § 7. 
 
Sec. 2-126. - Appointment and removal; responsibilities. 
The city clerk shall be appointed or removed by the mayor and shall be under the direct supervision of the mayor. The city clerk shall be the official keeper of the city seal. In addition, but not in limitation, the city clerk shall perform and be responsible for the following: 
(1)  Be the supervisor of elections and be responsible for the preparation of the ballot and the conduct of all elections of the city. 
(2)  Appoint deputy clerks as may from time to time be necessary to carry out the duties of the office. 
(3)  Attend all meetings of the city council and keep the minutes of all these meetings. 
(4)  Certify and maintain all permanent official records and archives of the city, with the exception of police department records. Police department records shall be maintained within the police department and it shall be the responsibility of the police chief to certify and maintain all permanent official records and archives of the police department. 
(5)  Certify all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city council. 
(6)  Perform all other duties required by ordinance or resolution of the city council or as otherwise needed in the day-to-day operation of the city. 
(Code 1985, §§ 30.06, 31.13(A); Ord. No. 97-22A, § 2, 1-6-97)  
Sec. 2-127. - Duty upon termination of office. 
The city clerk shall be required, on termination of his office, to present to the city council, at the last regular meeting before termination of his office, a final accounting of any funds, books, records, or any other matters or items belonging to the city which he had possession of as a result of the office. The city council shall, if all is in order, approve the final accounting, thus allowing the person next assuming the office to be in a position of being fully aware of the obligations which that person shall assume. 
(Code 1985, § 31.13(B))  
Sec. 2-128. - Vacancies in office; final accounting. 
Should the office of city clerk become vacated by tendered resignation, the resignation shall not be accepted until a final accounting has been approved. Should the office of city clerk become vacant because of disqualification or death, the president of the city council shall appoint one of the qualified electors of the city to survey the office which has become vacant and to render to the city council, after the survey, an accounting of the status of the office, which shall, if in proper order, be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 31.13(C))  
Sec. 2-129. - Council administrative assistant. 
The position of council administrative assistant is hereby established. The council administrative assistant shall assist and be under the supervision of the city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 30.23)  
Secs. 2-130—2-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-146—2-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 2-161. - Created; duties generally. 
There is hereby created and established a police department of the city, together with its employees, the duties of which are set forth in section 2-164. The police department shall have, in addition, those duties as established by state law, the Charter, and city ordinances and resolutions. 
(Code 1985, § 32.10(A); Ord. No. 90-64, § 1, 4-21-92)  
Sec. 2-162. - Composition. 
The police department shall be composed of a chief of police, as provided in section 2-163, and any police officers, patrol officers, and other employees as the mayor and council may determine. There shall be but one chief of police who shall oversee all police functions. 
(Code 1985, § 32.12; Ord. No. 90-64, § 3, 4-21-92)  
Sec. 2-163. - Chief of police. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established the office of the chief of police. 
(b)  The term of office of the chief of police shall be set by the city council. This provision shall in no way interfere with article III, section 3(H) of the Charter, giving the mayor the power to appoint and remove the chief of police. 
(c)  If a chief of police is not appointed in conformance with the provisions in the Charter, the police department shall be under the direct supervision of the mayor who shall carry out the orders and mandates of the city council. 
(d)  The chief of police shall have immediate direction and control of the police force, subject, however, to the supervision of the mayor, who shall carry out the mandates of the city council. 
(e)  The chief of police shall hire all police officers and other employees of the police department, subject to the approval of the mayor. 
(f)  The chief of police shall have the right and power to suspend any of the officers or employees under his immediate command who may be under his management or control for incompetency, common neglect of duty, immorality, drunkenness, failure to obey orders given by proper authorities, or for any other just or reasonable cause, and shall forthwith certify the fact in writing, together with the cause for suspension, to the mayor. 
(g)  The mayor shall, after review of the action taken by the chief of police under subsection (f) of this section, render final judgment thereon, which may be a reprimand, fine, suspension, reduction in rank, or removal, and which shall be final. Further, the mayor shall have the right, with respect to the chief of police, to suspend the chief of police for any of the causes for which the chief of police may suspend any of the officers or employees under his immediate command. Nothing contained in this subsection shall limit any statutory or contractual rights. 
(h)  The chief of police shall, at all times, day or night, have the following duties: 
(1)  To preserve the public peace; 
(2)  To protect the rights of persons and property; 
(3)  To provide proper police force protection at fires and to protect firefighters and property thereat; 
(4)  To protect strangers and travelers within the city; 
(5)  To suppress riots and insurrections, disperse unlawful or dangerous assemblages and assemblages which obstruct free passage on public streets, sidewalks, parks, and places; 
(6)  To preserve order at elections and all public meetings and assemblages; 
(7)  To regulate the movement of vehicles in the streets; 
(8)  To prevent the violation of all laws and ordinances in force applicable to the police department; and 
(9)  To cause the immediate arrest and apprehension of any violators of the laws and ordinances. 
(i)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police at all times to see to the proper training of the patrol officers and other police officers, regular and volunteer, and the training shall include compliance with the state department of law enforcement training and standards. 
(Code 1985, §§ 32.10, 32.11, 32.15; Ord. No. 90-64, §§ 1, 2, 4-21-92)  
Sec. 2-164. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the members and employees of the police department to: 
(1)  Preserve the public peace; 
(2)  Detect and prevent crimes; 
(3)  Arrest violators of the law; 
(4)  Protect the rights of persons and property; 
(5)  Preserve peace at all public meetings and public places; 
(6)  Prevent and remove, whenever possible, all nuisances on or in the streets, waters, and all other places; 
(7)  Regulate and control vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the streets; 
(8)  Investigate traffic accidents and determine the cause and responsibility for the accidents; 
(9)  Enforce the penal laws of the state, county and city; 
(10)  Enforce the penal ordinances of the city; and 
(11)  Perform and discharge all other duties as are imposed upon them by the laws of the state, by Charter, ordinances or resolutions of the city, or by the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 32.13; Ord. No. 90-64, § 4, 4-21-92)  
Sec. 2-165. - Employment requirements. 
Before any member of the police department shall assume his duties as such, the member shall first be fingerprinted and be cleared in accordance with standards as are from time to time established by the state department of law enforcement. 
(Code 1985, § 32.16; Ord. No. 90-64, § 6, 4-21-92)  
Sec. 2-166. - Compensation. 
All salaries, compensations, expenses, and other payments to be made to members of the police department shall be established by the city council by resolution, and may be changed from time to time as the council shall see fit. If any employees are governed by a collectively bargained agreement, such salaries shall be subject to those provisions and negotiation required under state and/or federal law. 
(Code 1985, § 32.17; Ord. No. 90-64, § 7, 4-21-92)  
Sec. 2-167. - Recordkeeping. 
All records required to be kept by the police department shall be kept in accordance with the provisions of Florida Statutes as from time to time amended and any other requirements as established by the state department of law enforcement, inclusive of statutory requirements and rules and regulations regarding case reports of pending criminal investigations. 
(Code 1985, § 32.18; Ord. No. 90-64, § 8, 4-21-92) 
State Law reference— Public records act, F.S. § 119.07.  
Sec. 2-168. - Rules and regulations. 
The police chief shall promulgate department rules and regulations, which rules and regulations shall be approved by the city council. The rules and regulations which are currently in full force and effect shall remain in full force and effect until such time as they are amended or repealed by council action. 
(Code 1985, § 32.19; Ord. No. 90-64, § 9, 4-21-92)  
Sec. 2-169. - Disposal of abandoned property by the police department. 
(a)  The police chief is authorized to utilize the procedures outlined in F.S. § 705.101 et seq. concerning the disposal of abandoned property. 
(b)  All provisions as set forth in F.S. § 705.101 et seq. concerning abandoned property are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(c)  If, at the end of the notice period as provided for in F.S. § 705.103, the owner or any person interested in an abandoned article has not claimed such article or shown reasonable cause for failure to do so, then the police chief is directed to either salvage the article should the article be of nominal value or sell the article should in the opinion of the police chief the sale of the article be warranted. 
(Code 1985, § 32.20)  
Sec. 2-170. - Statutory powers. 
Nothing contained in this division shall in any way limit the powers of the city police department or its police chief. The police department and chief of police shall have any and all powers as are established by state statutes, as from time to time amended. 
(Ord. No. 90-64, § 11, 4-21-92)  
Secs. 2-171—2-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 2-186. - Established; director; organization; appointments. 
(a)  The public works department of the city is hereby established. The head of the department is the director of public works, who shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the will of the mayor. 
(b)  The organization and operating procedures of the public works department shall be as prescribed by the mayor. 
(c)  The mayor, with the advice of the public works director, shall appoint such employees as may be necessary to perform the functions of the public works department. The salaries for the director and all departmental officers and employees shall be fixed by the city council. The manager or director may assign one person to perform, without additional compensation, the duties of other offices or positions created by, or made necessary by, the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 1(32.60), 3-27-90)  
Sec. 2-187. - Functions, powers and duties. 
The public works department shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Plan, design, construct and maintain all arterial and other roads, bridges, tunnels, canals and related facilities in the city, as well as such other arterial and other roads, bridges, tunnels, canals and related facilities situated partially or entirely within the city, which are from time to time designated by the mayor. 
(2)  Develop plans and make recommendations for the establishment, merger, and abolishment of special purpose districts within which may be provided water, streets, sidewalks, street lighting, sewage collection and disposal, drainage, and other essential facilities and services, and at the direction of the mayor and city council construct, maintain, provide and administer such facilities and services. 
(3)  With the cooperation of the building department, establish and enforce minimum standards for the approval of platting or replatting of any lands in the city. 
(4)  Perform any other functions reasonably necessary to, or reasonably related to, the performance of the functions as may be designated by the mayor. 
(5)  Review plans, issue permits and make inspections of paving and drainage on public rights-of-way and private property in the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 1(32.61), 3-27-90)  
Sec. 2-188. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Collection of fees. The public works department shall charge and collect fees for public works construction, under permit issued by the public works department, in canal, road and street rights-of-way, and utility or other easements, in the city area and in rights-of-way of canals, roads and streets located within the city drainage on private property. Such fees are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b)  Penalty fees. When work for which a permit required by this section is commenced prior to obtaining a permit, a penalty fee will be imposed. The payment of such penalty fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with all of the requirements of all applicable regulations and codes, nor shall it relieve such persons from any of the penalties therein. 
(c)  Extension of permit. A permit may be extended for a period of up to, but not more than, one year from the expiration date of the original permit, provided the permit section of the public works department is notified prior to the expiration of the permit. If the permit is allowed to expire without requesting an extension, a new permit will be required, including appropriate fees, for the remainder of the uncompleted work. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 4-24-90)  
Sec. 2-189. - Refund of permit fee. 
(a)  Full or partial refunds may be granted to a permit holder whose permit is canceled by owner authorization where work has commenced and the owner selects a second contractor to complete the work. The second contractor shall pay a full fee to complete the work unless the first contractor waives his opportunity to a refund in writing, in which case the second contractor is entitled to a permit to cover the same work on prorated charge basis. 
(b)  No refunds will be made where any work has commenced as evidenced by any recorded inspections having been made by the department. 
(c)  No refunds will be made where construction was stopped by court order or permits canceled by same. 
(d)  Where there is a change of contractor or qualifier involving a permit for which a fee of more than $75.00 was paid to the department the following conditions shall prevail: 
(1)  The original permit holder: 
a.  Is not entitled to any refund if the permit has expired or if work, as evidenced by any recorded inspection has commenced under such permit; or 
b.  Is entitled to a full refund where the permit has not expired and no work, as evidenced by any recorded inspection, has commenced. 
(2)  The second permit holder: 
a.  Shall pay a full fee if the original permit has expired; 
b.  Shall pay only $75.00 to cover the cost of transferring information from first permit holder permit to the second; or 
c.  Shall pay full fee plus $75.00 to cover the costs of transferring information from the first permit holder permit to the second when work, as evidenced by any recorded inspection, has commenced under the original unexpired permit. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 4-24-90)  
Sec. 2-190. - Lost and revised plans fee. 
When plans for pavement, drainage, sidewalk, driveway or any construction on right-of-way are lost by the owner or contractor, a recertification fee will be required to review, stamp and approve a new set of plans as a field copy. Such fee shall be based on 15 percent of the original public work permit. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 4-24-90)  
Sec. 2-191. - Reinspection fees. 
When extra inspection trips are necessary due to the wrong address being given on call for inspections, permit cards and plans not available for the inspector, the prior rejection of work due to faulty construction, work not being ready for inspections at the time specified, failure to call for final or other inspections, required corrections not being made or completed at the time specified, or other code violation or special inspections, a fee of $40.00 for each reinspection may be charged. The payment of reinspection fees may be required before any further permits will be issued to the person or firm owning same, and further inspections may be refused until payment of reinspection fees have been made. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 4-24-90)  
Sec. 2-192. - Exception. 
A fee will be charged for each permit except when waived for governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 4-24-90)  
Secs. 2-193—2-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CODE COMPLIANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, adopted Sept. 16, 2008, amended Art. V (title) to read as herein set out. Former Art. V (title) pertained to code enforcement. 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; animals, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; alarm systems, § 26-31 et seq.; regulations regarding weeds and wild growth, § 30-31 et seq.; noise regulations, § 30-61 et seq.; junked and salvaged materials, § 30-91 et seq.; solid waste regulations, ch. 42; local business tax receipts, § 46-31 et seq.; water regulations, § 54-36 et seq.; sewage disposal system regulations, § 54-71 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 58; housing regulations, ch. 74; land use regulations, ch. 78; sign regulations, ch. 82. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-211—2-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CODE COMPLIANCE DEPARTMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), adopted Feb. 7, 2006, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 2-231—2-250.4, pertained to the zoning and code compliance department, and derived from Ord. No. 97-21, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 6, 1998; Ord. No. 2001-09, § 1, adopted June 19, 2001. 
Cross reference— Code compliance department, § 78-51. 
 
Sec. 2-231. - Guidelines for code compliance department. 
There is hereby established a code compliance department. The City of Hialeah Gardens does hereby establish operational guidelines for the code compliance department. These operational guidelines shall coincide with the statutes of the State of Florida and in particular, Chapter 162, "County or Municipal Code Compliance." The intent of this division is to improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by providing an equitable, expeditious, effective method of enforcing the various codes that are pertinent to the city; inclusive of local business tax receipt, fire prevention, building, land use, minimum housing, contractor, sign and related technical codes. 
This division also establishes the fines that correspond to the different types of violations. The violation of any section of this Code as well as a violation of any of the regulations set forth in section 2-250.2 of this division shall constitute a civil offense punishable by civil penalty in the amount prescribed in section 2-250.2. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 2-232. - Federal and state authority. 
The provisions of this Code shall not deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this division or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-233. - Creation and establishment of the code compliance department. 
There is hereby established a department to be called the code compliance department. This department shall establish operational guidelines for the department. The person in charge shall be known as the code compliance director. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-234. - Employee qualifications. 
(a)  Code compliance director. The code compliance director shall be appointed by the mayor. The qualifications for this position are to be set by the mayor and reviewed periodically. 
(b)  Code compliance officer. The qualifications for code compliance officer will be set by the mayor and reviewed periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-235. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Code compliance director. The code compliance director's duties are to be designated by the mayor and reviewed periodically. 
(b)  Code compliance officer. The duties of a code compliance officer are to be designated by the mayor and reviewed periodically. 
(c)  Code compliance secretary. The duties of the code compliance secretary position are to be designated by the mayor and reviewed periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-236. - Right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever any code compliance officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premise any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, commercial space, business space, vacant land, unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, or holds an illegal business operation, the code compliance officer may enter such building, structure, commercial space, business space, vacant land or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any action necessary to enforce or effectuate this Code, provided that if such building or premises is occupied at the time, he/she shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the code compliance director shall have recourse to every recourse provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-237. - Warrants. 
When a code compliance officer has obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy or recourse provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry to the code compliance officer for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-238. - Liability. 
Any code compliance officer or employee of the city, charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the city in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not be personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any city employee because of an act performed in the enforcement of any provision of this Code, division or any other code adopted by the city shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-239. - Civil offenses and penalties; hearing officers. 
The violation of any section of the City Code shall constitute a civil offense punishable by civil penalty in the amount prescribed. 
Additionally, there is hereby created and established a code compliance position to be filled by a special master known as the "special master" to hear appeals in the form of administrative hearings and to consider evidence and issue orders therewith and in connection with the enforcement of city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-240. - Appointment and qualification of officers; removal and organization. 
(a)  Special master appointments shall be made by the mayor and city council on the basis of experience and interest in code compliance. 
(b)  The mayor and city council shall appoint as many special masters as are deemed necessary. Appointments shall be made for a term of one year and any reappointments are at the discretion of the mayor and city council. There shall be no limit on the number of reappointments that may be given to any special master provided, however, that a determination as to removal or reappointment must be made for each hearing officer at the end of each of his/her one-year terms. The mayor or city council shall have the authority to remove special masters with or without cause. Appointments to fill any vacancy shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  Special masters shall be shall compensated by the code compliance department budget at the rate determined by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-241. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  A code compliance officer shall have the authority to initiate an enforcement proceeding provided by this Code. No special master shall have the power to initiate proceedings provided by this Code. All code compliance proceedings shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of F.S. ch. 162. To the extent that the provisions of this division vary from the Florida Statutes, the provisions of the Florida Statutes shall govern. Pursuant to F.S. 162.03(2), the city has chosen to adopt the code compliance system provided for herein which provides for a special master of the city with the authority specified herein. The city does not choose to have a code compliance board. 
(b)  A code compliance officer who finds a violation of any of the city ordinances shall give a maximum of 30 days for the violator to correct the violation. This determination shall be based on considerations of fairness; practicality; ease of correction; ability to correct; severity of violation; nature, extent and probability of danger or damage to the public; and other relevant factors relating to the reasonableness of the time period prescribed. A time for correction need not be specified if the violation is deemed to be not a correctable violation. 
(c)  A code compliance officer who finds such a violation shall issue a civil citation to the violator. Service shall be effective by delivering the civil citation to the violator or his agent or by leaving the civil citation at the violator's usual place of abode with any person residing therein who is 15 years of age or older and informing that person of its contents. If such service cannot be effected, the civil citation may be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by posting of the civil citation in a conspicuous place on the premises or real property upon which the violation has been observed. Such posting of the civil citation shall be deemed proper service, and the time for compliance, stated in the citation, shall commence with the date such notice is posted. The civil citation shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Date and time of issuance; 
(2)  Name of code compliance officer and department issuing the civil citation; 
(3)  Name and address of the violator; 
(4)  Ordinance or section of the Code that has been violated; 
(5)  Brief description of the nature of the violation, including location, date, and time of violation; 
(6)  Amount of the civil penalty for which the violator may be liable; 
(7)  Instructions and due date for paying the civil fine or filing for an appeal at an administrative hearing before a special master. 
(8)  Time within which the violation must be corrected if applicable; 
(9)  Notice that each day of continued violation after the time period for correction has run shall be deemed a continuing violation subject to additional penalty in the same amount, without the need for issuance of additional civil violation notice; 
(10)  Notice that the filing of a request for an administrative hearing will toll the accrual of continuing violation penalties; 
(11)  Notice that failure to request an administrative hearing within five days after service of the civil citation shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to appeal at an administrative hearing before the special master; and 
(12)  Notice that the violator may be liable for the reasonable cost of the administrative hearing as well as the cost of the violation should he be found guilty of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-242. - Civil citations and related procedures. 
(a)  Penalties for violation(s) of the ordinances to be enforced by this division shall be in the amount prescribed in the schedule of civil citations in section 2-250.2. 
(b)  A repeat violation which remains uncorrected beyond the time prescribed for correction in the civil citation shall be treated as a continuing violation subject to additional penalties in the same amount without the need for issuance of additional civil violation notice. 
(c)  Continuing violation penalties shall accrue from the date of correction given in the civil citation until the correction is made if a request for administrative hearing is not timely filed. If the named violator requests a hearing with the special master on a correctable violation and loses this appeal, the special master shall determine a reasonable time period within which correction of the violation must be made, based an the considerations set forth in section 2-244. If correction is not made within the period set by the special master, continuing violation penalties shall begin after the time for correction has run. No continuing violation penalties shall accrue during the time period from the date of the civil citation until the date of the administrative hearing, if the named violator timely requests an administrative hearing to appeal the decision of the code compliance officer. Continuing violation penalties cannot be imposed by the hearing officer for uncorrectable violations. 
(d)  Civil citations issued to "violators" along with the penalties assessed pursuant to this division are due and payable to the city no later than the last day of the period allowed for correction of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-243. - Right of violators; payment of fine; right to administrative hearing/appeal; failure to pay and correct, or to appeal. 
(a)  A violator who has been served with a civil citation shall elect either to: 
(1)  Pay the civil penalty in the manner indicated on the notice, and correct the violation within the time specified on the civil citation; or 
(2)  Request an administrative hearing before a special master to appeal the decision of the code compliance officer which resulted in the issuance of the civil citation. 
(b)  In order to appeal the civil citation by administrative hearing, the individual receiving the citation must file a request in writing to the address indicated on the citation no later than five calendar days after being served with the civil citation. 
(c)  If the named violator, after being served with the civil citation, fails to pay the civil penalty and correct the violation within the time specified (if applicable), or fails to timely request an administrative heating before the special master, the special master shall be informed of such failure by report from the code compliance officer. If the named violator pays the civil penalty for a correctable violation but does not correct that violation within the time specified, each day that the violation continues beyond such specified time shall constitute a continuing violation. Failure of the named violator to appeal the decision of the code compliance officer within the prescribed period shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to administrative hearing before the special master. A waiver of the right to administrative hearing shall be treated as an admission of the violation and penalties may be assessed accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-244. - Scheduling and conducting an administrative hearing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a named violator's timely request for an administrative hearing, the special master shall set the matter down for hearing on the next regularly scheduled hearing date or as soon thereafter as possible. 
(b)  The special master or the code compliance department shall send a summons, by first class mail or hand delivery, to the named violator at his known address. The summons shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Name of the code compliance officer who issued the civil citation; 
(2)  Factual description of alleged violation; 
(3)  Date of alleged violation; 
(4)  Section of the code allegedly violated; 
(5)  Place, date and time of the administrative hearing; 
(6)  Right of violator to be represented by a lawyer; 
(7)  Right of violator to present witnesses and evidence; and 
(8)  Notice that failure of violator to attend the hearing may result in civil penalty being assessed against him. 
(c)  The special master shall call hearings on a monthly basis or upon the request of the code compliance department. No hearing shall be set sooner than five calendar days from the date of service of the civil citation. 
(d)  A hearing date shall not be postponed or continued unless a request for continuance, showing good cause for such continuance, is received in writing by the special master at least ten calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(e)  All code compliance hearings shall be open to the public. All testimony shall be under oath. Assuming proper notice, a hearing may proceed in the absence of the named violator. 
(f)  The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at the expense of the party requesting the transcript. 
(g)  Each case before the special master shall be presented by the code compliance officer that issued the civil citation. In the case that the code compliance officer who issued the civil citation is absent, any other code compliance officer, with prior knowledge of the case, may present the case before the special master. 
(h)  The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with the formal rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if the special master finds it competent and reliable, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule to the contrary. Furthermore, fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(i)  Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses to introduce exhibits; to cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination; to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him/her to testify, and to rebut the evidence against him. 
(j)  The special master shall make findings of fact based on evidence of record. In order to make a finding upholding the code compliance officer's decision, the special master must find that a preponderance of the evidence indicates that the named violator was responsible and that there is as a violation of the relevant section of the Code as charged. 
(k)  If the named violator is found guilty of the violation, he will be held liable for the cost of the administrative hearing. 
(l)  The determination of the special master shall be limited to whether the violation alleged did occur and, if so, whether the person named in the civil citation is responsible for that violation. Based upon this determination, the special master shall either affirm or reverse the decision of the code compliance officer as to the responsibility of the named violator for the code violation. If the special master affirms the decision of the code compliance officer, he shall determine a reasonable time period within which the violation must be corrected. If the special master reverses the decision of the code compliance officer and finds the named violator not responsible for the Code violations alleged in the civil citation, the named violator shall not be liable for the payment of any civil penalty or for the costs associated with the administrative hearing. If the decision of the special master is to affirm, then the following elements shall be included in the decision: 
(1)  Amount of civil penalty; 
(2)  Administrative costs of hearing; and 
(3)  Date by which the violation must be corrected to prevent imposition of continuing violation penalties (if applicable). 
(m)  The special master shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt procedures for the conduct of hearings; 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses for hearings; subpoenas may be served by the city's police department, the code compliance department or by a court authorized agent; 
(3)  Subpoena evidence; 
(4)  Take testimony under oath; and 
(5)  Assess and order the payment of civil penalties as provided herein.  
Secs. 2-245—2-247. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-248. - Administrative fines; costs of repair liens. 
(a)  The city's special master, upon notification by the code compliance officer that an order of the code compliance officer or special master has not been complied with by the set time or, upon finding that a repeat violation has been committed, may order the violator to pay a fine in an amount specified in the civil citation fee schedule for each day the violation continues past the date set by the special master for compliance or, in the case of a repeat violation, for each day the repeat violation continues, beginning with the date the repeat violation is found to have occurred by the code inspector. In addition, if the violation is a violation described in section 2-250.2, the code compliance department shall notify the city council, which may authorize all reasonable repairs, which are required to bring the property into compliance and charge the violator with the cost of the repairs along with the fine imposed pursuant to this section. If a finding of a violation or a repeat violation is made as provided in this part, a separate hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order imposing the fine. 
(b)  (1)  A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $250.00 per day for a first violation and shall not exceed $500.00 per day for a repeat violation, inclusive of the costs of repairs pursuant to subsection (a). 
(2)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the special master shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The gravity of the violation; 
b.  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; 
c.  Any previous violations committed by the violator; and 
d.  The scope of the existing regulations. 
(3)  A special master may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this section, upon a showing of good cause. 
(c)  A certified copy of the special master's order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public record and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real and/or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment. A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this section is in favor of the city, and the may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this section. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the code compliance department may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on real property which is not homestead under § 4, Art. X of the State Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-249. - Duration of lien. 
No lien provided for herein shall continue for a period longer than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee that it incurs in the foreclosure. The city shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-250. - Appeals. 
An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final administrative order of the special master to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the special master. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of entry of the order to be appealed. If an appeal is filed, the city attorney's office shall represent the city at such proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-250.1. - Notices. 
(a)  All notices required shall be provided to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt requested; by hand delivery by the police department, code compliance officer, or other person designated by the city; or by leaving the notice at the violator's place of residence with any person residing therein who is above 15 years of age and after informing such person of the contents of the notice. 
(b)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (a), in the event that the whereabouts of the alleged violator is unknown, and at the option of the code compliance department, notice may also be served by publication or posting, as follows: 
(1)  Such notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the violation is located. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under F.S. ch. 50 for legal and official advertisement. 
(c)  Proof of publication shall be made as provided by F.S. ch. 162. 
(1)  In lieu of publication as described in subsection (b), such notice may be posted for at least ten days in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other shall be at city hall. 
(d)  Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice, with said affidavit shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. 
(1)  Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (a). 
(e)  Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (a), together with proof of publication or posting as provided in subsection (b), shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this part have been met without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-250.2. - Payment of civil citation and description of fee schedule. 
The fee schedule for payments of civil citations is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06)  
Sec. 2-250.3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division the following definitions shall apply. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Code shall be described a meaning which they have in common usage and which gives this Code its most reasonable application. 
Abut means to physically touch, or having property or district lines in common. 
Accessory structure means a subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to that of the principal structure. Where there is no principal structure on the lot, the accessory structure shall be considered as a principal structure for the purpose of the height, area and bulk regulations. 
Accessory use means a use incidental to, and on the same lot as, a principal one. 
Advertising signs. See chapter 82 pertaining to sign regulations. 
Alcoholic beverages. As defined by F.S. 561.01(4). 
Alley means a through public right-of-way of less than 25 feet in width that offers only secondary access to abutting properties. 
Alteration means any change in the arrangement of a building, including any work affecting the structural parts of a building or any change in wiring, plumbing or heating systems (see Florida Building Code). 
Amusement arcade means a building or a part of a building in which five or more pinball machines, video games, or other similar player operated amusement devices are maintained. 
Apartment. See dwelling, multi-family. 
Apartment building. See dwelling, multi-family. 
Auto rental lot means a lot or parcel of land on which passenger automobiles for active rental purposes are stored or parked, together with associated maintenance activities, not including mechanical or body repair. 
Automobile wrecking yard (see also junkyard) means an area where the dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts takes place. 
Awning means an accessory structure either temporary or permanent which is supported by an open framework and is covered by a synthetic or metal material. 
Bar or saloon means any place devoted primarily to the selling or dispensing and drinking of alcoholic beverages. 
Barbecue pit or building means an open or enclosed pit or fireplace or an open or enclosed building used primarily for cooking meats in the barbecue style. 
Barbecue stand means a place to gather for the primary purpose of serving barbecued meats. 
Basement means a story partly underground and having at least one-half of its height above the average adjoining grade. A basement shall be termed a cellar when more than one-half of its height is below the average adjoining grade. A basement or cellar shall be counted as a story if vertical distance from the average adjoining grade to the ceiling is over five feet. 
Bedroom means any room used principally for sleeping purposes, an all-purpose room, a study, or a den, provided that no room has less than 100 square feet of floor area. 
Beer. As defined in F.S. 563.01. 
Block means a tract of land bounded by streets. 
Boat docking facility means a place where vessels may be secured to a fixed or floating structure or to the shoreline. 
Boat slip means a berthing space for a vessel between two piers or pilings. 
Borrow pit means any place or premises where dirt, soil, sand, gravel, or other material is removed below the grade of surrounding land for any purpose other than necessary and incidental to site grading or building construction. 
Boundary of district means any district limits shown on the comprehensive plan land use map or on the zoning district map. 
Building means any structure having a roof entirely separated from any other structure by space or by walls for the purpose of providing-support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind. 
Building height means the vertical distance from grade to the parapet or roof ridge. 
Building official means that official designated by the city to enforce the provisions of the Florida Building Code and other applicable laws. 
Bulky waste means less than one cubic yard of construction and demolition debris, large discarded items or large accumulations of trash. Bulky waste shall include, but is not limited to, appliances, furniture, yard trash, crates, corrugated cardboard, and other similar items. Bulky waste shall not include tires or other solid waste requiring special handling. 
Bundled yard trash means clean yard trash which is gathered into bundles and tied securely so that each bundle does not exceed three feet in length or weigh more than 50 pounds. 
Bus means any motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
Business, professions and occupations. These activities do not include the customary religious, charitable or educational activities of NONPROFIT religious, nonprofit charitable and nonprofit educational institutions in this state; which are more particularly defined and limited as follows: 
(1)  Religious institutions. Houses of worship, church cemeteries or established physical places for worship at which NONPROFIT religious services and activities are regularly conducted and carried on, and who have registered with the State of Florida and have been approved as not-for-profit organizations by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States. 
(2)  Educational institutions. State tax-supported or parochial, church, and NONPROFIT private schools, colleges or universities conducting regular classes and courses of study required for accreditation by or membership in the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, the Department of Education or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. Nonprofit libraries, art galleries, and museums open to the public are defined as educational institutions and eligible for exemption, if in compliance with state and federal laws and regulations for not-for-profit organizations. 
(3)  Charitable institutions. NONPROFIT corporations operating physical facilities, registered with the State of Florida, and approved by the Internal Revenue Service, at which charitable services are provided. 
Cabana or pool house means an accessory structure usually used in connection with outdoor bathing or recreation providing enclosed space for showering or changing clothes. The structure may include recreational cooking or bar facilities including storage facilities, but no sleeping rooms. 
Cabaret means a place of business other than a "night club" located in a lodging establishment having 50 or more guest rooms, where liquor, beer or wine is sold, given away or consumed on the premises, and where music or other entertainment is permitted or provided for the guest of said lodging establishment only. 
Cafeteria means a place where food is obtained by self-service and eaten on the premises. 
Cancellation of license means a license which was issued through error or fraud is declared void and terminated. 
Cargo van means an enclosed vehicle designed to haul cargo, having a gross vehicle weight (GVW) of not more than 8,200 pounds. 
Cellar. See basement. 
Center line of highway means a line running parallel with the highway right-of-way which is half the distance between the extreme edges of the official right-of-way width. 
Code compliance officer means the designated authority charged with the interpretation, administration and enforcement of this Code and of matters pertaining to local business tax receipt. 
Clean fill means material consisting of soil, rock, sand, earth, marl, clay, stone and/or concrete rubble. 
Clean yard trash means yard trash free of other forms of solid waste. 
Certified survey means a survey, sketch, plan, map or other exhibit is said to be certified when a written statement regarding its accuracy or conformity to specified standards is signed by the specified professional registered surveyor. 
Club, private means buildings, facilities or premises used or operated by an organization or association for some common purpose, such as, but not limited to, a fraternal, social, educational or recreational purpose beneficial to its members. In addition, the main purpose shall not be for serving alcoholic beverages to its members and others. 
Cluster development means a development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas. 
Code compliance officer means a designated authority, subordinate to the code compliance director, whose duty it is the enforcement of this Code and matters pertaining to local business tax receipts. 
Combustion contaminants means particulate matter discharged into the atmosphere from the burning of any kind of material containing carbon in a free or combined state. 
Combustible refuse means any combustible waste material containing carbon in a free or combined state. 
Commingled yard trash means yard trash mixed with other forms of solid waste. 
Commission means Miami-Dade County, Florida Board of County Commissioners. 
Commercial district. See Chapter 78 Land Development Regulations. 
Community residential home means a dwelling unit licensed to serve clients of the State of Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services, which provides a living environment for seven to 14 unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family. Supervisory and supportive staff may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of the resident clients and shall be excluded from said count. 
Comprehensive plan. As defined in F.S. ch. 163. 
Composting means controlled biological decomposition of organic materials. 
Concurrency means a condition where specified facilities and services have or will have the necessary capacity to meet the adopted level of service standards at the time of impact of the development project. 
Condensed fumes means minute solid particles generated by the condensation of vapors from solid matter volatilization from the molten state, or may be generated by chemical processes, operation or reactions, when these processes create air-borne particles. 
Conditional permit means a permit issued subject to revision or cancellation by the issuing department under the terms of the land development regulation and Florida Building Code. 
Cone of influence means a localized depression draw-down of the groundwater due to water supply well pumpage. 
Construction and demolition debris means solid waste comprised exclusively of materials which are not hazardous materials and which are not water soluble, including steel, concrete, glass, brick, soils not containing any hazardous materials, asphalt roofing and paving material, and lumber from a construction or demolition project. 
Convention hall means an assembly or meeting place for delegates for action on particular matters such as political, fraternal veterans affairs and the like. 
Crosswalk means: 
(1)  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
Court means an open, unoccupied unobstructed space except for trees, shrubs and foundations, statuary, other than a yard, on the same fit as a building. 
Court, inner means a court surrounded by a structure and not extending to a street or alley or to a front, side or rear yard. 
Court, outer means a court extending to a street or alley or to a front or rear yard. 
Daytime means a half hour before sunrise to a half hour after sunset. Nighttime means at any other hour. 
DERM means the Miami-Dade County Department of Environmental Resources Management. 
Depth of lot means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Development means generally consists of changes in land use or intensity; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relo- cation, or enlargement of any structure; any excavation, landfill, or land disturbance; any use or extension of the use of land and that which is further defined in F.S. 380.04. 
Development land means land upon which structures or facilities have been constructed. 
Developed property means any parcel of land which contains an impervious area. 
Diameter breast height (DBH) means the diameter of a tree's trunk measured at a point four and one-half feet above the ground surface. 
Dog kennel means the keeping of any dog or dogs, regardless of number, for sale, breeding, boarding or treatment purposes, except in a dog hospital, dog beauty parlor or pet shop, as permitted by law, or the keeping of five or more dogs, six months or older, on premises used for residential purposes, or the keeping of more than one dog on vacant property or on property used for business or commercial purposes. 
Domestic sewage means waste water from toilets, showers, sinks, baths, and other facilities designed for human sanitation whether located within residential or nonresidential land uses. 
Drainage well means any excavation that is drilled cored, bared, washed, driven, dug, jetted or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation is for the artificial recharge of groundwater, or the intentional introduction of, water into any underground formation. 
Drip line means an imaginary vertical line extending from the outermost horizontal circumference of a tree's branches to the ground. 
Dumping means throwing, discarding, placing, depositing or burying any solid waste in an area or manner not permitted by the city. 
Dust means minute solid particles released into the air by natural forces or by mechanical processes such as crushing, grinding, milling, drilling, demolishing, shoveling, conveying, covering, bagging, sweeping, etc. 
Dwelling means one or more rooms physically arranged so as to create an independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one family with separate toilets and facilities for cooking and sleeping, but not including hotels, motels, mobile homes, boardinghouses and lodginghouses. 
Dwelling, multifamily means a building or portion thereof used for occupancy of three or more families living independently of each other and containing three or more dwellings, including, but not limited to, what is commonly known as an apartment building. 
Dwelling, single-family attached (group, row, duplex, and townhouses) means one or more dwellings having a common or party wall. 
Dwelling, single-family detached means a dwelling entirely surrounded by open space. 
Electrical power facility means any electrical generating facility of 20 megawatts or more using any process or fuel and includes associated facilities except those electrical generating facilities the regulation and certification of which are expressly preempted by F.S. ch. 403. 
Enforcing agency means the zoning, code compliance and building departments. 
Enforcing (inspecting) officer means any employee of the referenced enforcing agencies charged with the responsibility of making inspections of buildings and premises and issuing violation notices when necessary. 
Environmentally-sensitive tree resources means a specimen tree, natural forest community, or any other tree or trees that substantially contribute(s) to the aesthetics of an area and which are not exempted from permit requirements under section 24-60.4(f), Miami-Dade County Code. 
Environment means the complex of climatic, edaphic and biotic factors that act upon an organism or an ecological community and ultimately determine its form and survival and which will be affected by the proposed word. 
Emission means the act of passing into the atmosphere an air contaminant or gas stream which contains or may contain an air contaminant; or the material so passed to the atmosphere. 
Essential services means public utility facilities related to the water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, solid waste, telephone, cable television, gas and systems serving the city but not including buildings housing employees, or public safety facilities such as fire or police. 
Excavation means the action or process of creating any lake, rockmining (excluding ancillary property uses necessary for extracting and processing subsurface materials), reservoir, pond or other surface water. 
Explosive means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion. 
Facility means something designed or created to provide a service or fulfill a need. 
Flammable liquid means any liquid which has a flash point of 70 degrees Fahrenheit, or less, as determined by a Tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device. 
Floating structure means a barge like entity, with or without accommodations, which is not used as a means of transportation on water but which serves purposes or provides services typically associated with a structure upon or improvements to real property. Incidental movement or the capability of movement upon water shall not preclude an entity from classification as a floating structure. Registration of the entity as a vessel in accordance with F.S. ch. 327, shall not preclude an entity from classification as a floating structure. 
Floor area ratio means is a measurement of development intensity. 
Florida No. 1 grade or equivalent means the classification of the quality of a nursery plant as published in Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Part 11, Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Division of Plant Industry. 
Firebreak means an area of bare ground no more than ten feet in width in a forest which has been created to prevent the spreading of wild fires. 
Flue means any duct or passage for air, gases, or airborne materials, such as a stack or chimney. 
Fresh waters means all waters of the state which are contained in lakes and ponds, or are in flowing streams above the zone in which tidal actions influence the salinity of the water and where the concentration of chloride ions is normally less than 500 milligrams per liter. 
Freshwater wetlands means those lands where the dominant plant community is composed of primary and secondary wetland plant species constitutes the dominant plant community or those lands which are subject to soil saturation conditions (i.e., groundwater levels no lower than one foot below surface elevations) for a minimum of 30 consecutive days per year based on an average of data for a minimum ten-year period. 
Garage, private means a structure for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal structure situated on the same lot for the storage of motor vehicles. 
Garage, public means a structure designed and used for the storage of motor vehicles. 
Garage, repair means (see also service station): a building designed and used for the storage, care, repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles, including both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint, and body work. 
Garbage means any accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter which is subject to decay. 
Home occupation means an occupation, activity, or use which is located in a home office that is clearly a customary, incidental, and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood. 
Hotel or motel (lodging establishment) means a building or structure under a common ownership interest and single management where sleeping accommodations are supplied for pay to transient guests. Food or drink may be served to the transient or permanent guests and other persons, The sleeping accommodations and dining rooms, restaurants, or lounges where food or drink are served to the transient or permanent guests and other persons. The sleeping accommodations and dining rooms, restaurants, or lounges, if existing being within the same building or buildings in connection therewith. 
House of worship means a tax-exempt institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services and meetings. 
Junk means waste material, such as furniture, lumber, metal, glass or other materials, or inoperative vehicles and other machinery. 
Junkyard means a parcel of land where junk is collected, stored, salvaged or sold. 
Landscaping, required means those natural plantings required by the provisions of chapter 78, including beautification strips, hedges, trees, planted ground cover, sodded and grassed areas, and planted floral installations. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed or built upon. 
(1)  Corner lot: A lot abutting the intersection of two or more streets. 
(2)  Interior lot: A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on only one street. 
(3)  Through lot: An interior lot having frontage on two streets other than a corner lot. 
Lot coverage, building means is determined by dividing that area of a lot which is occupied or covered by the total horizontal projected surface of all buildings, including covered porches and accessory buildings, by the gross area of that lot. 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot. Also, as defined in chapter 78. 
Lot of record means a parcel of land as originally subdivided or subsequently re-subdivided and properly recorded as a lot within a subdivision or plat. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the required front setback line. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for dwelling purposes. 
Nonconforming use means a lawful use of land that does not comply with the use regulations for its land use district but which did so at the time the use was established. 
Nursery, day means a building or lot where supervised care is provided to children of preschool age, school age, or both for remuneration. No overnight facilities or services are provided. 
Nursing, home. Defined as adult living facility in chapter 78. 
Parking lot means an open area or plot of land used exclusively for the storage or parking of motor vehicles together with associated access drives and aisles. 
Planning and zoning board means the city planning and zoning board, as described in chapter 78, article II. 
Principal use or building means a use or building in which is conducted the predominant or primary function or activity of the lot on which it is located. 
Private school means a building, or lot where education and instruction is provided for at least 20 hours per week to five or more persons, either children or adults, for remuneration. A private school may also provide room and board for the students, instruct day students only, or both. 
Recycling container means a receptacle used for recyclable material. 
Recyclable material means any material, which is capable of being recycled and which, if not recycled, would be processed and disposed of as solid waste. The term recyclable material shall include green glass, brown glass and clear glass; aluminum and steel cans and scrap metal; plastic containers, mixed paper, newspaper, corrugated cardboard, office paper, and phonebooks. Any recyclable material mixed with solid waste shall be considered solid waste. 
Recycling program means an operation which provides for the separate gathering, storage, collection and marketing of recyclable material. 
Recycling services means business activities related to buying, selling, trading, marketing, transferring, separating collection or processing of recyclable material. Such service shall include the proper handling and disposal of any portion of collected recyclable material deemed unusable or unmarketable. 
Repairs means restoration of portions of a building to its condition before decay, wear or damage, but not including alteration of the shape or size. 
Residence. See dwelling. 
Restaurant means a food and/or beverage establishment. 
Resubdivision means any change in the shape or size of any lot, tract or parcel of land that was previously platted. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or other utilities. 
Right-of-way line means the outside boundaries of such right-of-way. 
Rooming house means a residential building where accommodations are provided for pay to less than five transient or permanent guests, in three to five rooms, but which does not maintain a public dining room or cafe in the same building, nor in any building in connection therewith. 
Sanitary nuisance means the keeping of anything, by an individual, municipality, organization or cooperation, by which the health or life of an individual or individuals, may be threatened or impaired or by which or through which, directly or indirectly, disease may be caused. 
Service bar means a liquor, beer or wine or other alcoholic, vinous or malt beverage bar or counter used in connection with the operation of a bona fide restaurant, where drinks are prepared solely for the purpose of service to and consumption by the guests of the restaurant. No service of drinks or food is permitted to guests of patrons at the service bar. 
Service station means any premises where gasoline and other petroleum products are sold and/or limited light maintenance activities such as engine tuneups, lubrication, minor repairs, and carburetor cleaning are conducted. 
Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the lot or property line and the nearest front, side, or rear line of the building, as the case may be, including terraces or any covered projection thereof. Steps and ramps are excluded from this calculation. 
Sign. See chapter 82 pertaining to sign regulations. 
Site means a parcel of land which is to be developed as a single unit, subdivision, or project. 
Special execption means a use not permitted by right but may provide for an individual or community serving need and which, subject to conditions, would not impact the integrity of the zoning district. 
Sponsoring agency means an agency or unit of government, a profit or nonprofit agency, or any person or organization which intends to establish or operate a child day care home or adult living facility. 
Statement of code compliance means a statement issued by the chief code compliance officer setting forth that the permitted construction has been completed in compliance with the approved plans and resolutions and conforms with all the provisions of the land development regulations. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling above it. A basement shall be counted as a story if its ceiling is over five feet above the average level of the finished ground surface adjoining the exterior walls of such building, or if it is occupied for business or dwelling purposes. 
Street means a public or private right-of-way used, or intended to be used, for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Streets are further classified by the functions they perform. 
Structural alterations means any change in the shape or size of any portion of a building or of the supporting menders of a building or structure such as walls, columns, beams, arches, girders, floor joists or roof joists. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected the use of which requires rigid location on the ground, or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, including buildings, walls, fence, signs, light standards, tower, tanks, etc. 
Subdivision means a division of a lot, tract or parcel of land. 
Temporary housing means a structure used for human shelter which is not permanently attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system. Manufactured homes or mobile homes shall not be designated as temporary housing. For the purpose of this Code, living quarters for migratory agricultural workers shall be defined as temporary housing. 
Tent means any structure or enclosure, made of any light material, either attached or unattached to a building or structure. 
Tentative plat. See chapter 78 for definition. 
Testing laboratory means a plant which tests materials, products, methods and systems in accordance with established standards or procedures. 
Trailer means a non-self-propelled vehicle or conveyance permanently equipped to travel upon the public highway, that is used either temporarily or permanently as a residence or living quarters. Such mobile home may be affixed to the ground in accordance with the provisions for tie-downs in Chapter 19A of the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida, but shall not otherwise be permanently secured to a foundation. 
Trash means cuttings from vegetation, refuse, paper, bottles, rags and other junk. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-09)  
Sec. 2-250.4. - Technical standards adopted. 
The following technical standards as may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and shall be enforced by the code compliance department of the city: 
(1)  The Florida Building Code. 
(2)  The Public Works Manual of Miami-Dade County and the standards of the Miami-Dade county water and sewer authority Department (WASAD). 
(3)  The requirements for accessibility by physically, disabled persons as specified in F.S. ch. 553, Part V and Florida Building Code. 
(4)  Subdivision, Chapter 28 as specified in the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida. 
(5)  Minimum Housing Standard, Chapter 17 as specified in the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida. 
(6)  Fire Prevention, Chapter 14 as specified in the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida. 
(7)  Contractors, Chapter 10 as specified in the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida. 
(8)  Environmental Protection, Chapter 24 as specified in the Code of Miami-Dade County. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1 (Exh. 1), 2-7-06; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Secs. 2-250.5—2-250.20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RED LIGHT TRAFFIC SAFETY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-12, § 2, adopted Sept. 8, 2010, deleted former Div. 3, §§ 2-250.21—2-250.34, and enacted a new Div. 3 as set out herein. Former Div. 3 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ 2(2-309—2-322), adopted May 19, 2009. 
 
Sec. 2-250.21. - Intent. 
The purpose of this article is to specifically authorize the use of traffic infraction detectors, as permitted by general law, within the city's jurisdictional limits. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, § 2, 9-8-10)  
Sec. 2-250.22. - Use of traffic infraction detectors. 
This local government hereby exercises its option under F.S. (2010) §§ 316.008 and 316.0083 to use traffic infraction detectors within its jurisdiction to enforce the State of Florida Uniform Traffic Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, § 2, 9-8-10)  
Sec. 2-250.23. - Implementation of general law. 
The mayor is authorized to implement the provisions and requirements of Law of Florida, 2010-80 within this jurisdiction in coordination with the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, § 2, 9-8-10)  
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, art. III, §§ 5—9. 
 
Sec. 2-251. - Holding of elections; notice. 
(a)  Nonpartisan general and runoff elections shall be held as provided in the Charter, article III, section 5. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in accordance with the procedure established in article III, section 9, of the Charter. 
(b)  A notice of all city elections shall be given at least 30 days prior to the date of the election by posting a written notice of the election in at least three public places within the city. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to post the notices. 
(Code 1985, § 33.01) 
State Law reference— Notice of special elections or referendum, F.S. § 100.342.  
Sec. 2-252. - Polling place; compilation of votes and certification of results. 
(a)  The city polling place, where the qualified voters of the city may cast their ballots in secret in all elections, shall be as established by the county. 
(b)  The city clerk shall cause the polling place to be opened, and the devices used in balloting, as are approved and used by the county, shall be provided for the use of the qualified electors of the city. 
(c)  After the closing of the elections, the city clerk, under the supervision of the clerks and inspectors of election and in the presence of one police officer and those watchers, if any, designated by the several candidates, shall cause a compilation of the votes registered on the devices to be made therefor. The compilation shall be presented to the board of elections with a tally of all properly submitted absentee ballots. After certification by the board of elections, the tally and compilation shall be the official result of the election after presentation to the council. 
(Code 1985, § 33.02)  
Sec. 2-253. - Verification of signatures on petition. 
The petition required by Charter, article III, section 6B, shall be submitted by the city clerk to the county supervisor of elections for verification of signatures. 
(Code 1985, § 33.06(B))  
Sec. 2-254. - Adoption of state law. 
The following provisions in state law are adopted by reference and will be applicable to city elections. 
 F.S. 
section 	  Subject 
101.105—101.694 	Absentee voters 
102.166 	Contest of elections 
 
(Code 1985, § 33.08)  
Secs. 2-255—2-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PERSONNEL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-281. - Policies, rules and regulations adopted. 
The city personnel policies, rules and regulations, including the adoption by the city of F.S. § 112.0455, concerning the Drug-free Working Place Act, to provide for a drug-free working place, is hereby adopted by reference and is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1985, § 34.13; Ord. No. 89-16, § 1, 9-26-89)  
Sec. 2-282. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Part-time or full-time employees or consultants of the city including, but not limited to, the city architect, city attorney, city engineer, city planner, building official or code compliance officer, or any other city employee or consultant, shall be prohibited from representing on a consulting basis or otherwise, regarding obtaining city approval, persons or entities requesting from the city, either administratively or through the planning and zoning board or the city council, any form of city approval including but not limited to, approval for obtaining of licenses, permits, variances, zoning changes, or any other form of approval from the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this section may be waived by a four-fifths vote of the city council on proper disclosure as made pursuant to subsection (c) of this section; provided, however, that concerning matters which are under the jurisdiction of the water and sewer department, the provisions of this section may be waived by a four-fifths vote of the water and sewer board. 
(c)  Prior to any vote being made to waive the provisions of this section, the party requesting the waiver shall make a full disclosure of the type of services to be performed, the amount of compensation to be paid, and such other material details of the transaction as are requested either by the water and sewer board concerning water and sewer matters, or by the city council concerning other matters. 
(Code 1985, §§ 34.35—34.37)  
Sec. 2-283. - Disclosure of interest with any entity contracting with the city. 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  Immediate relative. The term "immediate relative" includes a brother, sister, father, mother, brother-in-law or sister-in-law. 
(2)  Entity. The term "entity" includes any business, whether individually owned, corporately owned, or otherwise, excluding corporations whose stock is traded on any public exchange and in which the person subject to this section does not own more than five percent interest therein. 
(3)  Full or part-time employee. The term "full or part-time employee" includes all employees of the city, whether on a full time or part time basis, but does not include elected officials. 
(4)  Consultant. The term "consultant" includes any individual who provides advice to the city on a fee basis. 
(b)  Disclosure. Every full or part time employee, or consultant of the city shall disclose any interest he or she may have or his or her immediate relative may have in any entity contracting with the city at least ten days prior to consideration by the council for final approval of such contract. 
(c)  Violation. In the event of a violation of this section, such individual so violating this section shall, absent good cause, be subject to dismissal or to have his or her consulting agreement terminated. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, §§ 1—3, 8-17-99)  
Secs. 2-284—2-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERSONNEL REVIEW BOARD[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference— Creation of personnel review board, art. VII, § 1. 
 
Sec. 2-301. - Composition; appointments; terms of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The personnel review board shall consist of five members to be appointed as follows. 
(1)  Two of the members shall be appointed by the mayor and the city council on the basis of rotating appointment privileges as set forth in Ordinance No. 82-02, passed February 16, 1982, and Ordinance No. 85-02, passed March 19, 1985. The mayor shall have the first appointment and the council person shall have the second appointment and shall serve for a period of two years. 
(2)  Two of the members shall be elected by permanent status employees of the city for a period of two years. 
(3)  The fifth member shall be elected by a majority of the four members of the board who have been appointed or elected as set forth above, such member to be a resident of the city, or proprietor of an established business located within the city and shall serve for a period of two years. 
(b)  Vacancies occurring on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term of any such vacancy in the same manner as the member of the board causing such vacancy was appointed or elected as the case may be. A member of the board may serve for more than one term and shall continue to serve until his successor has been appointed or elected. 
(Code 1985, § 34.10(B); Ord. No. 99-04, § 2, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 2-302. - Officers; duties of secretary; support services. 
(a)  The board shall initiate its organization by electing one of its members to serve as the chairperson for the period to be designated by the board and the board may appoint other subordinates as it deems necessary. 
(b)  The city clerk or designee shall act as the secretary of the personnel review board, attending all meetings of said board, maintaining a written record of the minutes of meetings of said board and performing such other duties in connection with the administration of this division as may be required by the board. He/she shall not be considered a member of the board or entitled to vote. 
(c)  All consultation or support services furnished to the board must be requested and approved by the city council or their designated authority. 
(Code 1985, § 34.10(C); Ord. No. 99-04, § 2, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 2-303. - Compensation of members. 
Members of the personnel review board shall serve without compensation. The city clerk or designee shall receive compensatory time at the rate of time and one-half for attendance at board meetings or hearings when held subsequent to regular office hours. 
(Code 1985, § 34.10(D); Ord. No. 99-04, § 2, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 2-304. - Rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations of the personnel review board, pursuant to article VII, section 1, of the Charter, shall be established by ordinance, which ordinance is not subject to amendment other than by four-fifths vote of the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 34.10(A))  
Sec. 2-305. - City officers, employees entitled to appeal to the board. 
All officers or employees of the city shall be entitled to appeal to the board with the exception of the following: 
(1)  Mayor, members of the city council, and any members of appointed or elected boards or commissions for the city. 
(2)  City attorney and associates. 
(3)  Persons of technical, scientific, or professional training who maintain an independent practice of their respective professions who are employed by the city on a consulting or retainer basis. 
(4)  Persons of a temporary, seasonal or emergency employment status working less than a 30-hour work week, or for a duration less than six months. 
(5)  Any employee who has not completed the probationary period of employment which entitles him/her to permanent employee status. 
(Code 1985, § 34.11; Ord. No. 99-04, § 2, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 2-306. - Personnel operations and procedures. 
All employees of the city are required to fulfill their respective duties and to abide by rules or procedure as set forth in departmental operational and procedural manuals. Modifications or amendments as to state or federal law which are applicable to operational or procedural matters within the city shall be automatically adopted. Periodic revisions to the aforesaid manuals shall be made and each employee shall be made aware, in writing, of changes relative thereto, however the failure to amend or modify such rules shall not preclude the city from enforcing any law applicable to the situation. The personnel review board may consider matters contained in these rules and regulations and procedural and operational manuals in its decision making process. 
(Code 1985, § 34.12(A); Ord. No. 99-04, § 2, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 2-307. - Authority. 
The personnel review board shall be a recommendation body with respect to all employee petitions or claims before it, which issues shall only concern demotion, suspension or dismissal. The mayor shall be the final decision maker. 
(Code 1985, § 34.12(B); Ord. No. 99-04, § 2, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 2-308. - Lobbying. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include future tense, words in the plural number shall include the singular number and words in the singular number shall include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Agency means the City of Hialeah Gardens, including all elected and appointed officials, employees and persons acting on behalf of the agency. 
Lobbyist means any person who, for compensation or remuneration, direct or indirect, seeks to influence the governmental decision making of the agency or seeks to encourage the passage, defeat or modification of any ordinance, resolution, contract, bid award, proposal, recommendation, action or decision of the agency. 
Lobbyist does not mean: 
(1)  A city employee when acting in his official capacity. 
(2)  Any person, or its full-time employee, officer or owner who appears before the city council, city board or committee, or staff in an individual capacity for the purpose of self representation or for the representation of others without compensation or reimbursement to express support of or in opposition to any ordinance, resolution, action, recommendation or decision of any city board; or any resolution, action, recommendation or decision or recommendation of the mayor. 
Person includes individual, firms, associations, joint ventures, general and limited partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations, and all other groups or combinations. 
(b)  Registration of lobbyist. Commencing 15 days after the effective date of this section and continuing thereafter, all lobbyists shall, before engaging in any lobbying activities, register with the city clerk. 
(c)  Registration forms. Every person required to register as a lobbyist shall do so on forms prepared by the city clerk and shall state under oath his or her name, business address, the name and business address of each person which has employed said registrant to lobby and the specific issue on which he or she has been employed to lobby. Separate registrations shall be required for each specific issue and for each employer. 
(d)  Filing and disclosure of annual expenditures. Commencing on April 1, 2003 and on January 1 of each year thereafter, all lobbyists registered pursuant to this section shall submit to the city clerk a signed statement under oath listing all lobbying expenditures for the preceding calendar year. A statement shall be filed even if there have been no expenditures during the reporting period. Annual statements shall be required until such time as the lobbyist files a notice of withdrawal of lobbying activities with the city clerk. 
(e)  Penalties for violation; cumulative in nature. 
(1)  Whenever a violation of this section exists, the city council may publicly reprimand, censure, and/or prohibit such lobbyist before the agency for a period of up to but not to exceed two years. 
(2)  The penalties provided herein are cumulative in nature. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the agency from pursuing any other remedies available to the agency under the agency's code and/or Florida law for the enforcement of its ordinances. 
(f)  Public records. All registration forms and annual disclosure statements required by this section shall be public records subject to inspection and examination as provided for in section 119.07 of the Florida Statutes. 
(g)  Lobbyist registration fee. An annual lobbyist registration fee in the amount of $25.00 per calendar year for each lobbyist shall be paid to the city clerk at the time the lobbyist files a registration form. This fee is necessary to cover the administrative expenditures required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-12, 4-1-03)  
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq.; sign regulations, ch. 82. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 6-1—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billposter means and includes any person engaging in the business for hire of posting, fastening, nailing, or otherwise affixing any written, painted, or printed matter of any kind, or other form or reproduction thereof (referred to in this article as a sign), containing a message or information of any kind whatsoever, to any outdoor billboard, or to or on any bridge, fence, pole, post, sidewalk, tree, or to or on the exterior of any other structure. The terms of this definition shall not apply to nor include any sign mounted on, fastened to, or suspended from the outside of any building or other structure, in accordance with and authorized by any provisions of an ordinance or statute, for any public convenience or use, nor to the construction or use of so-called outdoor display signs, whether the display signs are illuminated or not. 
Commercial handbill means and includes any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature which does the following: 
(1)  Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing. 
(2)  Directs attention to any business, mercantile, commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales. 
(3)  Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. The terms of this provision shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to the meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind when any of these is held, given, or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety, and good order. Nothing contained in this provision shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving, or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind without a license, where a license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city. 
(4)  While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, it is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as an advertiser or distributor. 
(5)  Any matter or literature which is not covered by the definition of sign under the definition of billposter in this section. 
Handbill distributor means and includes any person engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of handbills. 
Litter means and includes any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, cans, bottles, containers, paper (including the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and handbills), lighted or unlighted cigarettes or cigars, or flaming or glowing material. 
Newspaper means and includes any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law. In addition, it shall include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill means and includes any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the definitions of sign, commercial handbill, or newspaper. 
Private premises means and includes any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building, or other structure. 
Public place means and includes any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds, and buildings. 
(Code 1985, § 111.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-32. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are specifically declared to be as follows: 
(1)  To protect the people against the unlawful activities or operations of dissolute persons of criminal habits or tendencies, representing themselves as solicitors, canvassers, or handbill distributors, by requiring the registration of all solicitors, canvassers, or handbill distributors, together with the names of their employers, and by regulating the business of handbill and advertising distribution through the imposition of reasonable license fees. 
(2)  To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors, canvassers, or handbill distributors upon the private property of residents if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter. 
(3)  To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial handbills. 
(4)  To preserve to the people their constitutional right to receive and disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, and public order, by distinguishing between the nuisance created by the promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial circulars and the right to deliver noncommercial handbills to all who are willing to receive them. 
(Code 1985, § 111.01)  
Sec. 6-33. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers as defined in section 6-31. 
(Code 1985, § 111.05)  
Sec. 6-34. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a billposter for hire or as a handbill distributor for hire, or for any person to distribute commercial or noncommercial handbills, without first complying with the terms of this article and all other relevant laws and regulations. Nothing contained in this article shall apply to any person advertising his business or activity on his own premises, if the business or activity is regularly established at a definite location in the city, and also if a license has been obtained therefor, if a license is required under the terms of any applicable law or ordinance. 
(b)  Application; contents. Any person desiring to engage, as principal, either in the business of a billposter for hire, or in the business of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills for hire, shall make application to and receive from the city clerk a license in the manner and for the period prescribed by the terms of this article and by all relevant provisions of this Code. The applicant shall make written application to the city clerk on a form provided for this purpose by the city clerk. The form shall contain, among other things that may be required, the name, the business address, and a brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted by the applicant, the probable number of agents and employees to be engaged, together with a request for a license for the period for which the applicant seeks to engage in the business. 
(c)  Revocation; nontransferability. Without excluding other just grounds for revocation, the city council may revoke any license issued under this article which has been obtained under an application containing false or fraudulent statements knowingly made by the applicant with intent to obtain a license by means of false or fraudulent representations, or for violation of this article, or for any other grounds specified by law. The application shall be accompanied by the required fee for such license. No license issued under this article shall be transferable. If any license issued under this article shall be surrendered by the licensee therein named, or shall be revoked for cause, neither the licensee named in the license, nor any other person, shall be entitled to any refund of any part of the fee. 
(d)  Fees; exemptions. The fee for a license under this article, and for any such purposes, is on file in the city clerk's office. Persons acting for licensees, as agents or employees, in the posting or distributing of any signs or handbills, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay a fee, but each person shall comply with, and be subject to, each and all of the other provisions of this article. The provisions of this article may be waived by the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 111.03) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.  
Sec. 6-35. - Posting notices on public ways or places. 
No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint, or otherwise fix, or cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, advertisement, or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public, to or on any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, flagstone, or any other portion or part of any public way or public place, or any lamppost, electric light, telegraph, telephone line, pole, railway structure, hydrant, shade tree, or on piers, columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates, or other parts of any public bridge or viaduct, or on any other public structure or building, or on any pole, box, or fixture of the fire alarm or police telegraph system, except as authorized or required by the laws of the United States, the state, and the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 111.10)  
Sec. 6-36. - Distributing handbills in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any commercial handbill in or on any public place within this city. It shall be unlawful for any person to hand out, distribute, or sell any commercial handbill in any public place except to a person extending their hand in acceptance of such handbill. It shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept the noncommercial handbill. 
(Code 1985, § 111.11) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 38.  
Sec. 6-37. - Placing in vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handling, transmitting, or distributing of any handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle, who is willing to accept it. 
(Code 1985, § 111.12)  
Sec. 6-38. - Distribution on vacant premises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 1985, § 111.13)  
Sec. 6-39. - Distribution prohibited where proper notice given. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill on any premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No trespassing," "No peddlers or agents," "No advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbills left on the premises. 
(Code 1985, § 111.14)  
Sec. 6-40. - Distribution on private premises. 
No person licensed under the provisions of this article, or any other person, shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting the handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or on the private premises. However, in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in section 6-39, the aforesaid licensee or other person, unless requested by anyone on the premises not to do so, may place or deposit any handbill in or on the inhabited private premises, if the handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent the handbill from being blown or drifted about the premises or elsewhere. However, mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1985, § 111.15)  
Sec. 6-41. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place, or deposit litter in any manner or amount in the following places: 
(1)  In or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or any other public lands, except in containers or areas lawfully provided therefor. 
(2)  In or on any fresh water lake, river, or stream. 
(3)  In or on any private property, unless prior consent of the owner has been given and unless the litter will not cause a public nuisance or be in violation of any other state or local law, ordinance, rule, or regulation. 
(Code 1985, § 111.16) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 30.  
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; land use regulations, ch. 78; signs, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverage code, F.S. ch. 561 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverages, including beer, wine and mixed beverages, shall have the meanings in F.S. §§ 561.01, 563.01, 564.01 and 565.01, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Bar means any place of business where wine, beer, or alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, and where the sale of food is incidental to the sale of these beverages, or where no food is sold. Every place of business that sells or permits alcoholic beverages to be consumed on premises that is not specifically defined in this section shall be considered a bar under this chapter for the purposes of regulation. 
Cigar store and smoking lounge means a retail establishment that sells tobacco products, provides an area for smoking tobacco, and serves beer and wine for consumption on the premises. To do business within the city, a cigar store and smoking lounge must be approved as a "special exception use" by the city council under section 78-36 of the Hialeah Gardens Code of Ordinances. A cigar store and smoking lounge may be approved as a "special exception" use in the city's General business district (B-2), Commercial business district (B-3), or Light industrial business district (IN-1). The city council may condition its "special exception" approval upon whatever directives or limitations it believes are reasonably necessary to protect the interest of its citizens and property owners. Additional specific conditions precedent to "special exception" approval by the city council are: 
(1)  The "cigar store and smoking lounge" shall be not less than 1,000 square feet in size and may not be a "restaurant," "bar," "nightclub," or "show club" as defined in section 10-1 of chapter 10 of the Hialeah Gardens Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Food service in the establishment is limited to inside service of light snacks and sandwiches incidental to the operation of the cigar store and smoking lounge. Outside service of food is not permitted. 
(3)  In the event the sale of tobacco products is discontinued or terminated, then the smoking lounge use is terminated and the sale of alcoholic beverages (beer and wine) is no longer permitted. 
(4)  The cigar store and smoking lounge shall not be freestanding and must be located in an existing shopping center, a commercial building, or a warehouse. 
(5)  Service of alcoholic beverages (beer and wine) shall be subject to all conditions and restrictions set forth in chapter 10 (alcoholic beverages) of the Hialeah Gardens Code of Ordinances as well as applicable state licensing rules and regulations governing the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Consumption off premises means the selling of beers, wines, or alcoholic beverages in the original unbroken containers, to be taken by the purchasers off the premises where sold before being consumed. 
Consumption on premises means consumption of all beers, wines, or alcoholic beverages of every kind, or the right to sell by the drink, bottle, or can these beverages for consumption on the licensed premises only. 
Full-course meals means a meal consisting of salad, entree, dessert, beverage, and bread and butter, all prepared on the premises. Fast foods, sandwiches, frozen foods, or any other services not requiring the utilization of a full-time chef are not considered full-course meals. 
Hotel or motel bar means a bar operated in connection with a hotel, motel, or apartment hotel of more than 25 hotel or motel rooms or apartments, and operated by the same management, the bar being equipped with adequate and sanitary equipment. The sale of beer, wine and alcoholic beverages shall be strictly incidental to the principal use as a hotel or motel. 
Liquor means and includes any and all distilled or rectified spirits, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin, cordials, or similar distilled alcoholic beverages, including all dilutions and mixtures of one or more of the foregoing. 
Nightclub means any place of business operating after 9:00 p.m., where full-course meals, alcoholic beverages, and refreshments are continuously available and served and sold to the public until at least one hour before the authorized closing time in connection with dancing, vaudeville, theatrical, or similar entertainment; and where, in addition to the space occupied by chairs and tables for service of meals, there is provided a floor space of at least 400 square feet prepared for dancing, free from chairs, tables, or other obstructions at all times. Music shall be provided continuously from 9:00 p.m. except for reasonable break periods, the sum of which shall not exceed one-half of the time between 9:00 p.m. and the authorized closing time, by a live band, orchestra, or musical instruments being played by at least two musicians at the same time. However, should the band, orchestra, or musical entertainment not perform on any evening between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and the authorized closing time, the nightclub shall be regulated as a bar, as defined in this section. 
Package store license means a vendor's license to sell alcoholic beverages in sealed containers only and for consumption off the premises. The sealed package must not be broken and the contents must not be consumed in or on the premises under a package store license. 
Person or vendor includes all persons selling, offering, or keeping with the intention of selling or dealing the beverages defined in this chapter. 
Restaurant bar means a bar operated in connection with a restaurant and by the same management, where the principal business is the serving of full-course meals and where full-course meals are actually and regularly served, having accommodations for 150 or more patrons at tables and occupying more than 2,500 square feet of space, the space being provided and equipped with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment. The restaurant bar must be directly connected with the dining room. The sale of beer, wine and alcoholic beverages shall be strictly incidental to the serving of food. The sale of beer, wine and alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited except during the time the restaurant is actually engaged in, and open to the public for, the serving of meals. 
Show club means any place of business operating after 9:00 p.m. where alcoholic beverages and refreshments or full-course meals are continuously served until at least one hour before the authorized closing time in connection with vaudeville, theatrical, or similar entertainment. Musical or theatrical performances shall be provided continuously after 9:00 p.m. except for reasonable break periods, the sum of which shall not exceed one-half of the time between 9:00 p.m. and the authorized closing time, by live performers or by a live band, orchestra, or musical instruments being played by at least two musicians at the same time. 
(Code 1985, § 110.01; Ord. No. 2015-18, § 4, 12-1-15) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person who shall violate any term, condition, or provision of this chapter, upon conviction before a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1985, § 110.99)  
Sec. 10-3. - Consumption on premises; hours of sale. 
No person, vendor or distributor in any place of business, except those determined by the city council to comply with the requirements for an extended hours license pursuant to section 10-6, shall sell, offer for sale, deliver, or permit to be consumed upon the premises of the person, vendor or distributor in such place of business, any alcoholic beverage, including but not limited to liquor, beer, or wine, regardless of the alcoholic content, on any day of the week between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., or on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. The ability to sell, offer for sale, deliver, or permit to be consumed upon the premises any alcoholic beverage beyond the hour of 1:00 a.m. on any day of the week, including Sunday, is hereby declared to be and is a privilege subject to termination by the city council, and no person may reasonably rely on a continuation of that privilege. 
(Code 1985, § 110.02(A))  
Sec. 10-4. - Revocation of privilege to operate. 
(a)  If, at any time, the city clerk, mayor, or city councilmember determines that any person, vendor or distributor in any place of business is operating in a manner harmful to the public health, safety, or welfare, based upon the criteria specified in section 10-6(b), he may place on the city council agenda the matter of revoking such operating privilege. This agenda item shall be publicly advertised in a newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the charges against the person, vendor, distributor, or place of business shall be sent to him at least 14 days in advance. This notice shall also contain the date, time, and place of the agenda item. 
(b)  After consideration of the matter, and allowing the person to be heard, the city council may revoke or condition the privilege to operate a place of business under this chapter. The criteria to be used by the city clerk and the city council shall be the criteria specified in section 10-6(b). Should the privilege be revoked or conditioned, the person, vendor or distributor in such place of business may seek review of this action, after three months, before the city council. The council may then modify or refuse to modify its action. Only one such review shall be given within a 12-month period. 
(Code 1985, § 110.02(B), (C))  
Sec. 10-5. - Consumption off premises; hours of sale. 
(a)  No person, vendor, distributor, cafeteria or restaurant shall sell, offer for sale, or deliver any liquor, beer or wine within the commercial district (CM), regardless of the alcoholic content, by package, bottle or container, for the purpose of consumption on or off the premises, on any day of the week between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, or on Sunday between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 1:00 p.m. of the following day, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Packaged beer and wine sales are permitted in all licensed premises of the city where alcoholic beverages are sold between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as well as between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(c)  No person, vendor, distributor, cafeteria or restaurants shall sell, offer for sale, or deliver any liquor, beer or wine within the business district (BU), regardless of the alcoholic content, by package, bottle or container, for the purpose of consumption on or off premises, on any day of the week, including Sundays, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Code 1985, § 110.03; Ord. No. 90-15, § 1, 5-8-90; Ord. No. 94-05, § 1, 5-17-94; Ord. No. 98-36, § 1, 1-5-99)  
Sec. 10-6. - Extended hours license. 
(a)  Any person or vendor in any place of business operating as a restaurant bar, hotel or motel bar, nightclub, or show club in the city, and duly and regularly licensed by the state to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer therein, may apply for an extended hours license. The fee for the issuance of such license is on file in the city clerk's office. The extended hours license permits and extends the hours in which the licensee may remain open until 5:00 a.m. on any day; provided, however, that all extended hours licenses for restaurant bars, hotel or motel bars, nightclubs, or show clubs are hereby declared to be and are regulatory in nature. Every such license shall expire on October 1 of each and every year. The city clerk shall place all initial applications for such licenses on the agenda for the first regular city council meeting to be held in August, or as soon thereafter as may be heard, and shall notify all qualified applicants of the date on which their applications will be heard. The city council may grant or deny the extended hours license. 
(b)  The specific criteria for city council consideration in granting or denying an extended hours license are as follows: 
(1)  The amount of off-street parking in relation to the demand created by the extra hours of operation, especially with regard to the adverse impact on adjacent residential areas of any illegal or hazardous parking. 
(2)  The amount and degree of law enforcement activities generated by the extra hours of operation, both outside and inside the particular location, with particular emphasis on the vandalism, noise, vehicular use by patrons, and illegal activity of any kind by employees, patrons, or others associated with the establishment, during or immediately after the extended hours of operation. 
(3)  The adverse effects, if any, that the extended hours of operation will have on neighboring properties, especially with respect to the effect of noise, parking, and glare from headlights or exterior lighting on nearby residential properties. 
(c)  Extended hours licenses may only be granted to those establishments which are wholly enclosed, soundproofed, and air conditioned. All windows, doors, or other openings shall be kept closed, except for normal and emergency ingress and egress, in order that noise and music emanating therefrom will not disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(1)  The city council may require, as a condition of the privilege of extending hours of operation, compliance with any reasonable conditions deemed by the council to be necessary to mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects of the extended hours. These conditions may include, without being limited to, provision by the owner or operator of the premises to provide, at his expense, additional off-street parking, security personnel, and screening and buffering from nearby properties. 
(2)  The granting of an extended hours license to a particular licensee is a privilege subject to modification or termination by the city council each year at renewal time, and no person may reasonably rely on a continuation of that privilege. 
(d)  The renewal of any extended hours license shall first be determined by the city clerk. If, in the city clerk's opinion, based upon the criteria set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the license should be renewed, a new license shall issue upon payment of the required fee. If, however, the city clerk determines that renewal should be denied, the licensee shall have 20 days from the date of the notice of denial to appeal the city clerk's decision to the city council. The city council, in determining the appeal, shall use the criteria specified in subsections (a) through (c) of this section. 
(e)  If, prior to renewal time, the city clerk determines that any licensee has either violated a condition of renewal, or is operating in a manner harmful to the public health, safety, or welfare based upon the criteria specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, he may place on the city council agenda the matter of revoking the extended hours license. The agenda item shall be publicly advertised in a newspaper of local circulation and written notice of the charges against the licensee shall be sent to him at least 14 days in advance. This notice shall also contain the date, time, and place of the agenda item. 
(1)  After consideration of the matter, and allowing the licensee to be heard, the city council may revoke, modify, or condition the extended hours license. If the council determines that the actions of the licensee are of such a nature as to pose a serious harm to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, the council may also revoke the privilege of selling, delivering, or permitting consumption of alcoholic beverages after a time established by the city council on any day of the week, including Sunday. The criteria to be used by the city clerk and city council in these matters shall be the criteria specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(2)  Should the license or privilege be revoked, conditioned, or modified, the licensee may seek review of this action, after three months, before the city council. The council may then modify or refuse to modify its action. Only one of these reviews shall be given within a 12-month period. 
(Code 1985, § 110.04)  
Sec. 10-7. - Presence of nonlicensed persons on licensed premises after closing hour. 
No person, vendor or distributor in any place of business serving alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption under the provisions of this chapter and licensed by the state, or any employee thereof, shall permit any person who is not a licensed vendor or employee thereof to remain in the licensed premises beyond the legally authorized closing hour. However, if the premises are divided so that the portion of the premises where alcoholic beverages are kept, stored or dispensed is separated by a partition and locked doors after the legal closing hour, the prohibition shall not apply. 
(Code 1985, § 110.05)  
Sec. 10-8. - Distance of licensed premises from existing alcoholic beverage use business. 
Unless approved as a special exception, no premises shall be used for the sale of any alcoholic beverages to be consumed on or off the premises where the structure or place of business intended for this use is located less than 1,500 feet from a place of business having an existing, unabandoned, legally established alcoholic beverage use which permits consumption on or off the premises. The 1,500-foot distance requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest portion of the structure of the place of business. 
(Code 1985, § 110.06)  
Sec. 10-9. - Distance of licensed premises from church, school. 
Unless approved as a special exception, no premises shall be used for the sale of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on or off the premises where the structure or place of business intended for this use is located less than 2,500 feet from a church or place of religious worship or school. The 2,500-foot distance requirement shall be measured and computed as follows: 
(1)  From a church or place of religious worship, the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the front door of the proposed place of business to the nearest point of the church or place of religious worship structure. 
(2)  From a school, the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the front door of the proposed place of business to the nearest point of the school grounds. 
(Code 1985, § 110.07)  
Sec. 10-10. - Transfer of license. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be transferred to another person or location without notice to and approval by the city council.  
Sec. 10-11. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parking lot or parking area of any commercial establishment means any paved or unpaved area in, on, around, or near any store, warehouse, business, manufacturing or assembly plant, bar, lounge, skating rink, place of amusement, or other commercial activity located within the city. 
Public place means streets, sidewalks, parkways, parks, playgrounds, tennis courts, school buildings, schoolyards, city hall, and any other property owned or in the possession of the city, or any other state, county, or governmental agency, which is used or intended for use by city or governmental employees, or by members of the general public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic beverages in any public place in the city, or in, on, or upon any parking lot or parking area of commercial establishments within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic beverages in or upon any automobile, truck, motorcycle, or other vehicle while the vehicle is in or upon any public place or in or upon any parking area of any commercial establishment within the city. 
(c)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply in parks or playgrounds at any function, party, picnic, or other occasion for which a permit has been obtained from the mayor, or the president of the city council in the absence of the mayor. 
(Code 1985, § 133.01)  
Sec. 10-12. - Nude and seminude entertainment prohibited on licensed premises. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the city to: 
(1)  Prohibit nude and seminude entertainment in commercial establishments holding alcoholic beverage licenses; 
(2)  Prohibit the commercial advertisement, promotion, and exploitation of nude and seminude entertainment in commercial establishments holding alcoholic beverage licenses; and 
(3)  Proscribe conduct and activities which encourage the competitive commercial exploitation of nude and seminude entertainment in commercial establishments holding alcoholic beverage licenses. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advertisement means a display, notice, or other information designed to attract public attention, including, but not limited to, handbills, signs, billboards, soundtracks, placards, signboards, and written notices. 
Commercial means operated for pecuniary gain, which shall be presumed for any establishment which has received a local business tax receipt from any county or municipality. For purposes of this section, operating for pecuniary gain shall not depend on actual profit or loss. 
Establishment means a physical place or location, or the commercial activities or operations being conducted at such place or location, or both, as the context of this section may require. 
Nude or seminude entertainment consists of the following: 
(1)  The actual or simulated display of the genitals, vulva, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage. 
(2)  The actual or simulated display by a female of the area of the human breast at or below the areola. 
Person means any individual, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, government official, government entity, or any other group or combination of groups. 
Premises means the area wherein alcoholic beverage sales or consumption are permitted by the license. 
(c)  Prohibited activities. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in nude or seminude entertainment in any commercial establishment holding an alcoholic beverage license. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any female person, while on the premises of a commercial establishment holding an alcoholic beverage license, to expose to public view that area of the human female breast at or below the areola or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such areas of the female breast as described in this subsection. 
(3)  It is unlawful for any person, while on the premises of a commercial establishment holding an alcoholic beverage license, to expose to public view such person's genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage. 
(4)  It is unlawful for any person owning, maintaining, operating, or leasing any commercial establishment holding an alcoholic beverage license to suffer or permit any person on the premises to engage in nude or seminude entertainment. 
(5)  It is unlawful for any entertainer, performer, or employee, while on the premises of a commercial establishment regulated under this section, to dance in such a manner as to simulate sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee or other person not employed therein. 
(6)  It is unlawful for any entertainer, performer, or employee, while on the premises of a commercial establishment regulated under this section, to sit upon or straddle the leg, legs, lap, or body of a patron, spectator, or other person therein, or to engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by such patron, spectator, or other person. 
(7)  It is unlawful for any person owning, maintaining, operating or leasing a commercial establishment regulated under this section to suffer or permit any violation of subsection (c)(3) or (c)(6) of this section. 
(8)  It is unlawful for any licensee to permit any person, while on the premises of a commercial establishment regulated under this section, to use, or be present in, any area partitioned or screened from public view that is designed to be occupied by any persons for sexual contact or private dancing performances. 
(9)  It is unlawful for any person owning, maintaining, operating or leasing a commercial establishment regulated under this section to suffer or permit the construction, maintenance or use of any area partitioned or screened from public view that is designed to be occupied by any persons for sexual contact or private dancing performances. 
(10)  It is unlawful for any person owning, maintaining, operating or leasing a commercial establishment regulated under this section to suffer or permit any outside advertisement which encourages, solicits, induces or promotes conduct or activities proscribed by this section in such establishment. 
(d)  Presumptions. The following presumptions shall apply in actions brought for violation of this section: 
(1)  Any person who owns, maintains, operates, leases or enters a commercial establishment where nude or seminude entertainment actually takes place on the premises in violation of this section is presumed to be aware that such nude or seminude entertainment is taking place in the establishment. 
(2)  Any establishment which has received a local business tax receipt from the city to operate commercially is presumed to be a commercial establishment. 
(e)  Penalty. Anyone convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section is guilty of a violation of this Code, punishable as provided in section 1-16 and by revocation of any license and the privilege of doing business for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 90-17, § 1, 6-12-90; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-09) 
Cross reference— Sexually oriented businesses, § 18-86 et seq.; miscellaneous offenses, ch. 34.  
Chapter 11 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 11-1—11-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COIN- OR CURRENCY-OPERATED MACHINES 
 
Sec. 11-21. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein: 
Adult only coin- or currency-operated amusement machines shall be defined as any machine which depicts an activity which is normally perceived as being an activity which is primarily for the purpose of pari mutuel wagering and/or is available primarily in a casino setting (i.e., horse racing, dog racing, poker, roulette, slot machines, etc.) 
Amusement center shall mean a place of business having at least five or more coin or currency-operated amusement machines, which are operated, for the entertainment of the general public as a bona fide amusement facility. 
Coin- or currency-operated amusement machines: Any machine operated by insertion of coin, slug, token, credit card or paper currency which provides for entertainment or amusement of any kind. This definition excludes pinball machines, pool or billiard tables, vending machines, soda machines, kiddy rides, automatic music machines and skill games. 
Operator of coin- or currency-operate amusement machines shall mean an operator of coin- or currency-operated amusement machines is hereby defined as any person who shall own, operate or control coin- or currency-operated amusement machines. 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, member of firm, partnership, member of partnership, corporation, or any officer, director or stockholder of said corporation. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 1, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-22. - License revocation. 
If the person to whom a license has previously been issued shall thereafter be convicted or plead guilty to nolo contendere to any felony or a violation of any federal, state, county or municipal statute or ordinance involving gambling or the sale, transportation, possession or use of illegal drugs or a conspiracy involving any of the foregoing (either gambling or illegal drugs), said license shall immediately thereafter be revoked by the city council after a public hearing, notice of which shall be served in writing upon the licensee at least 15 days before the date set for the hearing, if the public hearing establishes that the facts set forth in this subsection requiring a revocation of said license do indeed exist. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 2, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-23. - Operation of coin-operated and currency-operated amusement machines generally. 
Coin-operated and currency-operated amusement machines, as defined by the definitions of this article, shall not be located and operated on premises where alcoholic beverages are consumed or where alcoholic beverages are consumed and offered for sale or sold. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-24. - License; transfer prohibited. 
No license issued under and by the authority of this article shall be transferable, and such license shall be valid only for the operator to whom the license was originally issued. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 4, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-25. - Operation of amusement centers generally. 
The establishment and operation of an amusement center shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold and/or consumed in the amusement center. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 5, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-26. - Operation of amusement centers associated with a bona fide recreational facility. 
Amusement centers licensed in bona fide recreational facilities for more than five, but less than 50 coin- or currency-operated amusement machines must be operated in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold and/or consumed in an amusement center associated with a bona fide recreational facility. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 6, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-27. - Minors prohibited from playing certain machines. 
(a)  Coin- or currency-operated which fall under the definition of adult only machines shall each bear a sticker, at least three inches in diameter, which clearly and legibly says "Play Prohibited by Minors." 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to assure than minors are prohibited from playing such machines at all times. Failure of the licensee to monitor and prohibit play by minors of said designated machines should be sufficient cause to subject the licensee to revocation of his/her license(s) under this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 7, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-28. - Gambling prohibited; purpose of article. 
No person or operator licensed under this article shall permit any coin- or currency-operated machines to be used for gambling or games of chance so as to be in violation of F.S. ch. 849. The intent and purpose of this article is to license the operation of coin and currency operated machines for amusement and skill purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 8, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-29. - Money, etc., prize restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the operation of any coin- or currency-operated machine, either as operator or licensee thereof where there is a prize or reward given other than automatic replays granted by the machine. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 9, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-30. - Seizure for nonpayment of fee; release. 
In the event of nonpayment of the license fee by any operator, or the placement of unlicensed machines within the city, authority is hereby given and granted to the chief license official or his/her designee to seize any of the said operator's machines for such payment. No machines so seized shall be released until the license fee and all storage and hauling and all other expenses have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 10, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-31. - Same—Sale when not redeemed, etc., by owner. 
When any coin- or currency-operated machine, seized pursuant to section 9-10 has not been claimed by the owner thereof by 90 days from the date of such seizure, the city chief license inspector shall sell any such machine at public sale after ten days' notice in writing to the owner if he can be found, and by at least one advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. All proceeds of said sale shall be credited to the general fund of the city; and shall offset the fees, costs, and storage owed by the owner of said machines. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 11, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-32. - Carnival; exemption for coin- or currency-operated amusement machines. 
Coin- or currency-operated amusement machines operated in conjunction with and under the auspices of a carnival duty licensed by the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida, to operate within the City of Hialeah Gardens, shall be exempted from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 12, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-33. - Amusement centers. 
All amusement centers shall be located in the BU zoning district (business district) which have floor areas in excess of 1,000 square feet. No amusement center will be permitted within a distance of 1,500 feet from another center. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 13, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 11-34. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of $300.00. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 15, 1-19-99)  
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq. 
State Law reference— Animal care and control, F.S. ch. 828; damage by dogs, F.S. ch. 767. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
At large means off the premises of the owner, and not under the control, custody, charge, or possession of the owner or other responsible person, either by leash, cord, chain, or otherwise. 
Cat means a member of the feline family and includes both male and female. 
Dog means a member of the canine family and includes both male and female. 
Fowl and poultry includes birds that are domesticated, hens, cocks, turkeys, geese, swans, ducks and other gallinaceous or similar birds. 
Owner means any person owning, harboring, keeping, or controlling a dog within the city limits. 
Wild animal is used as a term to indicate animals and reptiles of a species not usually domesticated in the United States and does not refer to the comparative docility or familiarity with man of a particular animal. Such term does not refer to pets customarily found in and about homes, such as baby turtles, small nonpoisonous lizards, and the like. 
(Code 1985, § 90.01; Ord. No. 98-18, § 1, 9-15-98) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-2. - Enforcement. 
The police department shall be the agency responsible for enforcing this chapter. The city council, in the manner provided by law, may promulgate rules and regulations incident to the proper administration, implementation, and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 90.08)  
Sec. 14-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be punished as a civil infraction by a fine not exceeding $500.00, in the discretion of the court. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1985, § 90.99(A)) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals prohibited, penalty, F.S. § 828.12.  
Sec. 14-4. - Sale of baby animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away baby chickens or ducklings under six weeks of age, or rabbits under two months of age, as pets, toys, premiums, or novelties. However, this section shall not be construed to prohibit the sale or display of baby chickens, ducklings, or rabbits in proper facilities by breeders or stores engaged in the business of selling them to be raised for commercial purposes. 
(Code 1985, § 90.02(A)) 
State Law reference— Artificial coloring and sale of certain animals prohibited, F.S. § 828.161.  
Sec. 14-5. - Pens and enclosures. 
No fowl, poultry or pigs shall be kept or maintained on residential property zoned LDR, MOR, MER or HDR, provided, however, nothing shall prohibit keeping or maintaining domesticated pets within a residential dwelling, provided such domesticated pets are confined to such residential dwelling and do not constitute a health hazard. No poultry, fowl, pig pen or other animal enclosure shall be situated or maintained within 25 feet of any neighboring residential dwelling. Such pens or enclosures must be kept free from odors, fly breeding and other offensive or unhealthy conditions and all food used for poultry, fowl, pigs or other animals shall be kept in suitable containers with tightfitting covers inaccessible to rats and other varmints. Commercial fowl, poultry or pig raising establishments shall be subject to those rules as are consistent with the city land development and zoning regulation and county, state and federal laws related to such enterprises. 
(Code 1985, § 90.03; Ord. No. 98-18, § 2, 9-15-98)  
Sec. 14-6. - Keeping of wild animals and reptiles; permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any wild animal or reptile without first having obtained a permit from the city council. However, this provision shall not apply to parks, zoos, pet shops, medical or scientific institutions, or other places licensed for the showing or keeping of wild animals or reptiles. In the city council's consideration of permits for animals subject to the provisions of this section there shall be a presumption against the issuance of a permit for any animal or reptile falling within the following classifications: 
(1)  Any snake normally possessing fangs and poisonous glands and capable of inducing toxic effects through biting. 
(2)  Any snake possessing the power of constriction and in excess of ten feet in length or of a weight in excess of 25 pounds. 
(3)  Any lizard normally capable of inducing toxic effects through biting, including the gila monster and the Mexican beaded lizard. 
(4)  Any lizard in excess of eight feet in length or of a weight in excess of 25 pounds. 
(5)  Any alligator, caiman, or crocodile in excess of four feet in length. 
(6)  Any ape, including the chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan, gibbon, or simian. 
(7)  All members of the flesh-eating order carnivora, including nondomestic dogs, cats, foxes, seals, raccoons, coatimundis, bears, civets, skunks, and related forms. 
(8)  Elephants. 
(b)  There shall be a presumption in favor of the issuance of a permit to keep animals which do not fall within the classifications set forth in this section. However, the city council may still, in the exercise of their discretion, rely upon their judgment as to when the keeping of such an animal is dangerous and harmful to human safety. 
(Code 1985, § 90.04)  
Secs. 14-7—14-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 
 
Sec. 14-36. - Running at large. 
No person owning or having possession, charge, custody, or control of any dog shall cause, permit, or allow the dog to stray, run, go, or in any other manner to be at large in or upon any public street, sidewalk, or park, or on private property of others, without the express or implied consent of the owner of the private property. This section shall not apply to any dog when the dog is actually engaged in the sport of hunting in authorized areas and supervised by and under the control of a competent person. 
(Code 1985, § 90.16)  
Sec. 14-37. - Removal of dog excrement from public areas. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any dog to permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, the dog to deposit excrement upon the sidewalk of any public street; or upon the floor of any common hall in any apartment house, tenement house, hotel, or other multiple dwelling; or upon any entranceway, stairway, or wall immediately abutting into a public sidewalk; or upon the floor of any other building used in common by the public. If such excrement is deposited by a dog, such person shall, immediately, properly pick it up and dispose of it in a proper place. 
(Code 1985, § 90.15)  
Sec. 14-38. - Rabies vaccination. 
Every person who owns and harbors any dog or cat four months of age or older in the city limits shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Evidence of vaccination shall consist of a county certificate, signed by the licensed veterinarian administering the vaccine. However, no dog or cat need be vaccinated for rabies where a licensed veterinarian has examined the dog or cat and certified that at that time vaccination would endanger the animal's health because of its age, infirmity, debility, or some other physiological consideration; and the certificate is presented to the enforcing agency of the county or the city within five days of such examination. The certificate shall not be valid for more than 12 months from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1985, § 90.17) 
State Law reference— Rabies vaccination of dogs and cats required, F.S. § 828.30.  
Sec. 14-39. - Number of cats restricted in certain areas. 
No more than three cats over the age of eight weeks shall be permitted to be kept at any one time on any premises zoned for residential purposes, or on other premises within 500 feet of any such premises. 
(Ord. No. 90-06, § 1(90.24), 3-27-90) 
Cross reference— Land use regulations, ch. 78.  
Sec. 14-40. - Identification collars for cats. 
All cats owned by residents of the city shall be required to wear a collar, which shall contain the name, current address and current telephone number of the owner of such cat, or as otherwise required by applicable county ordinance or state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 90-06, § 1(90.25), 3-27-90)  
Secs. 14-41—14-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 14-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means bovine or equine animals, male and female, singular and plural. 
(Ord. No. 94-03, § 1(a), 4-19-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-67. - Restrictions on riding or leading. 
No person shall ride or lead an animal, as defined in this article: 
(1)  On any sidewalk; 
(2)  Through any service station; 
(3)  Through any shopping center; 
(4)  Upon private property without the prior consent or authorization of the property owner; 
(5)  On or along a street or roadway other than on the left side of the street or roadway facing approaching traffic, except where bridle paths are provided; 
(6)  In other than single file, except on designated bridle paths; 
(7)  Between sunset and sunrise unless the animal, and the person riding or leading it, each bears a reflector of such size and characteristics and so maintained as to be readily visible at nighttime from all distances within 500 feet to 50 feet from the animal when in front of lawful upper beams of motor vehicle headlamps. 
(Ord. No. 94-03, § 1(b), 4-19-94)  
Sec. 14-68. - Group of riders. 
A person at least 18 years of age must be placed in charge of any organized group of riders on any designated bridle path or public way, from any riding academy, stable, club or similar establishment. 
(Ord. No. 94-03, § 2, 4-19-94)  
Sec. 14-69. - Traffic regulations apply to riding animals. 
Every person riding an animal in the city shall be subject to the provisions of the traffic ordinances and regulations of the city, except those provisions which by their nature can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 94-03, § 3, 4-19-94)  
Sec. 14-70. - Exceptions. 
The police mounted patrol, as well as any mounted patrol so authorized by the chief of police, i.e., search and rescue, etc., are excluded from this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-03, § 4, 4-19-94)  
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq.; handbills, § 6-31 et seq.; license required for distribution of handbills, § 6-34; alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; local business tax receipt, § 46-31 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Posting of information on front door of commercial establishments. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial establishment means any establishment within the city wherein business is conducted, regardless of the frequency of such business being conducted. 
(b)  Posting of information required. 
(1)  Every owner of a commercial establishment within the city shall post in a conspicuous place on the front door of the establishment the name, address, and telephone number of a person who can be contacted at any hour of the day or night for the purpose of peaceful entry to the commercial establishment when requested to do so by any persons authorized to enter upon the premises by virtue of an emergency or otherwise. 
(2)  In lieu of utilizing the address as set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the owner may post a second telephone number with the name of the person to be contacted at such telephone number in a conspicuous place on the front door of the establishment, who can be contacted at any hour of the day or night for the purpose of peaceful entry to the commercial establishment when requested to do so by any persons authorized to enter upon the premises by virtue of an emergency or otherwise. 
(c)  Enforcement. This section may be enforced by the code compliance board or judicially through the courts. 
(d)  Penalty. Should the owner of a commercial establishment fail to comply with the terms and conditions of this section, such owner shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each such violation. 
(Code 1985, §§ 116.01—116.03, 116.99; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01)  
Secs. 18-2—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE PARKING LOTS AND FACILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Land use regulations type, density, intensity of use, § 78-126 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garage means a building, shed or enclosure, or any portion thereof, in which motor vehicles may be parked, stored, housed or kept, for which any charge is made. 
Motor vehicle means any automobile, truck, motor scooter, or other self-propelled vehicle not operated on tracks or from trolleys. 
Parking lot means any outdoor space, or uncovered plot, place, lot, parcel, yard or enclosure, or any portion thereof, where motor vehicles may be parked, stored, housed or kept, for which any charge is made. This definition shall specifically not apply to otherwise duly licensed and regulated businesses which charge for parking only as part of their principal business and for which such parking is appurtenant to their principal business. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 1, 5-3-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-32. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any owner or operator of a parking lot or garage in the city found to be in violation of the terms of this article shall be subjected to one of the following penalties: 
(1)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-16. 
(2)  Issuance of a notice of violation by a city building official or code compliance officer requiring the owner and/or operator to appear before the city code compliance board, which shall have jurisdiction to impose penalties pursuant to the authority granted by F.S. ch. 162. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 25, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01)  
Sec. 18-33. - License and site plan review required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a business of storing motor vehicles for hire on property, a parking lot or garage within the city without first having obtained a site plan review approval and a license therefor in the manner set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 2, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-34. - Application for license and site plan review. 
Applications for licenses and site plan review required by this article shall be made upon forms provided by the zoning and code compliance department, shall be signed and verified under oath by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent if a partnership or corporation, and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  If a person, the name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  If a partnership, the name, residence and business address of each partner; 
(3)  If a corporation, the name, date and state under whose laws such corporation was organized, and if a foreign corporation, whether authorized to do business in this state, the names of the principal officers, directors and local representatives, their residences and business addresses; 
(4)  A site plan, as provided in section 18-35, shall be submitted with the application; 
(5)  The hours for storage or parking of such vehicles and whether night storage is to be maintained upon the licensed premises; 
(6)  The hours during which parking attendants will be on duty; 
(7)  A complete schedule of the rates to be charged for storing or parking vehicles; 
(8)  Such other information as the zoning and code compliance department may deem necessary for the issuance of such licenses. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 3, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01)  
Sec. 18-35. - Site plan requirements. 
A site plan shall be provided, along with the license application as provided in section 18-34, for review by the zoning and code compliance department. The site plan, at a scale of no less than one inch equals 100 feet, shall include the following information: 
(1)  Location, size, construction, and type of barrier surrounding the lot or garage as provided in section 18-49; 
(2)  The location, size, and capacity of the parking garage or lot; 
(3)  The location and size of entrances and exits and kind of floor or ground surface; 
(4)  The location, size, and construction of attendant's station, wall or barriers surrounding such premises; 
(5)  The floor plans and elevation of the proposed parking garage or other building, if any; 
(6)  Drainage plan for site retention of the rainwater and the flood protection of the adjoining property; 
(7)  Lot lines, setbacks, parking space, driveway, and site analysis. 
All parking lots shall be only on property zoned for commercial use. In addition, all parking lot site plans shall have a minimum of 15 percent of the net lot area as landscape open space with eight feet width of greenbelt along all property lines. The plans shall also have a total land area sufficient to meet all land development regulations of the city, including, but not limited to, county and state requirements. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 4, 5-3-94) 
Cross reference— Land use regulations site plan review, § 78-271 et seq.  
Sec. 18-36. - Bond or liability insurance required. 
Every application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a bond, approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by a bonding or surety company authorized to do business in the state, in the penal sum of $5,000.00, conditioned upon payment by the licensee of any and all final judgments for damages resulting to persons arising out of the operation or maintenance of any parking lot or garage. Such bond shall run to the city for the benefit of any person who may receive injuries, and for the benefit of any person who may claim redress for property damage or theft, resulting from the operation or maintenance of such parking lot or garage. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for the full period of time for which the license is effective. A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, conforming to the requirements of this section, may be permitted in lieu of a bond. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 15, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-37. - License fees. 
The license fees for the operation of a parking lot under this article are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 5, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-38. - Issuance of license; term of license; records. 
If, after an investigation by the police department and approval of the application by the zoning and code compliance department of the city, the city council shall be reasonably satisfied that the applicant has a good reputation and that the statements set forth in the application are correct, and if the proper fee shall have been paid, the city shall issue to the applicant a license for a parking lot or garage. Such license shall continue in full force and effect for a period of one year from the date of issuance of the license, or until revoked by the city council. The city clerk shall keep a record of all applications and licenses issued under this article, indexed alphabetically and by location. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 7, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-39. - License not transferable. 
No license issued under this article shall be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it was issued, or at any location other than the one for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 8, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-40. - Revocation of license. 
The city council may revoke any parking lot or garage license if, upon a hearing and investigation after at least ten days' written notice of the time and place of such hearing, the city council finds: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly made any false or materially incorrect statement in the application; 
(2)  The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances the violation of any provision of this article; 
(3)  The licensee has made any charge for parking or storing a vehicle other than those set forth in his license application; 
(4)  The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances the violation of any provision of any penal law or ordinance regarding theft, larceny or conversion of a motor vehicle, or the operation of a motor vehicle without the owner's consent, whether such licensee or other person has been convicted of such offense or not; 
(5)  The licensee fails to keep an attendant on duty during the times specified on his application. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 9, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-41. - Rates to be filed with clerk. 
Every licensee under this article shall file with the city clerk at the time of application for license a complete schedule of rates and charges to be made for storing or parking motor vehicles on the premises to be licensed. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 10, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-42. - Change in rates. 
Every application for a change in the schedule of rates or charges, as filed under section 18-41, shall first be submitted in writing to the city council, which shall hold hearings on such applications to determine the necessity of such change. In making its decision, the city council shall take into consideration, in each case where application is made, operating and labor costs, increases in rental or maintenance costs, and such other factors as may reasonably enter into the conduct of the business. If the city council approves the proposed change in rates and charges, the schedule as filed shall be amended. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 11, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-43. - Employee identification cards. 
Every person owning or operating a parking lot or garage shall file with the city police department the name and address of each employee employed at such parking lot or garage and shall obtain from the police department a card showing the name and address of each such employee and the name and address of the operator of such parking lot or garage at which he is employed. Such card shall be carried by the employee at all times that he is on the premises and shall be exhibited at any time on demand. The annual fee for the issuance of each parking lot employee's identification card is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 6, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-44. - Signs. 
(a)  Required. Each licensee under this article shall maintain at each entrance to the parking lot or garage a permanently affixed sign suitable to apprise persons using such parking lot or garage of the name of the licensee; the hours of the day or night when such place is open for parking or storing motor vehicles; the rates charged by and the closing hours of such parking lot or garage. Where more than one rate is charged for parking, the figures for each rate shall be of the same size and dimensions and such figures shall measure not less than six inches in height. All such signs shall be subject to the approval of the zoning official or his authorized representative. 
(b)  Day and night rates. Where separate rates or charges are made for day parking and night parking, the night rate shall become effective at 6:30 p.m., and notice thereof shall be posted by the licensee on the signs described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Height above sidewalk. All signs required by this section shall be erected pursuant to the provisions of section 82-134(a) of this Code, and shall not be erected in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 12, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-45. - Licensee not to refuse vehicles. 
No licensee under this article shall refuse to park or store any vehicle for which there shall be accommodation in the parking lot or garage upon tender of the stated fee for such parking. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 13, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-46. - Claim checks; return of vehicle. 
(a)  When a vehicle is left for storing or parking, the licensee of the parking lot or garage, his agent, servant or employee shall furnish the owner or operator of such vehicle with a distinctive claim check, which shall have printed thereon the full name and address of the parking lot or garage, a number corresponding to a coupon placed upon the vehicle, and shall have written or stamped thereon the date and license number of the motor vehicle. The licensee shall not deliver any vehicle without the proper claim check being presented, or without satisfactory proof of ownership of such vehicle. 
(b)  This section shall not apply where vehicles are stored or parked on a weekly or monthly fee basis. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to affix any parking coupon upon any vehicle so as to obliterate in whole or in part any portion of the license plates on such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 14, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-47. - Entrances and exits. 
Each parking lot or garage shall have one common entrance and one common exit, which may or may not be combined, and the operator of such parking lot or garage shall keep such entrance and exit properly attended at all times during the period the parking lot or garage is in operation. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 16, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-48. - Fire protection. 
Every parking lot or garage shall be equipped with proper fire extinguishing apparatus subject to the approval of the fire department, and all vehicles shall be so parked or stored that they may be reached readily in case of fire or other emergency. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 23, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-49. - Barriers in parking lots. 
Except for places of entrance and exit, every parking lot shall be completely enclosed by barriers constructed and maintained so as to withstand the shocks and stresses to which they will normally be subjected by vehicles using the premises and shall be of such height as to engage the bumper of any motor vehicle parked on such lot so that no portion of the vehicles shall extend over the property lines. When such lot abuts on a building, barriers shall be erected as provided in this section to prevent motor vehicles from striking such building. When such lot abuts a commercial district, a barrier shall be erected consisting of a chainlink fence with aluminum slats with a minimum height of ten feet. When such lot abuts a business or residential district, a barrier shall be erected consisting of a finished block wall, stucco on block, painted, with a height of seven feet as measured by the crown of the road adjacent to the property wherein the wall is being constructed, with equal architectural treatments on both sides consistent with the surrounding area, the city's land development code and the South Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 17, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-50. - Maintenance of parking lot or garage and surroundings. 
(a)  Sidewalks. Every operator of a parking lot or garage shall keep the sidewalk surrounding the premises free from dirt, and shall keep such sidewalk and the driveways in a safe condition for the travel of pedestrians. 
(b)  Dust and water. The ground or floor space of each parking lot or garage, if made of dirt, sand, cinders or other loose mixture, shall at all times be kept thoroughly sprinkled or treated with water, calcium chloride or other means, so that the dust, sand, cinders or other substance of which such ground or floor space is made will not be raised, carried or blown by the wind, movement of vehicles, or other causes, into or upon public property, or the adjacent property of others. The surface or floor of such premises shall be constructed so as to prevent retention of water thereon. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 18(a), (b), 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-51. - Handbills. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute literature or place handbills in or upon any vehicle which is parked in a parking lot or garage. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 18(c), 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-52. - Loading or unloading of vehicles. 
The loading or unloading of passengers or drivers of vehicles across or upon a public sidewalk is hereby expressly prohibited and any operator or employee who, by receiving or delivering vehicles other than within the property line of the parking lot or garage, aids or assists in blocking any sidewalk or street shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 18(d), 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-53. - Vendors prohibited. 
No licensee shall sublet, sublease or otherwise permit any parking lot or garage or portion thereof to be used by any vendor of goods, wares, or merchandise or services for the conduct of such vendor's business unless such use is conducted in a permanent building or structure licensed by the city for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 18(e), 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-54. - Notification of claims for damage or loss. 
Every licensee shall immediately notify the police department of every claim made by reason of loss, theft, or conversion, or any damage or injury to person or property, from the operation of a parking lot or garage, and occurring during the hours such premises are regularly open for business. The obligation created by this section shall not extend beyond the regular posted hours of attendance as posted upon the premises and printed upon the regular receipt furnished to the owner or person parking such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 19, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-55. - Notification to police of unclaimed vehicles. 
Every licensee shall immediately notify the police department, in writing, of the license number, make, and the name of the owner, if known to him, of every vehicle left in a parking lot or garage for a period of more than 48 consecutive hours. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 20, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-56. - Unauthorized use or removal of vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee of a parking lot or garage to make or permit any use for any purpose whatsoever of any vehicle parked in such place, unless the use shall have first been expressly authorized by the owner or person having control of such vehicle. No licensee shall transfer, or cause to be moved or transferred, any parked vehicle through or upon the streets, or alleys of the city without the written consent of the owner or person having control of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 21, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 18-57. - Vehicles left after closing time, duty of attendant. 
When vehicles are not called for at closing time, the attendant shall leave the keys and parking coupon for safekeeping at a place within a reasonable distance of the parking lot or garage, with a responsible person whose name and address shall be posted in a conspicuous place on such premises. 
(Ord. No. 94-04, § 22, 5-3-94)  
Secs. 18-58—18-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Nude or seminude entertainment prohibited on alcoholic beverage licensed premises, § 10-12. 
 
Sec. 18-86. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
Licensee or permittee means a person in whose name a license and/or permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license and/or permit. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Nudity or state of nudity means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical areas means the male genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in parts (1) through (3) of this definition. 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor areas existed on February 28, 1989. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing such ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § II, 4-10-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-87. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § I, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 18-88. - Classification. 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § III, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 18-89. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person convicted of violating any portion of this article shall be punished as provided by section 1-16. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § XIII, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 18-90. - Permit and/or license—Required; application. 
(a)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid permit and/or license issued by the county for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a permit and/or license under this article must be made on a form provided by the city zoning and code compliance department. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(c)  The applicant for a permit and/or license under this article must be qualified according to the provisions of this article and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the health department, fire department, and building official or code compliance officer. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a permit and/or license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit and/or license as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a 20 percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a permit and/or license as applicant. 
(e)  The fact that a person possesses other types of state or county permits and/or licenses does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit and/or license. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § IV, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 18-91. - Same—Issuance or denial; certifications. 
The city shall approve the issuance of a permit and/or license for a sexually oriented business to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of the application unless the city finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the permit and/or license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit and/or license by the county to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. 
(5)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building official or code compliance officer as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(6)  The permit and/or license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(7)  An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this article. 
(8)  The permit and/or license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit and/or license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
The health department, fire department, and the building official or code compliance officer shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application by the zoning administrator. The certification shall be promptly presented to the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § V, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 18-92. - Same—Fee. 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit and/or license is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § VI, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 18-93. - Inspection of premises. 
(a)  An applicant, permittee and/or licensee shall permit representatives of the sheriff's department, health department, fire department, zoning and code compliance department, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he refuses to permit the lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § VII, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 18-94. - Expiration of permit and/or license. 
(a)  Each permit and/or license issued under the terms of this article shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 18-91. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit and/or license will not be affected. 
(b)  When the city denies renewal of a permit and/or license under this article, the applicant shall not be issued a permit and/or license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal permit and/or license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit and/or license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § VIII, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 18-95. - Transfer of permit and/or license. 
A permittee and/or licensee under this article shall not transfer his permit and/or license to another, nor shall a permittee and/or licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit and/or license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § XI, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 18-96. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  The city land use regulations are hereby amended by having zoning classification to be designated business BU-1 district. The permitted principal uses and structures therein shall be those enumerated in the city land use regulations, chapter 78 as well as the following: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
The permitted accessory uses and structures; permitted special exceptions; prohibited uses and structures; minimum lot area; minimum lot width, minimum yard requirements, maximum lot coverage by all buildings; maximum height of structures; loading requirements and sign regulations shall be the same as those required under the BU-1 zoning district classification as cited under the city land use regulations, chapter 78. Off-street parking shall be one space per three seats, and sign regulations shall be the same as those required under the C-3 zoning district classification as cited in the city land use regulations, chapter 78. 
(b)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business outside of a designated BU-1 district. All sexually oriented businesses shall be located within a BU-1 district. 
(c)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(3)  A boundary of any residential district; 
(4)  A public park adjacent to any residential district; 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to residential use. 
(d)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(e)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor areas of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(f)  For the purpose of this article, measurement of distance shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot. 
(g)  For purposes of subsection (d) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(h)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on February 28, 1989, that is in violation of any of the provisions of subsections (a) through (g) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed two years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business is nonconforming. 
(i)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit and/or license, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or a residential lot within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or license, and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § XII, 4-10-90) 
Cross reference— Permitted uses in zoning districts, § 78-131.  
Secs. 18-97—18-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING AND STORAGE LOTS IN POWER LINE EASEMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-21, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2001, established regulations and licensing for parking lots located under the power line easement. Said ordinance did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as Art. IV, §§ 18-121—18-136, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 54; land use regulations, ch. 78. 
 
Sec. 18-121. - Definition of terms. 
Whenever used in this article, the following terms shall mean and include: 
Accessory use means a use incidental to, and on the same lot and secondary to a principal use. 
Automobile wrecking yard (see also junkyard) means a site at which the dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts takes place. 
City means [the] municipal corporation or a political government subdivision or entity authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, as adopted or amended. 
Code compliance officer means an authorized employee of the city whose duty it is to assure code compliance. 
Commercial district means a portion of the territory of the city, exclusive of streets and other public ways, within which certain uses of land, premises. (CM) allowable uses: Vehicles sales, rental, farm tractor or implement sales, construction equipment sales, storage yards, but not automobile wrecking yards, service or repairs. 
Commercial truck means a motor vehicle with three or more axles. 
Buffer area (see also screening) means a landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another. 
Development means any of the following activities: the construction, reconstruction, clearing, filling, excavating, grading, paving, dredging, mining, drilling or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil of a site, impervious surface or water management system, subdividing the land, and any use or extension of the use. 
Easement means the right of a person, government agency or public utility company to use public or private land owned by another for a specific purpose. 
Frontage means the length of any one property line of a site, which property line abuts a legally accessible street right-of-way. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under yards in this section. 
Impervious surface means any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land. Impervious surface shall include graveled driveways and parking areas as well as roofs and other similar structures. 
Junkyard (see also automobile wrecking yard) means a parcel of land on which waste material or inoperative vehicles and other machinery are collected, stored, salvaged, or sold. 
License or valid license is a license that was properly issued for a period of time that has not yet expired, that has not been revoked, was not obtained by providing wrong/false information in the application and that in being used exclusively for the classification for which it was issued. 
Lot, lot area, lot, corner, lot coverage, lot depth, lot frontage, lot line, (front, rear and side), lot width, (see land development regulation, definitions section). 
Motor vehicle means any automobile, truck, motor scooter, or other self-propelled vehicle not operated on tracks or from trolleys. 
Office trailer means a wheeled vehicle that is pulled by a motor vehicle, which has been previously fabricated outside of the territorial limits of the city and brought upon for the purposes of office space or storage. The trailer, so-called, shall not have live-in privileges and shall be approved for the use intended by the corresponding agency of the state. 
Person means and includes any natural person, individual, public or private corporation, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, municipality, governmental agency, political subdivision, public officer or any other entity whatsoever, or any combination of such, jointly or severally, company or organization of any kind. 
Permit means an official document or certificate issued by the pertinent city department authorizing performance of a specified activity. 
Power line easement bound on the North by the Southerly Right-of-Way line of NW 103 rd Street, bound on the West by the Easterly Right-of-Way line of NW 80 th Avenue, bound on the South by the Northerly Right-of-Way line of NW 98 th Street and bound on the East by the Easterly line of the Florida Power & Light Easement more particularly described as follows: Those portions of the West 165.00 feet of tracts 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of Florida Fruit Lands Company Subdivision No. 1 in Section 3, Township 52 South, Range 40 East, according to the Plat thereof as recorded in plat book 2 at page 17 of the public records of Miami-Dade County, Fl., lying South of the Southerly Right-of-way line of N.W. 103 rd St. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land dedicated by the subdivider, or deeded by the owner, or otherwise transferred for public use for road or highway use. 
Sanitary nuisance means the commission of any action, by a person, or the keeping, maintaining, propagation, existence or permission of anything, by a person, by which the health or life of an individual or the health or life of individuals, may be threatened or impaired or by which or through which, directly or indirectly, disease may be caused. 
Site plan means a document or group of documents, in blue or black print containing sketches, text, drawings, maps, photographs, and other material intended to present and explain certain elements of proposed development, including physical design, siting of buildings and structures, interior vehicular and pedestrian access, the provision of improvements, and the interrelationship of these elements. 
Zoning, code compliance and licensing officials means designated authorities, charged with the administration and enforcement of the zoning, code compliance and local business tax receipt departments. 
(Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2001-21, § 1, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 18-122. - License and site plan review required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a business of storing motor vehicles, a parking lot or storage yard installing an office trailer on the property, within the power line easement, without first having obtained a site plan review, waiver of plat approval and a license therefore in the manner hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 2, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 18-123. - Application for license and site plan review. 
Applications for licenses and site plan review required by this article shall be made upon forms of development review, provided by the zoning department and shall be signed and verified under oath by the applicant. A site plan, as provided in section 18-124 below, shall be submitted with the application along with any additional information as the zoning and local business tax receipt departments may deem necessary for the issuance of said licenses. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 3, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 18-124. - Review procedure. 
This section sets forth the application review procedures required for obtaining development orders, and certain types of permits. 
(1)  The review process shall be divided into five stages: 
a.  Pre-application conference/concept review; 
b.  Preliminary site plan approved by Miami-Dade County Fire Department, and Florida Power Light Company; 
c.  Development technical review committee; 
d.  Planning and zoning board; and 
e.  City council for final development order. 
(2)  An application for a site plan review shall be made to the technical review coordinator prior to an application for development order and will only be accepted if all the requirements of the development review application package has been complied with. 
(3)  The purpose of the site plan review is to encourage logic, imagination, innovation, and variety in the design process and ensure the congruity of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area. 
(4)  The site plan shall be provided, along with the license application as provided in [subsection] (3) above, and shall include the following information: 
a.  Exhibits as per the development review application; 
b.  Type of barrier surrounding lot as provided in section 18-130 herein; 
c.  The floor plans and elevation of the proposed office trailer, if any; 
d.  Paving and drainage plan providing the retention of rainwater and the flood protection of the adjoining property; 
e.  Location and details of above ground diesel and/or storage tanks; 
f.  Comply with the landscaping ordinance of the city and Florida Power and Light Company landscaping requirements; and 
g.  To meet all land development regulations of the city including, but not limited to, Miami-Dade County and state requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 4, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 18-125. - Issuance of license. 
If, after the approval of the site plan review and the license application by the local business tax receipt department of the city, the city shall issue to the applicant a development permit, and the local business tax receipt department shall issue a license for off-street parking with above ground diesel and/or storage tanks, which license shall continue in full force and effect, except as otherwise provided, licenses shall expire on September 30. Those licenses not renewed by October 1 shall be considered delinquent. No license shall be issued for more than one year. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 5, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 18-126. - License not transferable. 
No license issued under this article shall be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it was issued, or at any location other than the one for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 6, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 18-127. - Revocation of license. 
The city council shall either revoke or temporarily suspend the license of any off-street parking license, under the power line if upon an investigation and hearing after at least five calendar days' written notice of the time and place of such hearing, the city council finds: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly made any false or materially incorrect statement in the application; 
(2)  The licensee, as part of the licensee's business activity within the city, is engaged in conduct, which is an actual threat to the public health, welfare or safety; 
(3)  Habitual conduct by licensee, his employee or patrons has occurred at the licensee's premises, which violates city, county, state or federal law; 
Habitual conduct is understood as frequent need for police, code compliance department of the city and Metro-Dade County Fire [Department] to act at the premises because of such conduct. Frequent is deemed to be more than three times a year. 
(4)  The license issued by the city depended upon the licensee's compliance with specific provisions of federal, state, county law or city ordinance or resolution and the licensee have has violated such specific provisions of law; 
(5)  The licensee has violated any provision of this article and has failed or refuses to cease or correct the violation after notification thereof; and 
(6)  After cease and desist issued by the code compliance official. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 7, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 18-128. - Signs. 
Signs are permitted in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  The gross surface area of all signs on a lot shall not exceed 200 square feet in area, and signs shall be approved as part of the site plan review; 
(2)  No individual sign shall be greater than 70 square feet in gross surface area; 
(3)  No sign shall be installed above the roof of any office trailer; 
(4)  No sign shall be placed within ten feet of any adjoining property line, nor 20 feet from any other sign located on the same property; 
(5)  The maximum height of any sign shall not exceed 15 feet, measured vertically from the finished grade at the base of the supporting structure to the top of the sign, or its supporting structure, whichever is higher; 
(6)  The bottom of the sign must provide at least eight feet clearance; and 
(7)  No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 8, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 18-129. - Above ground diesel tank and storage tanks. 
Above ground diesel tank and storage tanks are permitted in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  The tanks shall be located no closer than the following: 
a.  Twenty-five feet to any right-of-way line; and 
b.  Fifty feet to an existing above ground tank, on another property. 
(2)  Not more than five tanks shall be installed on the premises; 
(3)  When more than one tank is installed, they shall be clustered together; 
(4)  The use of the tank, shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the property's primary use, for the use of its occupants only, and shall under no circumstances change the character of the parking lots within the power line easement; 
(5)  No additional traffic shall be generated by the use of such tanks; and 
(6)  The following shall not be considered allowed within this article: gas station, service station or diesel station. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 9, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 18-130. - Office or storage trailers. 
Office or storage facilities are permitted in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  The trailer shall be located no closer than the following: 
a.  Ten feet to any right-of-way; 
b.  Five feet to side lot lines; and 
c.  Ten feet to rear lot lines. 
(2)  Not more than one trailer shall be installed on the premises; and 
(3)  Trailer construction and installation shall comply with all land development regulations of the city including, but not limited to, Miami-Dade County and state requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 10, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 18-131. - Barriers—Parking lots. 
Every off-street parking lot shall be completely enclosed by a chain link fence, with a minimum height of eight feet as measured vertically from the adjacent crown of road. The fence, along the frontage of the property, shall be provided with a visual barrier, to screen all proposed uses from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 11, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 18-132. - Construction and maintenance of off-street parking. 
(a)  Paving required: All areas not covered by the office trailer, landscaping or open space shall be paved in compliance with the city public works department's rules and regulations. 
(b)  Drainage required: A proper drainage system shall be constructed in compliance with the city public works department and shall be designed to dispose, contain or retain a one hour duration, five year frequency rain event with a 6.2" intensity. 
(c)  Sidewalks, if any: Every operator or owner of an off-street parking lot shall keep the adjacent public sidewalk free from dirt or debris and shall keep the sidewalk and driveways in a safe condition for the travel of pedestrians. 
(d)  Handbills: It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute literature or place handbills in or any vehicle while parked in an off-street parking lot. 
(e)  Loading or unloading: Across or upon a public sidewalk or public right of way is hereby expressly prohibited and any owner, operator or employee, who by receiving or delivering vehicles or any loading other than within the property line of the off-street parking lot, aids or assists in blocking any sidewalk or street, entry gates shall be kept opened during the hours of operation. 
(f)  Vendors prohibited: No licensee shall sublet, sublease or otherwise permit any off-street parking lot under power line or portion thereof to be used by any vendor of goods, wares, or merchandise or services for the conduct of such vendor's business. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 12, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 18-133. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are expressly prohibited: Permanent structure or building, except as allowed herein above; vehicle sales, rental service or repairs; service stations; automobile wrecking yards, salvage facility, junk yard; flea markets; towers or masts; billboards signs; sale of alcoholic beverages; blasting; explosives; any other use that, which are either unsafe, unsanitary, fail to permit safe public passage, constitute a fire or environmental hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 13, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 18-134. - Fire protection. 
Every off-street parking lot under the power line shall be equipped with proper fire extinguishing apparatus subject to the approval of the Miami-Dade County Fire Department, including but not limited to site plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 14, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 18-135. - Time for compliance. 
(a)  All off-street parking lots under the power line, not now licensed shall be given 60 days from the effective date of this article to file applications and site plans for approval, and 180 days for full compliance with the terms of this article; and 
(b)  All currently licensed off-street parking lots, under the power line shall comply with all the terms and provisions of this article, after the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 15, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 18-136. - Penalties. 
Any owner, tenant or entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, § 15, 12-18-01)  
Chapter 22 - CABLE TELEVISION 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The cable television ordinance, chapter 112 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances, is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city.  
Chapter 26 - EMERGENCY SERVICES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Comprehensive emergency management plan. 
The City of Hialeah Gardens' comprehensive emergency management plan attached hereto and made a part hereof shall be adopted, complied with and implemented by the following city departments: 
(1)  Police department; 
(2)  Administration; 
(3)  Code compliance department; 
(4)  Public works and maintenance department; 
(5)  Parks and recreation department; and 
(6)  Water and sewer department. 
(Ord. No. 98-33, § 1, 1-5-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-33, § 1, adopted Jan. 1, 1998, adopted provisions implementing the city's comprehensive emergency management plan. Said ordinance did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as § 26-1 was at the discretion of the editor. The city's comprehensive emergency management plan is not set out at length herein, but is available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 26-2. - Adoption of National Incident Management System. 
(a)  The city council hereby recognizes the NIMS and adopts NIMS principles and policies. 
(b)  The city council directs the Hialeah Gardens Police Department Office of Emergency Management to establish a NIMS baseline by determining which NIMS requirements have already been met. 
(c)  The city council directs the Hialeah Gardens Police Department Office of Emergency Management to establish a time frame and develop a strategy for full City of Hialeah Gardens NIMS implementation. 
(d)  The city council directs all city departments, agencies, organizations to institutionalize the use of the incident command system. 
(Res. No. 2127, §§ 1—4, 6-6-06)  
Sec. 26-3. - Alternative energy sources required. 
(a)  Requirement for emergency generators. Automobile gas and/or service stations that sell gasoline at retail to consumers from gas pumps at their stations, within the city, shall have as a minimum an alternative energy source, a generator connection/hookup, that is capable of providing electrical service during an interruption of the normal electrical supply, sufficient to power up the gasoline pumps so that gasoline can be sold to the consumer. 
(b)  Compliance. Automobile gas and/or service stations shall comply with this ordinance within three years from adoption. 
(c)  Sanctions. Failure to comply with this ordinance shall subject automobile gas and/or service station owners and operators to the penalties prescribed in F.S. 162.22, as well as Code compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 1, 3-21-06)  
Secs. 26-4—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm systems means any equipment, mechanical or electrical, which is arranged to signal the occurrence of illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which the police department is expected to respond. 
Alarm user means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained or used. 
False alarm means an alarm signal calling for a response by the police department when a situation requiring a response by the police department does not in fact exist, but this definition does not include an alarm signal caused by unusually violent conditions of nature. 
(Code 1985, § 96.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-32. - User to provide emergency telephone number. 
Every alarm user located within the limits of the city shall give the city police department an emergency telephone number in order to permit prompt notification of the alarm user of alarm calls to the protected premises. The emergency telephone number shall be kept current by the alarm user. 
(Code 1985, § 96.02)  
Sec. 26-33. - Duties of police upon response. 
(a)  Whenever an alarm as described in this article is activated within the city limits, thereby requiring an emergency response to the location by the police department and the police department does respond, the police officer on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by the system and shall determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the alarm system or whether in some way the alarm system malfunctioned and thereby activated a false alarm. 
(b)  If a police officer at the scene of an activated alarm system determines the alarm to be false, the officer shall make a report of the false alarm to the chief of police. The chief of police shall mail or deliver notification of the false alarm to the alarm user at the address of the alarm system installation location, advising the alarm user of the false alarm, and setting forth the date and time of the false alarm. 
(Code 1985, § 96.03)  
Sec. 26-34. - False alarms; fee assessment. 
(a)  With respect to alarm users in residential districts, more than ten false alarms within any 12-month period are excessive and constitute a public nuisance. With respect to alarm users in business and commercial districts, more than five false alarms within any 12-month period are excessive and constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)  The activation of ten or more false alarms within a 12-month period by an alarm user in residential districts, or the activation of five or more false alarms within a 12-month period by an alarm user in business or commercial districts, shall be handled in the following manner: 
(1)  A service charge, which is on file in the city clerk's office, shall be imposed upon the alarm user for each false alarm at the premises where the alarm system is located; provided, however, that should there be more than 16 false alarms within any 12-month period activated by an alarm user in residential districts, or more than 11 false alarms within any 12-month period activated by an alarm user in business or commercial districts, then for each additional false alarm the service charge will be increased. 
(2)  The bill for the charge as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be due and payable within 30 days from the date of mailing. After the passage of 30 days, the bill shall be considered delinquent and shall bear interest from the date of delinquency at the rate of 15 percent per annum. To enforce payment of the bill, the city shall, in addition to all other legal rights, have the right to record a lien against any real property owned by the alarm user located within the limits of the city and shall have all rights granted by law to enforce payment of the lien. 
(3)  In addition to those rights set forth in subsection (b)(2) of this section, the city shall also have the right to discontinue police response to alarms that occur on the premises where the false alarm occurred until payment as set forth in this section is received from the alarm user. 
(4)  The fee provided for in this section shall be cumulative; that is to mean that for each false alarm in excess of ten false alarms during any 12-month period, the alarm user shall be charged the fee provided for in this section. 
(Code 1985, § 96.04; Ord. No. 90-36, § 1, 5-7-91)  
Sec. 26-35. - Right of appeal. 
Any alarm user who disputes the amount of any fee imposed as provided for in this article shall have a right of appeal to the city council. The appeal shall be taken by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within 14 days after notice of imposition of the fee has been mailed. The city council shall consider the appeal at its next regularly scheduled city council meeting or at a specially called city council meeting and shall have the power to either affirm imposition of the fee or order the fee cancelled. Any alarm user who is aggrieved by any action of the city council on an appeal shall have the right to seek judicial review of the city council's actions in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1985, § 96.05)  
Secs. 26-36—26-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITIZEN EMERGENCY RESPONSE TEAM 
 
Sec. 26-51. - Appointment of members. 
The city council members and the mayor shall each appoint two residents or business owners from the city to the citizen emergency response team. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 1, 7-21-98)  
Sec. 26-52. - Reporting for direction and coordination. 
All citizens appointed to the citizens emergency response team shall be under the direction of the mayor and shall report for coordination to the city's emergency management representative. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 2, 7-21-98)  
Sec. 26-53. - New members. 
The mayor or city council may appoint new members from time to time as specific needs shall arise to the citizens emergency response team. All approvals or denials of appointments to the citizens emergency response team shall be made by majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 3, 7-21-98)  
Sec. 26-54. - Abolishment of response team. 
The mayor and the city council are duly authorized to abolish the existence of the citizens emergency response team upon the realization that the existence of such a team is no longer necessary. A majority of the council members may disapprove of the abolition of the citizens emergency response team. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 4, 7-21-98)  
Sec. 26-55. - Training course and age requirements. 
Appointees to the citizens emergency response team shall be duly authorized to participate in the program only after they have completed a training course according to the goals of the emergency management representative of the City of Hialeah Gardens, and are 18 years of age or higher. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 5, 7-21-98)  
Sec. 26-56. - Failure to attend meetings, training, etc.; mayor to declare vacancy. 
If any member of the citizens emergency response team fails to attend two meetings, training or continuing education, the city council or the mayor shall declare the member's position vacant and the city council and the mayor shall promptly fill such vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 6, 7-21-98)  
Sec. 26-57. - Meetings. 
The citizens emergency response team shall conduct at least two meetings a year in which minutes and recording of proceedings shall be taken. In addition to the meetings, members of the citizens emergency response team shall at least once a year participate in a continuing education program that will enhance their capability to help the residents of the city in time of need. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 7, 7-21-98)  
Sec. 26-58. - Making commitments or binding obligations. 
Citizens emergency response team representatives shall have no power to act for or on behalf of, or to make any commitment or binding obligations on behalf of the mayor and/or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 8, 7-21-98)  
Sec. 26-59. - Authority of code inspector. 
No member of the citizen emergency response team shall have the power of a code inspector to initiate any code compliance proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 9, 7-21-98; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01)  
Sec. 26-60. - Representatives of response team. 
All representatives of the citizen emergency response team are volunteers and as such shall aid their fellow residents or business owners of the municipality. Members of the citizens emergency response team shall, whenever possible, include an architect, engineer, general contractor, subcontractor, business person licensed by the city to work within the municipality, electrician, plumber, air conditioning technician, mechanic, lawyer, nurse, doctor or any other technical or professional trades that may be authorized by the mayor or city council members. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 10, 7-21-98)  
Sec. 26-61. - Obtaining equipment, materials and supplies from the city. 
The citizen emergency response team shall obtain from the city equipment, materials and supplies for the emergency management purpose; providing for the health and safety of persons and property including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency; and direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans set by the federal, state, county or city emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 11, 7-21-98)  
Sec. 26-62. - Service without compensation; exceptions. 
Members of the citizen emergency response team shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for such travel, mileage and per diem expenses as may be authorized be the mayor and the city council or as are otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 12, 7-21-98)  
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Littering prohibited, § 6-41. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Public nuisances; abatement procedure. 
All real property including structures and personal property located thereon and undeveloped lots which are either unsafe, insanitary, fail to permit safe public passage, constitute a fire or environmental hazard, are dangerous to human life, dangerously constructed, unsafely maintained, dilapidated, abandoned, or which in combination with an otherwise lawful existing use constitute a hazard or potential hazard to the public safety and health, are declared to be public nuisances. All public nuisances shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, or removal in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Whenever the building official or code compliance officer shall find any personal or real property to be unsafe, insanitary, or a danger to the public health or safety, the building official or code compliance officer shall give the owner, agent, or person in control thereof written notice of such nuisance. The notice shall state the nature of the danger to the public health or safety and the finding that the personal or real property constitutes a public nuisance. The notice shall require abatement of the nuisance within a stated time, no longer than 30 days thereafter. The notice shall contain notification of the right to appeal as provided in subsection (3) of this section. 
(2)  If the public nuisance constitutes an immediate threat to life or property, the building official or code compliance officer shall request a hearing before the city council. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing before the city council at the first regular or special meeting to be held by the city council thereafter. 
(3)  The owner, agent, or person in control of the personal or real property shall have the right to appeal the decision of the building official or code compliance officer to the city council by filing written notice of appeal within five days after receipt of the notice of nuisance. The notice of appeal shall set forth the grounds relied upon by the owner, agent, or person in control of the personal or real property as to why they should not be required to abate the nuisance. 
(4)  If the owner, agent, or person in control of any unsafe structure, lot, or personal property shall fail, neglect, or refuse to abate the public nuisance as described in the notice of nuisance within the time stated by the building official or code compliance officer and no appeal has been taken to the city council, the city attorney is authorized to seek appropriate relief on behalf of the public in the name of the city from any court or administrative agency having jurisdiction to abate public nuisances. 
(5)  If an appeal is taken to the city council, the council at a public hearing shall review all evidence and hear testimony from all interested parties, including the public. The city council shall determine if the public nuisance exists as found by the building official or code compliance officer. If the city council upholds the determination of the building official or code compliance officer and finds that a public nuisance exists, the city attorney shall seek appropriate judicial relief on behalf of the city and the public. If an emergency exists and is so declared by the city council, the mayor shall be authorized to abate the nuisance in such manner as shall protect the public from the immediate danger to health or safety. If the city council finds that no public nuisance exists, the decision of the building official or code compliance officer shall be deemed reversed and no further action shall be taken, unless a change of circumstances occurs, in which instance the public nuisance abatement procedure set forth in this section shall be followed. 
(6)  All notices required in this section shall be served upon the owner, agent, or person in control of the personal or real property by posting notice on personal property or, in the case of real property, by personal service or by certified mail. Proof of service of the notice shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(7)  Costs incurred by the city where judicial relief was sought in abating a public nuisance shall be paid to the city by the owner, agent, or person in control of the personal or real property upon which the nuisance existed. Costs shall include reasonable attorney fees and costs of removal, repair, or demolition incurred by the city. If not paid, the amount of such costs shall become a lien on the property benefited by the abatement of the nuisance. The lien shall be recorded in the public records of the county as a lien on the property equal in dignity with all other liens of the city. The lien shall bear interest at the highest legal rate of interest permitted by law. The city attorney is directed to collect such costs in the manner permitted by law for foreclosure of liens generally. 
(8)  If the city institutes any legal or administrative proceeding relating to the abatement of any public nuisance, all costs incurred by the city, including reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and the costs of demolition, removal, and protection of the public, shall be determined by judgment of the court or agency having jurisdiction. If such costs are not paid, such sum shall become a lien upon the personal and real property upon which the nuisance exists or from which the nuisance was removed and the lien shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by the law. The judgment shall be collected in the manner permitted by law. 
(Code 1985, § 98.01)  
Sec. 30-2. - Health officer, powers and duties. 
(a)  The health officer shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  The health officer is authorized to inspect premises to determine if a health nuisance exists and to do all things necessary to abate or cause the prosecution of those responsible for such health nuisances. 
(2)  The health officer is authorized to enforce all of the requirements of state laws, county or city ordinances and resolutions in regard to sanitary regulations which are calculated to guard against epidemics, infectious, contagious, or malignant diseases or other matters which tend to affect the health of the residents of the city. 
(3)  The health officer is authorized to have notice served upon the owner, lessee, or occupant or any agent, servant, representative, or employee of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the property on which any health nuisance exists for its removal or abatement and to specify a reasonable time within which it shall be done. 
(4)  The health officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of any and all ordinances or resolutions of the city in relation to garbage and trash and shall be responsible to see that such regulations are strictly complied with. 
(5)  The health officer shall have the authority to enforce any and all laws relating to health, whether promulgated by the state, the county or the city. 
(b)  In the fulfillment of his duties, the health officer is authorized to enlist the aid of the police department. In this regard, the police department shall cooperate fully with the health officer for the purpose of obtaining for the health officer, when needed, entry upon premises wherein a health nuisance is believed to be occurring, the serving of the prescribed notice wherein a health nuisance is found to exist, or the investigation of such alleged health nuisance. 
(Code 1985, § 94.45)  
Sec. 30-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Unless otherwise provided, any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be punished by a fine as provided in F.S. ch. 162. Each day the violation continues may be considered a separate and distinct violation and may be punishable as such. 
(Code 1985, § 94.99; Ord. No. 90-71, § 5, 7-21-92; Ord. No. 93-01, § 5, 4-6-93)  
Secs. 30-4—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS AND WILD GROWTH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Weeds means and includes all rank vegetable growth (all grasses, weeds, brush, vines and undergrowth) which emit obnoxious or unpleasant odors or which might be a source of disease of physical distress to human beings, and such term shall also be deemed to include all high and rank vegetable growth that may conceal pools of water, trash, filth or any other deposits which may be detrimental to health if, in the opinion of the building official or code compliance officer, or authorized agent, such condition endangers the health, safety or welfare of any member of the community. 
(Code 1985, § 94.20; Ord. No. 89-11, § 1(94.20), 7-11-89) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-32. - Accumulation of weeds prohibited, declared nuisance; duty of owner. 
The existence of an excessive accumulation or untended growth of weeds, undergrowth, or other dead or living plant life upon any lot, tract, or parcel of land, improved or unimproved, within 100 feet of any improved property or vacant lot within the city limits to the extent and in the manner that the lot, tract, or parcel of land is or may reasonably become infested or inhabited by rodents, vermin, or wild animals, or may furnish a breeding place for mosquitoes, or threaten or endanger the public health, safety, or welfare, or cause disease or adversely affect and impair the economic welfare of adjacent property, is hereby prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of all owners of lots, parcels and tracts of land within the city to keep such property in a safe, clean and presentable condition, and to remove therefrom all surplus grass, saplings, weeds and other growth and all trash and rubbish and to fill in all excavations and depressions thereon. 
(2)  It shall further be unlawful for the owner or any other person in possession of any lot, tract, or other parcel of land in the city, improved or unimproved, to permit the accumulation of rubbish, trash, garbage, debris, weeds or bushes and the location thereof upon such property shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of this section. Such weeds and bushes shall not be greater than 18 inches in height. 
(Code 1985, § 94.20; Ord. No. 89-11, § 1(94.20), 7-11-89)  
Sec. 30-33. - Notice to owner; property lien. 
(a)  If the health officer, building official or code compliance officer finds and determines that a public nuisance as described and declared in section 30-32 exists, or that any part of this article has been violated, the official shall notify the record owner and tenant of the offending property in writing and demand that the owner and tenant cause the condition to be remedied. The notice shall be served in accordance with F.S. § 162.12, concerning notices. 
(b)  The notice provided for in this section shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE 
Name of owner _____
Address of owner _____ 
Our records indicate that you are the owner of the following property in Hialeah Gardens, Florida: 
(describe property) 
An inspection of this property discloses, and I have found and determined that a public nuisance exists thereon so as to constitute, a violation of the Hialeah Gardens' lot clearing ordinance in that: 
(describe here the condition which places 
the property in violation) 
You are hereby notified that unless the condition above-described is remedied so as to make it nonviolative of the Hialeah Gardens' lot clearing ordinance within 20 days from the date hereof, Hialeah Gardens will proceed to remedy this condition and the cost of the work, including advertising costs, attorney fees and interest at the maximum rate attainable by law, and other expenses, will be imposed as a lien on the property if not otherwise paid within 30 days after receipt of billing. 
	Hialeah Gardens 
By: _____
Mayor 
 
(c)  Citations may be issued for violations of this article in accordance with F.S. ch. 162, and the procedure as outlined in F.S. ch. 162 shall be applicable under this article. 
(Code 1985, § 94.21; Ord. No. 89-11, § 1(94.21), 7-11-89; Ord. No. 90-71, § 4, 7-21-92; Ord. No. 93-01, §§ 3, 4, 4-6-93)  
Sec. 30-34. - Penalty for noncompliance. 
In addition to any other enforcement provision contained in this article, any person who fails to properly clear and remedy a nuisance after the notification referred to in section 30-33 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250.00 for each day the nuisance exists. Each day that such nuisance exists shall be considered a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-11, § 1(94.22), 7-11-89)  
Secs. 30-35—30-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-61. - Purpose. 
The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noises within the limits of the city is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent and volume of such noises is increasing. The making, creation, or maintenance of such excessive, unnecessary, unnatural, or unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual, and unnatural in their time, place, and use affect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the citizens of the city. The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this article is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this article are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Code 1985, § 95.01)  
Sec. 30-62. - Excessive noise prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 95.02)  
Sec. 30-63. - Certain noises prohibited. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar, or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of such a signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such a device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of such a signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for persons who are in the room, vehicle, chamber, or immediate outdoor area in which the machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon the request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise. 
(9)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers. 
(10)  Construction or repair of buildings. The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building official or code compliance officer. The permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building official or code compliance officer should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for the work to be done between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(11)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while these are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of the institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets indicating that the street is a school, hospital, or court street. 
(12)  Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(13)  Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show, or sale. 
(14)  Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns. The transportation of rails, pillars, or columns of iron, steel, or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, trays, cars, trucks, or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of the streets or other public places. 
(15)  Operation of street railway cars. The causing, permitting, or continuing of any excessive, unnecessary, and avoidable noise in the operation of a street railway car. 
(16)  Piledrivers, hammers. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(17)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from the blower or fan is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden the noise. 
(Code 1985, § 95.03; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01)  
Secs. 30-64—30-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - JUNK AND SALVAGED MATERIALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junkyard means an open area which provides space for the storage or display of derelict, broken, rusted, inoperative, incomplete, partially destroyed, or damaged machinery, vehicles, building products, wreckage, debris, scrap, junk, trash, or other materials. 
Salvage facility means yards where recycling, dismantling, or reclaiming of machinery, automobiles, building materials, or other personal property takes place and includes business activities similar to junkyards and wrecking yards. 
Wrecking yard means a place where building products, machinery, vehicles, wreckage, debris, trash, or other materials are dismantled, segregated, stored, and offered for sale, salvage, or reuse. 
(Code 1985, § 97.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-92. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500.00 per day for each day such violation continues. 
(Code 1985, § 97.99)  
Sec. 30-93. - Keeping of junk or junkyards, salvage facilities, or wrecking yard prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit, store, keep, or maintain or permit to be deposited, stored, kept, or maintained junk, trash or junkyards, salvage facilities, or wrecking yards in or on any lot, parcel, tract of land, or body of water in any zoning district in the city, except within a legally established junkyard; provided, that it is not the intent of this section to prohibit the deposit of trash or junk in a usual location for waste collection provided it is not or will not become a nuisance and that it will be collected by an authorized commercial waste collector. No junkyard, salvage facility, or wrecking yard shall be permitted in the city. No existing licensed junkyard, salvage facilities, or wrecking yard shall be enlarged. 
(Code 1985, § 97.02)  
Sec. 30-94. - Junk storage areas. 
(a)  Enclosures required. 
(1)  Junkyards, salvage facilities, and wrecking yards shall be surrounded by a solid wall eight feet high, and this wall shall be of C.B.S. construction and painted and maintained in order to present a good appearance. 
(2)  All walls shall be constructed so as to prevent runoff of oil, transmission fluid, and other contaminants onto adjacent properties or into adjacent groundwater or waterways that may result from junking, salvaging, or wrecking operations. 
(3)  All gates shall be of the cyclone-wire type, interwoven with wooden, metal, or plastic slats in order to screen the interior of the yard when the gates are closed. 
(4)  In addition, an appropriate hedge made up of native tree or plant species such as southern red cedar or other species approved by the building department shall be planted between the wall and the street, and such tree or plant species shall be not less than four feet in height at time of planting, and plants located five feet on the center and 2½ feet from the wall. The hedge shall be maintained in a healthy and living condition and replanted as necessary in order to create a dense growth above the wall in order to obscure the view of the interior of the facility and materials stored therein. No scrap or junk may be piled higher than the height of the wall or fence. 
(b)  Maintenance. All walls, gates, interwoven material, curbs, and hedges in junkyards, salvage facilities and wrecking yards shall be continuously maintained in good condition and appearance and in such a manner that the purpose of screening and water runoff prevention is served. 
(Code 1985, § 97.03)  
Chapter 32 - HEALTH FACILITIES AUTHORITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-04, §§ 1—28, adopted Jan. 16, 2007, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Ch. 32 was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2 
State Law reference— Statutory authorization, F.S. § 154.207. 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Recitals. 
The recitals and findings contained in the preamble to Ordinance No. 2007-04 are adopted by reference and incorporated as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-2. - Declaration of need. 
The council hereby finds and declares that there is a need for a health facilities authority to function in the city in order to assist in the development and maintenance of the health facilities located in the city and, where authorized by law, outside the city's boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 2, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-3. - Definitions. 
The following terms, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
Act means F.S. ch. 154, pt. III, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Authority means the City of Hialeah Gardens Health Facilities Authority created by ordinance. 
Bonds or revenue bonds mean revenue bonds and revenue refunding bonds of the authority issued under the provisions of this chapter and state law, including without limitation the Act and F.S. ch. 159, pt. II, as the same may be amended from time to time, notwithstanding that such bonds may be secured by a mortgage or the full faith and credit of a health facility. 
City means the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida. 
Cost as applied to a project or any portion thereof financed under the provisions of this chapter, embraces: 
(1)  All or any part of the cost of construction and acquisition of all real property, lands, structures, real or personal property rights, rights-of-way, franchises, easements, and interests acquired or used for a project. 
(2)  The cost of demolishing or removing any buildings or structures on land so acquired, including the cost of acquiring any lands to which such buildings or structures may be removed. 
(3)  The cost of all machinery and equipment. 
(4)  Financing charges and interest prior to, during, and for a reasonable period after completion of such construction. 
(5)  Provisions of reserves for principal and interest and for extensions, enlargement, additions, and improvements. 
(6)  The cost of engineering, appraisal, architectural, accounting, financial and legal services. 
(7)  The cost of plans, specifications, studies, surveys and estimates of cost and revenues. 
(8)  Administrative expenses, including expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of constructing the project. 
(9)  Such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the construction and acquisition, the financing of such construction and acquisition, and the placing of the project in operation and such items which qualify as "costs" under state law from time to time. 
Council means and refers to the city council of the city. 
Health facility means any private corporation organized as either not for profit or for profit and authorized by law to provide hospital or nursing care services in accordance with F.S. ch. 395 or ch. 400, or life care services in accordance with F.S. ch. 651, and also includes facilities licensed under F.S. chs. 393, 394, any "health care facility" as defined in F.S. § 159.27(16), and any other facilities which under state law, the authority may provide assistance to, in each case as such provisions of state law may be amended from time to time. 
Project means any structure, facility, machinery, equipment or other property suitable for use by a health facility in connection with its operations or proposed operations, including, without limitation: 
(1)  Real property; 
(2)  A clinic, computer facility, dining hall, fire fighting facility, fire prevention facility, food service and preparation facility, health care facility, long term care facility, hospital, interns' residence, laboratory, laundry, maintenance facility, nurses' residence, nursing home, nursing school, office, parking area, pharmacy, recreational facility, research facility, storage facility, utility or X-ray facility, or any combination of the foregoing; and 
(3)  Other structures or facilities related thereto or required or useful for health care purposes, the conduct of research or the operation of a health facility, including facilities or structures essential or convenient for the orderly conduct of the health facility and other similar items necessary or convenient for the operation of a particular facility or structure in the manner for which its use is intended; but shall not include such items as fuel, supplies or other items which are customarily deemed to result in a current operating charge. 
Real property means and includes all lands, buildings, structures, improvements and fixtures thereon; any property of any nature appurtenant thereto or used in connection therewith; and every estate, interest and right, legal or equitable, therein, including any such interest for a term of years. 
State means the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 3, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-4. - Creation of City of Hialeah Gardens Health Facilities Authority; membership. 
Creation. The City of Hialeah Gardens Health Facilities Authority is hereby created and established and, in accordance with F.S. § 154.207, is constituted a public instrumentality. The exercise by the authority of the powers conferred by state law shall be deemed and held to be the performance of an essential public function. 
Members; terms of office. The authority, unless otherwise provided by state law, shall be composed of five voting members. The members of the authority except members appointed to fill vacancies, shall be comprised of the members of the city council, and shall serve for terms of four years; provided that of the first members to serve, the council shall designate one member to serve for one year, one member to serve for two years, one member to serve for three years and two members to serve for four years, in each case until his or her successor is appointed and has qualified. Thereafter, all members of the authority, except members appointed to fill vacancies, shall be for a term of four years. Vacancies during a term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the council. A member of the authority shall be eligible for reappointment. Any member of the authority may be removed by the council for misfeasance, malfeasance, willful neglect of duty or such other good cause as shall be determined by the council. 
Responsibilities of member. Each member of the authority, before entering upon his duties, shall take and subscribe the oath or affirmation required by the state constitution. A record of each oath shall be filed in the Department of State and with the clerk of the city. The members of the authority shall receive no compensation for the performance of their duties hereunder, but each member shall be paid necessary expenses incurred while engaged in the performance of such duties. Service as a member of the authority by a trustee, director, officer or employee of a health facility shall not, in and of itself, constitute a conflict of interest; however, any member of the authority who is employed by, or receives income from a health facility under consideration by the authority shall not vote on any matter related to such facility. Members of the authority shall comply with the provisions of F.S. § 286.012, relating to voting, and with the provisions of F.S. ch. 112, pt III, relating to financial disclosure, in each case as said provisions of state law may be amended from time to time. 
Organization and meetings of the authority. The authority, at its initial meeting and annually thereafter, shall elect one of its members as chair and one as vice chair. Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present shall be necessary for any action taken by the authority. No vacancy in the membership of the authority shall impair the right of a quorum to exercise all the rights and to perform all the duties of the authority. Any action taken by the authority under the provisions of this chapter may be authorized at any regular or special meeting, and each such resolution shall take effect immediately and need not be published or posted. All meetings of the authority, as well as records, books, documents and papers shall be open and available to the public in accordance with F.S. § 286.011, as the same may be amended from time to time. The authority shall keep a record of all of its proceedings and be custodian of all books, documents and papers filed with it and of its minute book or journal and official seal. The authority shall cause copies to be made of all of its minutes and other records and documents and shall give certificates under its official seal to the effect that such copies are true copies, and all persons dealing with the authority may rely upon such certificates. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 4, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-5. - Powers of the authority. 
The purpose of the authority shall be to assist health facilities in the acquisition, construction, financing and refinancing of projects. For this purpose, the authority shall have all the powers conferred by state law, including, but not limited to those powers conferred under the Act and F.S. ch. 159, pt. II, as the same may be amended from time to time, all of which provisions of state law are incorporated herein by reference, as if fully set forth herein, as the same shall be amended from time to time. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the power: 
(1)  To adopt an official seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(2)  To maintain an office at such place or places in the city as it may designate, including space in city hall; 
(3)  To sue and be sued in its own name and to plead and be impleaded; 
(4)  To acquire by purchase, lease, gift, or otherwise, or to obtain options for the acquisition of, any property, real or personal, improved or unimproved, for the acquisition, construction, operation or maintenance of any project; 
(5)  To construct, acquire, own, lease, repair, maintain, extend, expand, improve, rehabilitate, renovate, furnish and equip projects and enter into construction contracts in connection therewith and to pay all or any part of the costs thereof from the proceeds of bonds of the authority or from any contribution, gift, or donation or other funds made available to the authority for such purpose; 
(6)  To make and execute loan agreements, agreements of lease, contracts, deeds, mortgages, notes and other instruments necessary or convenient in the exercise of the powers and functions conferred upon the authority by this chapter; 
(7)  To sell, lease, exchange, mortgage, transfer or otherwise dispose of, or to grant options for any such purposes with respect to any project, or any real or personal property or interest therein; 
(8)  To pledge or assign any money, rents, charges, fees or other revenues and any proceeds derived from the sale of property, insurance or condemnation awards; 
(9)  To fix, charge, and collect rents, fees and charges for the use of or the financing of any project; 
(10)  To issue bonds and notes for the purpose of providing funds to pay all or any part of the cost of any project or any other lawful purpose and to issue refunding bonds; 
(11)  To employ consulting engineers, architects, surveyors, attorneys, accountants, financial experts and such other employees and agents as may be necessary in its judgment, including employees of the city to the extent approved by the council, and to fix their compensation; 
(12)  To acquire existing projects and to reimburse any health facility for the cost of such project in accordance with an agreement between the authority and the health facility; however, no such reimbursement shall exceed the total cost of the project as determined by the health facility and approved by the authority; 
(13)  To acquire existing projects and to refund outstanding obligations, mortgages, or advances issued, made or given by a health facility for the cost of any project; 
(14)  To charge to, and equitably apportion among, health facilities its administrative costs and expenses incurred in the exercise of the powers and duties conferred by this chapter, and to otherwise charge fees and costs in connection with a health facility financing; and if approved by a resolution of the authority, to donate any surplus funds that remain in its account at the end of the fiscal year after those costs and expenses are paid, which funds may include fees and accrued interest, to the city for disbursement to nonprofit human health service agencies; 
(15)  To mortgage any project and the site thereof for the benefit of the holders of the bonds issued to finance such project; 
(16)  To participate in and to issue bonds for the purpose of establishing and maintaining a self-insurance pool pursuant to F.S. § 627.357, as the same may be amended from time to time, on behalf of a health facility or a group of health facilities in order to provide for the payment of judgments, settlements of claims, expenses or loss and damage that arises or is claimed to have arisen from an act or omission of the health facility, its employees or agents in the performance of health care or health care related functions; 
(17)  To issue special obligation revenue bonds for the purpose of establishing and maintaining self insurance pools and to provide reserve funds in connection therewith, which bonds shall be payable from funds available in the pool from time to time or from assessments against participating health facilities for the purpose of providing required contributions to the fund or from such other sources as may be permitted by state law. Such bonds shall be issued in accordance with all other applicable provisions of state law; 
(18)  To enter into interlocal agreements with other governmental bodies in connection with the exercise of its powers hereunder, including, but not limited to the issuance of bonds, pursuant to the authorization conferred by F.S. § 163.01, as the same may be amended from time to time; 
(19)  To participate in and issue bonds and other forms of indebtedness for the purpose of establishing and maintaining an accounts receivable program on behalf of a health facility or group of health facilities. Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, the structuring and financing of an accounts receivable program pursuant to this subsection shall constitute a project and may be structured for the benefit of health facilities within or outside the geographical limits of the local agency. An accounts receivable program may include the financing of accounts receivable acquired by a health facility from other health care corporations, whether or not controlled by or affiliated with the health facility and regardless of location within or outside the geographical limits of this state; 
(20)  To do all things necessary, as otherwise provided by law, to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 5, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-6. - Reports. 
The authority shall make a report to the council within the first 90 days of each calendar year, of the authority's activities for the preceding calendar year. Each report shall set forth a complete operating and financial statement covering its operations during the preceding calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 6, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-7. - Payment of expenses. 
All expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of this chapter shall be payable solely from funds provided under the provisions of this chapter, and no liability or obligation shall be incurred by the authority, the city or the state hereunder beyond the extent to which moneys shall have been provided under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 7, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-8. - Notes of authority. 
The authority is authorized from time to time to issue its negotiable notes for any corporate purposes and renew from time to time any notes by the issuance of new notes, whether the notes to be renewed have or have not matured, subject however, to any maturity limitations prescribed by state law. The notes may be authorized, sold, executed and delivered in the same manner as bonds. All such notes shall be payable solely from the revenues of the authority, subject only to contractual rights of the holders of any of its notes or other obligations then outstanding. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 8, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-9. - Revenue bonds. 
The authority is authorized from time to time to issue its negotiable revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project or projects, including without limitation, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of acquiring existing or completed health facilities projects, all as permitted by the Act or otherwise permitted by law. In anticipation of the sale of such revenue bonds, the authority may issue negotiable bond anticipation notes and may renew the same from time to time, subject however, to any maturity limitations prescribed by state law. Such notes shall be paid from any revenues of the authority available therefor and not otherwise pledged or from the proceeds of sale of the revenue bonds of the authority in anticipation of which they were issued. The notes shall be issued in the same manner as the revenue bonds. Such notes and the resolution or resolutions of the authority authorizing the same may contain any provisions, conditions or limitation which a bond resolution of the authority may contain. 
The revenue bonds and notes of every issue shall be payable solely out of revenues as authorized by the Act and provided therefor. Notwithstanding that revenue bonds and notes may be payable from a special fund, such bonds for all purposes are negotiable instruments, subject only to the provisions of the revenue bonds and notes for registration. 
The revenue bonds may be issued as serial bonds or as term bonds, or the authority, in its discretion, may issue bonds of both types. The revenue bonds shall be authorized by resolution of the members of the authority and shall bear such date or dates; mature at such time or times, not exceeding the maximum maturity provided by law; bear interest at such rate or rates; be payable at such time or times; be in such denominations; be in such form, either coupon or registered, or both; carry such registration privileges; be executed in such manner; be payable in lawful money of the United States at such place or places; and be subject to such terms of redemption, including redemption prior to maturity and such other provisions, as such resolution or resolutions may provide. The authority shall also provide for the authentication of such bonds by a trustee or fiscal agent. The authority shall determine the form and manner of execution of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. In case any officer whose signature, or a facsimile of whose signature, shall appear on any bonds or coupons shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature or facsimile shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as of he had remained in office until such delivery. The revenue bonds or notes may be sold at public or private sale for such price or prices as the authority shall determine. Pending preparation of the definitive bonds, the authority may issue interim receipts or certificates which shall be exchanged for such definitive bonds. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 9, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-10. - Refunding bonds. 
The authority is hereby authorized to provide for the issuance of revenue bonds for the purpose of refunding any of its revenue bonds then outstanding or, to the extent permitted by state law, any bonds issued by another public instrumentality which are then outstanding, including the payment of any redemption premium thereon and any interest accrued or to accrue to the earliest or subsequent date of redemption, purchase or maturity of such bonds. 
The proceeds of any such revenue bonds issued for the purpose of refunding outstanding bonds may, in the discretion of the authority, be applied to the purchase or retirement at maturity or redemption of such outstanding bonds either on their earliest or any subsequent redemption date, or upon the purchase or at the maturity thereof, and may, pending such application, be placed in escrow to be applied to such purchase or retirement at maturity or redemption on such date as may be determined by the authority. 
Any such escrowed proceeds, pending such use may be invested and reinvested in direct obligations of the United States, in any obligations of which the principal and interest are unconditionally guaranteed by the United States, in certificates of deposit or time deposits secured by direct obligations of the United States, or in any obligations of which the principal and interest are unconditionally guaranteed by the United States, in any other obligations as may be permitted by law from time to time, maturing at such time or times as shall be appropriate to assure the prompt payment, as to principal, interest and redemption premium if any, of the outstanding bonds to be so refunded. The interest, income and profits, if any, earned or realized on any such investment may also be applied to the payment of the outstanding bonds to be so refunded. After the terms of the escrow have been fully satisfied and carried out, any balance of such proceeds and interest, income and profits, if any, earned or realized on the investments thereof may be returned to the authority for use or disposition by it in any lawful manner. 
All such revenue bonds issued for the purposes of refunding shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as other revenue bonds issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 10, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-11. - Security of bondholders. 
In the discretion of the authority, any bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter may be secured by a trust agreement by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or without the state. Such trust agreement or resolution providing for the issuance of such bonds may pledge or assign the fees, rents, charges or proceeds, condemnation awards and other funds and revenues to be received therefor, and may provide for the mortgaging of any project or any part thereof as security for repayment of the bonds. Such trust agreement or resolution providing for the issuance of such bonds shall contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property and the construction, improvement, maintenance, repair, operation and insurance of the project or projects in connection with which such bonds shall have been authorized, the fees, rents and other charges to be fixed and collected; the sale of any project, or part thereof, or other property; the terms and conditions for the issuance of additional bonds; and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all monies. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of the State of Florida which may act as depositary of the proceeds of bonds, revenues or other money hereunder to furnish such indemnifying bonds or to pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Any such trust agreement or resolution shall set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action by bondholders. In addition to the foregoing, any such trust agreement or resolution may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of such trust agreement or resolution may be treated as a part of the cost of the project or projects in connection with which bonds are issued or as an expense of administration of such project, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 11, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-12. - Payment of bonds; no liability of the authority or the city. 
Revenue bonds issued by the authority under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute a debt, liability or obligation of the city or the state or any political subdivision thereof, or a pledge of the faith and credit of the city or the state or any political subdivision thereof, but shall be payable solely from the revenues provided therefor. All such revenue bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the effect that the authority shall not be obligated to pay the same or the interest thereon except from the revenues of the project or the portion thereof for which they are issued and that neither the faith and credit not the taxing power of the city or of the state or of any political subdivision thereof is pledged to the payment of the principal of or the interest on such bonds. The issuance of revenue bonds by the authority under the provisions of this chapter shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the city or the state or any political subdivision thereof to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 12, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-13. - No liability of authority members. 
Neither the members of the authority nor any person executing the revenue bonds or notes shall be liable personally on the revenue bonds or notes or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 13, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-14. - Revenues. 
The authority is hereby authorized to fix and to collect fees, rents and charges for the services of the authority in providing the financings or for the use of any project or projects and any part or section thereof as provided by law. The authority may require that the lessee, owner or operator of any project or part thereof shall operate, repair and maintain the project and bear the cost thereof and other costs of the authority in connection with the project or projects as may be provided in a loan agreement, lease or other contract with the authority, in addition to other obligations imposed under such agreement or contract. 
The fees, rents, and charges shall be so fixed as to provide a fund sufficient to pay the principal of, and the interest on, such bonds as the same shall become due and payable and to create reserves, if any, deemed by the authority to be necessary for such purposes. The fees, rents, charges, and all other revenues and proceeds derived from the project or projects in connection with which the bonds of any issue shall have been issued, except such part thereof as may be necessary for such reserves or any expenditures as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or in the trust agreement securing the same, shall be set aside at such regular intervals as may be specified in such resolution or such trust agreement in a sinking fund which is pledged to, and charged with, the payment of the principal of and the interest on such bonds as the same shall become due and the redemption price or the purchase price of bonds retired by call or purchase as therein provided. Such pledge shall be valid and binding from the time when the pledge is made. The fees, rents, charges, and other revenues and moneys so pledged and thereafter received by the authority shall immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract, or otherwise against the authority, irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof. The use and disposition of money to the credit of such sinking fund shall be subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or of such trust agreement. Except as may otherwise be provided in the resolution or the trust agreement, the sinking fund shall be a fund for all such bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 14, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-15. - Trust funds. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, all money received pursuant to the provisions of this chapter whether as proceeds from the sale of bonds, sale of property, insurance, or condemnation awards, or as revenues, shall be deemed to be trust funds, to be held and applied solely as provided by law. The resolution authorizing the bonds of any issue or trust agreement securing such bonds may provide that any of such moneys be temporarily invested pending the disbursement thereof and shall provide that any officer with whom, or any bank or trust company with which, such moneys shall be deposited shall act as trustee of such moneys and shall hold and apply the same for the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as such resolution or trust agreement may provide. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 15, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-16. - Remedies. 
Any holder of bonds issued by the authority or of any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under any trust agreement, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by such trust agreement or the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceeding, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the state or under such trust agreement or resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds, or under any agreement of lease, loan agreement or other contract executed by the authority pursuant to this chapter, and may enforce and compel the performance of all duties required by law or by such trust agreement or resolution to be performed, including the fixing, charging and collecting of fees, rents and charges. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 16, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-17. - Negotiability of bonds. 
All bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter have all the qualities and incidents, including negotiability, of investment securities under the Uniform Commercial Code as adopted and modified by the state, but no provision of such code respecting the filing of a financing statement to perfect a security interest shall be deemed necessary for, or applicable to, any security created in connection with the issuance of any such bonds. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 17, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-18. - Tax exemption. 
(a)  The exercise of the powers granted by this chapter and the Act will be in all respects for the benefit of the people of the city for the increase of their commerce, welfare and prosperity, and for the improvement of their health and living conditions, and, because the operation and maintenance of a project by a health facility will constitute the performance of an essential public function, neither the authority nor a hospital institution shall be required to pay any taxes or assessments upon or in respect of a project or any property acquired by the authority under the provisions of this chapter and the Act or upon the income therefrom, and any bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter and the Act, their transfer, and the income therefrom, including any profit made on the sale thereof, shall at all times be free from taxation of every kind by the state, the city and municipalities and other political subdivisions in the state, except that such income shall be subject to the tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of F.S. Ch. 220. Nothing in this section shall be construed as exempting from taxation or assessments the leasehold or other interest of any health facility organized for profit. If any project or any part hereof shall be occupied or operated by any health facility organized for profit pursuant to any contract or lease with the authority, the property interest created by such contract or lease shall be subject to taxation to the same extent as other privately owned property. 
(b)  Homes for the aged, or life care communities, however designated, which are financed through the sale of the authority's bonds, whether on a sale-leaseback arrangement, a sale-repurchase arrangement or another financing arrangement, are exempt from ad valorem taxation only in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 196.1975. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 18, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-19. - Legal investment. 
Bonds issued by the authority under the provisions of this chapter and the Act are securities in which all public officers and public bodies of the state and its political subdivisions and all insurance companies, trust companies, banking associations, investment companies, executors, administrators, trustees and other fiduciaries may properly and legally invest funds, including capital in their control or belonging to them. Such bonds are securities which may properly and legally be deposited with and received by any state or municipal officer or any agency or political subdivision of the state for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or obligations of the state is now or may hereinafter be authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 19, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-20. - Certificate of need. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, to the extent required by the Act or other provisions of law, before any project is approved for financing by the authority, a certificate of need shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any bonds for the financing of such project by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 20, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-21. - Validation. 
Bonds issued by the authority, to the extent required by law shall, or otherwise at the option of the authority may, be validated in the manner prescribed by F.S. Ch. 75, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 21, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-22. - Approval by council. 
The sale of bonds and notes authorized to be issued by the authority hereunder shall be subject to the prior approval of the council, which approval shall be evidenced by a resolution of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 22, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-23. - Administrative procedures. 
The authority shall adopt administrative guidelines and procedures in connection with the exercise of its powers hereunder which shall become effective upon approval by the council. Such guidelines and procedures shall only be amended by the authority with the approval of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 23, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-24. - Council may abolish authority. 
The council shall have the power and authority at any time to abolish the authority by ordinance; however, the authority shall not be abolished until all bonded indebtedness incurred pursuant to the Act and this chapter has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 24, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-25. - Application of the Act. 
All provisions of the Act shall apply to the authority whether or not such provision is specifically set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 26, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-26. - Severability. 
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 26, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-27. - Inclusion in code. 
It is the intention of the council that the provisions of this chapter shall become and be made a part of the City of Hialeah Gardens Code; and that the sections of this chapter may be renumbered or relettered and the word "ordinance" may be changed to "section," "article," or such other appropriate word or phrase in order to accomplish such intentions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 27, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 32-28. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect immediately at the time of its passage. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 28, 1-16-2007)  
Chapter 34 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nude or seminude entertainment prohibited on alcoholic beverage licensed premises, § 10-12. 
 
Sec. 34-1. - State misdemeanors adopted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit within the limits of the city any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor and the commission of such acts is hereby forbidden. 
(b)  Whosoever shall violate the provisions of this section shall be punished on conviction thereof by the same penalty as is provided therefor by the laws of the state, but in no case shall such penalty exceed the punishment provided in section 1-16 of this Code. 
Case Law reference— A municipality may enact an ordinance which creates an offense against municipal law for the same act that constitutes an offense against state law. Jaramillo v. City of Homestead, 322 So. 2d 496 (Fla. 1975). 
A municipality by ordinance may adopt state misdemeanor statutes by specific reference or by general reference, such as that contained in an ordinance making it unlawful to commit, within city limits, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. Id. 
An adoption by general reference of a misdemeanor statute permits subsequent amendments, revisions and repeals of the laws by the state legislature to apply to the municipal ordinances. Id. 
See also Hecht v. Shaw, 112 Fla. 762, 151 So. 333 (1933); McFarland v. Roberts, 74 So. 2d 88 (Fla. 1954); and State v. Smith, 189 So. 2d 846 (Fla. 4th D.C.A. 1966). 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083; discharging firearms in public, F.S. § 790.15. See also Fla. Stats. general index under heading "Fines and Civil Penalties" for listing of state law misdemeanors.  
Sec. 34-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 2011-22, adopted Oct. 18, 2011, repealed § 34-2, which pertained to discharging of firearms in public and derived from the 1985 Code.  
Sec. 34-3. - Graffiti. 
(a)  No person shall write, paint, or draw any inscription, figure, or mark of any type on any public or private building or other real or personal property owned, operated, or maintained by a governmental entity or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or by any person, unless the express permission of the owner or operator of the property has been obtained. 
(b)  No person shall carry an aerosol spray paint can or broad-tipped indelible marker with the intent to violate the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. For the purpose of this section, the term "broad-tipped indelible marker" means any felt-tipped marker, or similar implement, which contains a fluid which is not water soluble and which has a flat or angled writing surface one-quarter inch or greater. 
(c)  No person shall sell an aerosol spray paint can or broad-tipped indelible marker to a minor with the intent to violate the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  No person shall purchase an aerosol spray paint can or broad-tipped indelible marker for a minor for the purpose of violating the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(e)  No minor shall be in possession of an aerosol spray paint can or broad-tipped indelible marker with the intent to violate the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. For the purpose of this section, the term "minor" means persons who are under 18 years of age. 
(f)  In addition to any punishment for violation of this section, the court may order the defendant to make restitution to the victim for damage or loss caused directly, or indirectly, by the defendant's offense in a reasonable amount or manner to be determined by the court. Where the defendant is a minor, the court may order the parent or legal guardian of such minor to make such restitution. 
(g)  In addition to any punishment provided for violation of this section, the court may in its discretion order the defendant to perform monitored community service. 
(h)  Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti on any property, including structures or improvements within the city, a building official, a code compliance officer or police officer is authorized, upon such discovery, to give, or cause to be given, notice to remove or effectively obscure such graffiti to the property owner, the property owner's agent or manager, or other person in possession or control of the property. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning property, acting as manager or agent for the owner of property, or in possession or control of property to fail to remove or effectively obscure any graffiti from such property within 30 days from receipt of the notice described in this subsection (h). If the person owning such property, acting as manager or agent for the owner of such property, or in possession or control of such property, fails to remove or effectively obscure the graffiti within the time period enumerated in this subsection, the city shall cause the graffiti to be removed or effectively obscured and charge the property owner, or property owner's manager or agent, for the expenses incurred by the city. The city may sue in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover such expenses, together with attorneys' fees and costs. 
(2)  Any person owning property, acting as agent or manager for the owner of such property, or in possession or control of such property, who commits a violation of this subsection (h) shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. In deciding the amount of fine to impose, the hearing officer shall consider the efforts taken by the violator, if any, to remove or effectively obscure the subject graffiti in a timely manner and how often the violator has been victimized by graffiti during the preceding calendar year. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a property owner, manager, agent or possessor of property if, in the sole determination of the city graffiti coordinator or the mayor's designee, such property owner, agent, manager, or possessor has been victimized two or more times by graffiti within any calendar year, and during such time has removed or effectively obscured such graffiti from the property in a timely manner. 
(i)  There is hereby created the city anti-graffiti trust fund. Civil penalties assessed against violators of this section ultimately received by the city shall be placed in the fund. The city council shall direct the expenditure of monies in the fund. Such expenditures shall be limited to the payment of the cost of removal of graffiti, the costs of administering this section, and such other public purposes as may be approved by the city council by resolution. 
(j)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section, or any part thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250.00 for a first offense, and of not more than $500.00 for a second or subsequent offense, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Where a minor is found to have violated subsection (a), (b), (c) and/or (d) of this section, the fine imposed by this subsection shall be assessed against such minor's parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. No. 90-41, §§ 1, 3, 9-3-91) 
State Law reference— Graffiti prohibited, F.S. § 806.13.  
Chapter 38 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Restrictions on distributing handbills in public places, § 6-36. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Swimming in Samari Lake. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Swimming means the entering of a body of water for the purpose of covering the body or parts of the body with water. 
(b)  Swimming in the lake commonly known as Samari Lake is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1985, § 91.03)  
Secs. 38-2—38-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS OF CONDUCT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, ch. 10. 
 
Sec. 38-21. - Definitions. 
Definitions as used in this article are as follows: 
Alcoholic beverages means any beer, wine, fortified wine, liquor or other alcoholic beverage defined in F.S. ch. 561. 
Closing hours means that time period which a park or recreational facility is closed to the general public. 
Gun means any instrument capable of firing a projectile or bullet at a high velocity, including but not limited to, any air gun, sling or slingshot. 
Motor vehicle means a vehicle which is self propelled. 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or other area owned, leased or used by the department and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Permit means a written document issued by the department granting permission for a specific activity. 
Recreational facility means a facility for recreational purposes on property owned, leased or used by the department. 
Regulation means a regulation approved by the city council which governs the use of park and recreational facilities and the violation of which subjects the offender to criminal penalties. 
Rule means a rule approved by the city council which governs the use of park or recreational facilities and the violation of which subjects the offender to ejection or expulsion from park or recreational facilities. 
Vehicle means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered, animal drawn or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.01), 6-16-98)  
Sec. 38-22. - Rules authorized; ejection of violators. 
(a)  The council, by resolution, may adopt additional rules governing the use of parks and recreational facilities owned, leased or operated by the city, which may include, but are not limited to, the use of supplies and equipment, the charge and payment of fees, the hours of operation, the use and parking of vehicles, the conduct and overall safety of persons within parks and the general use of park and recreational facilities for each such park and recreational facility as may be necessary. 
(b)  Any person violating a rule may be expelled or ejected from any park or recreational facility. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.02), 6-16-98)  
Sec. 38-23. - Temporary closing and exclusion of public. 
In an emergency, when the mayor shall determine that the public interest, health, morals and safety require such action, any park or recreational area or any part thereof may be closed and all persons may be excluded from such area. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.03), 6-16-98)  
Sec. 38-24. - City's right to enter. 
The city and its employees shall have the right at all times to enter the premises of any building, structure or enclosure of any park or recreational facility including such grounds, buildings, structures or enclosures as may be leased or set aside for private or exclusive use of any individual or group. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.04), 6-16-98)  
Sec. 38-25. - Designation of areas for specific use. 
The mayor shall have the power to designate areas and facilities in park and recreational facilities for specific activities, and to prohibit other activities within the designated area. The mayor shall be the official custodian of a list of all areas which have been designated for specific activities. Such list shall contain a description of the property which is designated for a specific activity and the nature of the activities which are permitted. The mayor is authorized to post designated areas when, in his discretion, such posting is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.05), 6-16-98)  
Sec. 38-26. - Activities confined to designated areas. 
No person shall play or participate in any game or organized activity, including but not limited to, football, baseball, basketball, or any such game, in any park or recreational facility, except in areas designated for such use. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.06), 6-16-98)  
Sec. 38-27. - Permit required for group use. 
Any lodge, society, social organization, social club, group or other organization desiring to use any park or recreational facility for a picnic or other recreational purpose shall obtain a permit from the park director not less than 30 days prior to such use. 
(a)  Conditions to permit issuance. The park director may issue a permit for group use when it has been established: 
(1)  That the proposed activity will occur within an area which is proper for the activity to occur. 
(2)  That the proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park or recreational area. 
(3)  That there are adequate facilities and personnel in the proposed areas so that the proposed activity will not impair the health, safety, welfare or recreation of the general public. 
(4)  That the desired facility has not been reserved for other use at the time requested. 
(5)  In the event any proposed activity may constitute a hazard to any person or property, the mayor, as a condition to the issuance of a permit, may require public liability insurance in an amount the city deems appropriate to protect such person or property. 
(b)  Notice of permit denial. In the event any applicant is refused a group use permit, the mayor shall notify the applicant within ten days of the reason for refusing such permit. 
(c)  Appeal of permit denial. The applicant may appeal the refusal of a group use permit to the city council within ten days after notification of such refusal is sent by filing a petition with the city clerk stating why the applicant should receive a permit. 
(d)  Permit revocation. The mayor or his duly authorized representative shall have the authority to revoke a group use permit upon finding a violation of any rule or regulation. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.07), 6-16-98)  
Sec. 38-28. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  Interfering with city personnel. No person shall hinder or oppose any officer, agent or employee in the discharge of his duties or with the enforcement of the park regulations and rules. 
(b)  Entering, remaining during closing hours. No person shall enter or remain in a park or recreational area without a permit during and after closing hours, if the closing hours are posted at the entrance of the park or recreational facility. No person shall enter or remain in a park or recreational facility after 10:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m.; provided, however, in the event there is any city sponsored or permitted, endorsed, or approved event occurring at such park, then the hours as set forth herein shall be extended for a time to include one hour before such event and one hour after the termination of such event. 
(c)  Duty to leave on request. No person who has violated a rule shall remain in a park or recreational facility after the park director, police officer, sheriff's deputy, or employee of the city requests such person to leave or vacate a park or recreational facility. 
(d)  Damaging property. No person in any park or recreational facility shall wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, railings, paving or paving material, water lines, or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal in any park or recreational facility. 
(e)  Damaging vegetation. No person in any park or recreational area shall remove, damage, cut, carve or transplant, any tree, shrubbery, lawn, plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers. No person shall attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant in any park or recreational facility without expressed written permission. 
(f)  Removing natural resources. No person in any park or recreational facility shall remove any soil, rock, stones, plants, wood or other materials, make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency. 
(g)  Polluting waters. No person in any park or recreational facility shall throw or place of cause to be thrown or placed, any dirt, filth or foreign matter into the waters of any lake, pond, pool, river, inlets tank or reservoir. 
(h)  Disposal of rubbish. No person in any park or recreational facility shall throw, place, cast, deposit, dump or cause to be thrown, any ashes, refuse, offal, vegetables, garbage, grass, cinders, shells, straw, shavings, paper, scraps, dirt or like matter, filth or rubbish of any kind in any park, square, avenue or grounds adjacent to or in any recreational area, except to place the same in cans or receptacles provided for such matter. 
(i)  Hunting, molesting wildlife. No person in any park or recreational area shall hunt, catch, harm, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird. No person in any park or recreational areas shall remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal or eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird. 
(j)  Alcoholic beverages. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, stored or consumed within any park or recreational area, except by approval of the mayor and city council for sales or consumption at special events. 
(k)  Drugs. No person shall possess or consume cannabis or other controlled substances as defined in F.S. ch. 893, in any park or recreational facility. 
(l)  Fires. No person in any park or recreational area shall ignite, set or maintain any fire for cooking or any other purpose unless such fire is within a designated area for such purpose. Notice of such activity shall be given upon application. 
(m)  Firearms and fireworks. No person in any park or recreational area shall carry, fire or discharge any rocket, torpedo or other fireworks of any description without a permit from the city to discharge same in an area designated for such purpose. Such activity shall be approved or supervised by the City of Hialeah Gardens Police Department. 
(n)  Distributing literature. No person in any park or recreational area shall distribute any handbill, circular, booklet, leaflet, flyer, card, pamphlet, sheet, written or printed matter without causing the removal of any discarded material or paper from the park or recreational facility prior to leaving the park or recreational facility. 
(o)  Conducting, participating in unpermitted meeting. No person shall conduct or participate in any public meeting, assembly, entertainment, tournament, religious gathering, demonstration, parade, procession or meeting on any subject, religious, social, political or otherwise, in any park or recreational area, unless a permit from the city has been issued for such meeting, assembly, entertainment, tournament, religious gathering, demonstration, parade or procession in accordance with F.S. ch. 98.08. 
(p)  Sound amplifiers, musical instruments. No person shall use any loudspeaker or other amplifying equipment nor shall any person play upon any musical instrument in any park or recreational area without a permit from the city. 
(q)  Sales. No person shall sell, keep, or offer for sale any tangible or intangible object, merchandise or thing for any consideration within any park or recreational area without a permit from the city. 
(r)  Signs or posters. No person shall post or affix to any tree, shrub, plant, fence, building, structure, monument, wall, table, apparatus, bridge, post, bench, corral, gate or any other physical object, any sign, poster or other printed or written matter in any park or recreational facility without expressed written approval by the city. 
(s)  Sleeping, camping, overnight parking. No person shall sleep, camp, lodge or park a vehicle overnight in any park or recreational area except in such areas as are designated for such purposes or without a permit from the city. 
(t)  Animals. No horse, dog, cat or other animal shall be brought upon any park property. 
(u)  Motorized vehicles and the like. No go-carts, motorized bikes, inclusive of dirt bikes and motorcycles, automobiles, or terrain vehicles shall be brought upon park property or driven on park property, excepting only such vehicles as are used by park personnel for park purposes. 
(v)  Skating, skate boards and bicycles. The use of skates, skateboards and bicycles are prohibited, except on paths (if any) which have been duly designated for such use. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.08), 6-16-98; Ord. No. 2011-23, § 2, 10-18-11)  
Sec. 38-29. - Traffic. 
(a)  The Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law (F.S. ch. 316) is hereby adopted as an ordinance of the city. 
(b)  The proper officers of the city are directed to enforce the provisions of the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law within the city and said officers are directed to apprehend persons violating the said Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law who may attempt in the presence of the officer to leave the city premises, notwithstanding that the officer may be required to effect an arrest outside the city limits. 
(c)  The Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law shall apply to the operation of all motor vehicles on streets and roads in city parks, public lands and rights-of-ways, unless modified herein. All police officers are hereby authorized to direct traffic whenever necessary in any park or on public lands or rights-of-ways. Park employees may direct traffic in public works only in the absence of a police officer and when required to for the protection of the public. 
(d)  No person shall operate, drive or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle upon any road, driveway, path, parking area or other area unless such road, driveway, path, parking area or other area has been designated by the city for such purpose. No person shall cause any vehicle for hire to stand upon any part of a park or recreational area for the purpose of soliciting passengers. 
(e)  No person shall drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding five miles per hour in any city park, unless the city has designated, by posted sign, a greater speed limit. 
(f)  No person shall park any vehicle in other than the area which is designated for parking. No person shall leave any vehicle standing or parked at night without lights clearly visible at least 200 feet upon said vehicle except in legally established parking areas or designated campsite areas. 
(g)  No person shall enter or exit from any park or recreational facility in any vehicle except on entrances and exits established for such purpose by the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.09), 6-16-98) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 50.  
Sec. 38-30. - Water activities. 
No person shall swim, ski, dive, surf, scuba dive, fish or use boats in any area in any park or recreational area unless such area is specifically designated for such purpose. There shall be posted at any facility involving water activity rules related to the use of such water facility and those using such facility shall be required to abide by such rules. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.10), 6-16-98)  
Sec. 38-31. - Utilities. 
No person shall locate any utility upon any park or recreational facility without receiving a permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.11), 6-16-98)  
Sec. 38-32. - Aircraft and parachuting. 
No person shall ascend or land any aircraft, glider or parachute over or into any park or recreational facility without a permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.12), 6-16-98)  
Sec. 38-33. - Exceptions/variances. 
The provisions contained herein may be varied from concerning any city sponsored, endorsed or approved function. The council may establish by resolution or administrative directive from the mayor standards related to obtaining exemptions or variances from this ordinance. A city sponsored, endorsed or approved function shall be any function which has been approved by the city council. Any such variance to this ordinance may be conditioned upon reasonable requirements to be established by the mayor, park administrator and/or the city council as the circumstances warrant. City functions such as July 4th, the city's fiftieth anniversary or other city functions approved by the city council are exempt from the terms and conditions of this article. The council may, by resolution, or directive of the mayor, establish standards for granting variances. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1(98.13), 6-16-98)  
Chapter 40 - HIALEAH GARDENS POLICE PENSION TRUST FUND[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-33, adopted May 21, 1991, has been included herein as a new Ch. 40 at the request of the city. The user's attention is also directed to the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
 
ARTICLE I. - DECLARATION OF TRUST  
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 40-1. - City. 
The term "City" as used herein shall mean the City of Hialeah Gardens, a Florida municipal corporation. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-2. - Participant. 
The term "Participant" shall mean any pensioner or beneficiary receiving or entitled to receive benefits, any person with vested benefits, and any Employee who accrues or retains credited service, in accordance with the provisions of the Plan established pursuant to this Declaration of Trust. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.2, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-3. - Beneficiary. 
The term "Beneficiary" shall mean a person designated by a Participant or by the terms of the Pension Plan created pursuant to this Declaration of Trust, who is or may become entitled to a benefit, thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.3, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-4. - Trustees. 
The term "Trustees" as used herein shall mean the Trustees designated in this Declaration of Trust, together with their successors, designated and appointed in accordance with the terms of this Declaration of Trust. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.4, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-5. - Trust Fund. 
"Trust," "Trust Fund" and "Fund" as used herein shall mean the entire trust estate of HIALEAH GARDENS POLICE PENSION TRUST FUND as it may, from time to time be constituted, including, but not limited to, all funds received in the form of contributions, together with all contracts (including dividends, interest, refunds, and other sums payable to the Trustees on account of such contracts), all investments made and held by the Trustees, all income, increments, earnings and profits therefrom, and any and all other property or funds received and held by the Trustees by reason of their acceptance of this Declaration of Trust. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.5, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-6. - Declaration of Trust. 
The term "Declaration of Trust" as used herein shall mean Article I of this chapter including all amendments and modifications as may from time to time be made. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.6, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-7. - Pension Plan. 
The term "Pension Plan" or "Plan" shall mean the plan, program, method, rules, and procedures for the payment of benefits from the Trust Fund which is part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.7, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-8. - Contributions. 
The term "contributions" shall mean the payments required of the City of Hialeah Gardens and those payments made by the State of Florida for this Fund, or payments made by or on behalf of Participants or their beneficiaries. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.8, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-9. - Consultant. 
The term "consultant" as used herein shall mean any person or entity who, for compensation, advises, represents, or provides other assistance to the Trustees concerning the establishment, or operation of the Plan as defined in section 40-7 and meets the definition and requirements in F.S. § 185.06(5). 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.9, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-29, § 1, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 99-45, § 1, 3-21-00)  
Sec. 40-10. - Administrator. 
The term "Administrator" as used herein shall mean the Board of Trustees as defined in section 40-4 herein. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.10, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-11. - Custodian. 
The term "custodian" as used herein shall mean one who is officially entrusted with guarding and keeping records and documents of this Trust Fund. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.11, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-12. - Named Fiduciary. 
The term "named fiduciary" as used herein shall mean the Board of Trustees as defined in section 40-4 herein. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.12, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-13. - Police Officer. 
The term "police officer" shall mean any person employed by the City who satisfies the definition of police officer in F.S. § 185.021(11). 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 1.13, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-29, § 2, 11-16-99)  
Secs. 40-14—40-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CREATION AND PURPOSE OF FUND 
 
Sec. 40-21. - Creation. 
The Trust Fund is created, established and maintained, and the Trustees agree to receive, hold and administer the Plan, for the purpose of providing such benefits as now are, or hereafter may be authorized or permitted by law for Participants and their beneficiaries and in accordance with the provisions set forth herein and in the Pension Plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 2.1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-22. - Effective Date. 
This chapter and Declaration of Trust shall be in full force and effect as of October 1, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 2.2, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-23—40-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
 
Sec. 40-31. - Number, Appointment, Term. 
(a)  The Plan shall be administered by five (5) Trustees. 
(1)  Two (2) trustees shall be elected by the police officers employed by the City who participate in the Plan; 
(2)  Two (2) trustees shall be appointed by the City Council; and 
(3)  One (1) trustee shall be elected by a majority of the previous four (4) trustees. 
(4)  The trustees appointed by the City Council must, at all times while serving as a trustee, be a resident of the City of Hialeah Gardens. 
(b)  Appointed trustees shall serve for a term of two (2) years, unless sooner replaced by the City Council at whose pleasure they serve. 
(c)  Elected trustees shall serve two-year terms, commencing on October 1st of the year in which they are elected, provided that one (1) of the trustees elected initially by the police officers and the trustee elected initially by the other four (4) trustees shall serve terms expiring on September 30, 1991. The City Clerk shall conduct the elections by secret ballot during September prior to the expiration of a trustee's term. 
(d)  A vacancy shall occur whenever a trustee resigns is no longer eligible or qualified to serve as a trustee, dies or becomes incapacitated. The vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as was utilized to select the original trustee. Successors to elected trustees shall serve out the unexpired term of the prior trustee. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 3.1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-32. - Resignation. 
A Trustee may resign and become and remain fully discharged from all further duty or responsibility hereunder upon giving thirty (30) days' notice in writing to the remaining Trustees and to the City Clerk or such shorter notice as the remaining Trustees may accept as sufficient. In the notice there shall be stated a date on which such resignation shall take effect; and such resignation shall take effect on the date specified in the notice unless a Successor Trustee shall have been appointed at an earlier date, in which event such resignation shall take effect immediately upon the appointment of such successor Trustee. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 3.2, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-33. - Successor Trustees, Assumption of Office. 
Any Successor Trustee shall immediately upon appointment or election and acceptance of the Trusteeship, become vested with all the property, rights, powers and duties of a Trustee hereunder with like effect as if originally named a Trustee, without the necessity of any formal conveyance or other instrument of title. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 3.3, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-34. - Acceptance of the Trust by Trustees. 
A Trustee shall execute a written acceptance in a form satisfactory to the Trustees. By executing such written acceptance, a Trustee shall be deemed to have accepted the Trust created and established by this Declaration and to have consented to act as Trustee and to have agreed to administer the Trust Fund as provided herein. Such written acceptance shall be filed with the secretary. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 3.4, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-35. - Limitation of Liability of Trustees. 
No Successor Trustee shall in any way be liable or responsible for anything done or committed in the administration of the Trust prior to the date of becoming a Trustee. No Trustee shall be liable for the acts or omissions of another Trustee to whom certain responsibilities, obligations or duties have been delegated pursuant to this Trust Declaration, nor shall any Trustee be liable for the acts or omissions of any investment manager, attorney, agent, or assistant employed by them pursuant to this Agreement, if such person's performance was periodically reviewed by the Trustees who found such performance to be satisfactory. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 3.5, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-36. - Office of the Fund. 
The principal offices of the Trust Fund shall be located and maintained in Miami-Dade County, Florida, at Hialeah Gardens City Hall, or at such other locations in the City of Hialeah Gardens as the Trustees may determine. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 3.6, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-29, § 3, 11-16-99)  
Sec. 40-37. - Officers. 
The Trustees shall elect from among themselves a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and a Secretary for a term of one (1) year, or until their successors have been elected. The Secretary or such other person as the Trustees may designate, shall keep minutes and records of all meetings, proceedings and acts of the Trustees and shall, with reasonable promptness, send copies of such minutes and records to all Trustees, and legal counsel and shall maintain a record of all persons receiving a benefit nothing the time when such benefit was allowed and when the benefit shall cease. This record shall include a list of the name; address, date of employment and when such employment shall cease for all Police Officers employed by the City. The Chairperson, and in the chairperson's absence the Vice-Chairperson, shall preside at all meetings of the Trustees and shall be entitled to one vote on all matters. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 3.7, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-07, § 1, 4-6-99)  
Sec. 40-38. - Power to Act in Case of Vacancy. 
In case of death, resignation or refusal or inability to act of any one (1) or more of the Trustees, the remaining Trustees shall have all the powers, rights, estates and interests of this Trust, and shall be charged with its duties, provided that, in such cases there shall be no change in the quorum or voting requirements established in section 40-31. hereof. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 3.8, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-39. - Meetings; Notices. 
The Trustees shall meet at least once each quarter and at such other times as they deem it necessary to transact their business. The Chairman or the Secretary of the Board of Trustees may, and upon the written request of any two (2) Trustees shall, call a meeting of the Trustees at any time by giving at least five (5) days' notice in writing, of the time and place thereof to the remaining Trustees. Notice of such meetings shall be posted or advertised to the public. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 3.9, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-40. - Attendance at Meetings; Minutes. 
Written minutes, a copy of which shall be furnished with reasonable promptness to each Trustee and legal counsel, shall be kept of all business transacted and of all matters upon which voting shall have occurred and the vote shall be recorded. Such minutes shall bear the signature of the Secretary and shall be approved at the succeeding meeting. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 3.10, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-41. - Quorum; Voting; Action Without Meeting. 
(a)  A quorum of the Board of Trustees shall be at least three (3) trustees. 
(b)  Any action taken by the trustees, except as herein otherwise provided, shall be by affirmative vote of at least three (3) votes. The Trustees must cast their votes in person. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 3.11, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-42. - Removal of Trustees. 
The Board of Trustees shall initiate action to cause the removal of any fellow Trustee who is not qualified to serve as a Trustee under this Agreement or state law. The vacancy or vacancies caused by such a removal shall be filled in accordance with section 40-33 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 3.12, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-43—40-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONTRIBUTIONS AND COLLECTIONS 
 
Sec. 40-51. - Employer Contributions. 
(a)  The City and Participants shall make prompt contributions or payments to the Trust Fund in such amounts and under the terms as are provided for in this chapter and as required by law. Such contributions or payments are absolute obligations to the trust fund, and such obligations shall not be subject to (by way of illustration and not limitation,) set-off or counterclaim which the City or any Participant may have for erroneous contributions to any other Trust Funds, or for any other liability of any Employee, the City, the Trustees, or any other person. 
(b)  Contributions to the Fund shall be paid to the Trust Fund or to such depository as the Trustees shall designate, only by check, bank draft, or money order, or its equivalent. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 4.1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-52. - Receipt of Payment and Other Property of Trust. 
The Trustees or such other person or entity designated or appointed by the Trustees in accordance with section 40-68 of Division 5 are hereby designated as the persons to receive the payments heretofore or hereafter made to the Trust Fund by the City and Participants. The Trustees are hereby vested with all right, title and interest in and to such monies and all interest which may be accrued thereon, and are authorized to receive and be paid the same. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 4.2, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-53. - Collection and Enforcement of Payments. 
The Trustees, or such committee of the Trustees as the Board of Trustees shall appoint, and when directed by such committee or by the Board of Trustees, shall have the power to demand, collect and receive City and Participant payments and all other money and property to which the Trustees may be entitled, and shall hold the same until applied to the purposes provided in this Trust Agreement. They shall take such steps, including the institution and prosecution of, or the intervention in, such legal or administrative proceedings as the Trustees in their sole discretion determine to be in the best interest of the Trust Fund for the purpose of collecting such payments, money and property. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 4.3, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-54—40-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF TRUSTEES 
 
Sec. 40-61. - Conduct of Trust Business. 
The Trustees shall have general, sole and exclusive supervision of the operation of this Trust Fund and shall conduct the business and activities of the Trust Fund in accordance with this Trust Agreement and applicable law. The Trustees shall hold, manage and protect the Trust Fund and collect the income therefrom and contributions thereto. The Trustees may in the course of conducting the business of the Trust, execute all instruments in the name of the Hialeah Gardens Police Pension Trust Fund. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-62. - Use of Fund for Expenses. 
The Trustees shall have the power and authority to use and apply the Trust Fund to pay or provide for the payment of all reasonable and necessary expenses of administering the affairs of this Trust, including the employment of such administrative, legal, expert and clerical assistance, the purchase or lease of such materials, supplies and equipment and the performance of such other acts, as the Trustees, in their discretion, find necessary or appropriate in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.2, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-63. - Use of Fund to Provide Benefits. 
The Trustees shall have the power and authority to use and apply the Trust Fund to pay or provide for the payment of retirement and related benefits to eligible Participants and beneficiaries in accordance with the terms, provisions and conditions of the Pension Plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.3, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-64. - Investments. 
(a)  The Trustees shall have the power and authority, in their sole discretion, to invest and reinvest such funds as are not necessary for current expenditures or liquid reserves, as they may from time to time determine. The Trustees may sell, exchange or otherwise dispose of such investments at any time and, from time to time, as provided in section 40-69(f). The Trustees shall have the authority, in respect to any stocks, bonds or other property, real or personal, held by them as Trustees, to exercise all such rights, powers and privileges as might be lawfully exercised by any person owning similar stocks, bonds or other property in his own right. 
(b)  Delegation and Allocation of Investment Functions. 
(1)  The Trustees are authorized, in their discretion to allocate such duties and responsibilities to invest and reinvest such Fund assets as they shall specify in such allocation to a committee or subcommittee of the Board of Trustees in accordance with section 40-67, provided, however, that such action shall have been approved by a vote of at least three (3) Trustees as provided in section 40-41. 
(2)  The Trustees shall have the power and authority to appoint one (1) or more investment managers who shall be responsible for the management, acquisition, disposition, investing and reinvesting of such of the assets of the Trust Fund as the Trustees shall specify. Any such appointment may be terminated by the Trustees upon written notice. The fees of such investment manager, and its expenses to the extent permitted by law, shall be paid out of the Trust Fund. The Trustees shall require that the investment manager acknowledge in writing that it is a fiduciary with respect to the Plan. 
(3)  In connection with any allocation or delegation of investment functions under paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection (b), the Trustees shall, from time to time, adopt appropriate investment policies or guidelines. 
(4)  The Trustees shall at least once every three years retain an independent consultant professionally qualified, as defined in Chapter 185 Florida Statutes, to evaluate the performance of professional money managers. The independent consultant shall make recommendations to the Board of Trustees regarding the selection of money mangers for the next investment term. These recommendations shall be considered by the Board of Trustees at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The date, time, place and subject of this meeting shall be advertised in the same manner as any other meeting of the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.4, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-07, § 2, 4-6-99)  
Sec. 40-65. - Deposits and Disbursements. 
All funds and securities of the Trust shall be deposited by the Trustees in such depository or depositories as defined in F.S. § 280.02(12), as the Trustees shall, from time to time, select, and any such deposit or deposits, or disbursement therefrom, shall be made in the name of the Trust in the manner designated and authorized by the Trustees or by the Investment Manager appointed in accordance with Section 5.4(b)(2) of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.5, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-66. - Allocation and Delegation of Non-Investment Responsibilities. 
The Trustees may, by resolution or by-law or by provisions of this Trust Agreement, allocate fiduciary responsibilities and various administrative duties to committees or subcommittees of the Board of Trustees. In addition, the Trustees may delegate such responsibilities and duties to other individuals as they may deem appropriate or necessary in their sole discretion, and consistent with state law provided, however, that such action shall have been approved by a majority vote of the Trustees, as provided in section 40-42. Such delegations or allocations of responsibilities shall not relieve the Board of Trustees of its responsibility for the sole and exclusive administration of the Trust Fund. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.6, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-67. - Committee of the Board of Trustees. 
Each committee or subcommittee shall consist of at least two (2) Trustees. A quorum of a committee shall be at least two (2) trustees. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.7, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-68. - By-Laws, Rules and Regulations. 
(a)  The Trustees are hereby empowered and authorized to adopt by-laws and to promulgate any and all necessary rules and regulations which they deem necessary or desirable to facilitate the proper administration of the Trust Fund, provided the same are not inconsistent with the terms of this Trust Agreement. All by-laws, rules and regulations adopted by action of the Trustees shall be binding upon all parties hereto, all parties dealing with the Trust Fund and all persons claiming any benefits hereunder. 
(b)  No by-law, regulation, rule, action or determination made or adopted by the Trustees, shall in any, manner conflict or be inconsistent with any provision of this Declaration, or with any applicable Federal, State or local law. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.8, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-69. - Additional Authority. 
The Trustees are hereby empowered in addition to such other powers as are set forth herein or conferred by law: 
(a)  To enter into any and all contracts and agreements for carrying out the terms of this Declaration and for the administration of the Trust Fund, and to do all acts as they, in their discretion, may deem necessary or advisable and such contracts and agreements and acts shall be binding and conclusive on the parties hereto and on the Participants involved; 
(b)  To keep property and securities registered in the name of the Trustees or of the Fund; 
(c)  To establish and accumulate as part of the Trust Fund such reasonable reserve funds as the Trustees, in their sole discretion, deem necessary or desirable to carry out the purposes of such Trust Fund; 
(d)  To pay out of the Trust Fund all real and personal property taxes, income taxes, and other taxes of any and all kinds levied or assessed under existing or future laws upon or in respect to the Trust Fund, or any money, property, or securities forming a part thereof; 
(e)  To do all acts, whether or not expressly authorized herein, which the Trustees may deem necessary or proper for the protection of the property held hereunder, and 
(f)  To sell, exchange, lease, convey, or dispose of any property, whether real or personal, forming a part of the Trust Fund upon such terms as they may deem proper and to execute and deliver at any time, any and all instruments of conveyance, lease, mortgage and transfer in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.9, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-70. - Bonds. 
The Trustees may obtain from an authorized surety company such bonds as may be required by law or desired by the Trustees covering such persons and in such amounts (but not less than required by law) as the Trustees, in their discretion, may determine. The cost of premiums for such bonds shall be paid out of the Trust Fund. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.10, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-71. - Insurance. 
The Trustees may in their discretion obtain and maintain policies of insurance, to the extent permitted by law, to insure themselves, the Trust Fund as such, as well as Employees or agents of the Trustees and of the Trust Fund, while engaged in business and related activities for and on behalf of the Trust Fund, 
(a)  with respect to liability to others as a result of acts, errors or omissions of such Trustee or Trustees, Employees or agents, respectively, and 
(b)  with respect to injuries received or property damage suffered by them. 
The cost of the premiums for such policies of insurance shall be paid out of the Trust Fund. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.11, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-72. - Information to Participants and Beneficiaries. 
The Trustees shall provide Participants and beneficiaries such information as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.12, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-73. - Accountants and Actuaries. 
The Trustees shall engage one (1) or more independent qualified public accountants and one (1) or more enrolled actuaries to perform all services as may be required by applicable law and such other services as the Trustees may deem necessary. The costs incurred under this section shall be paid out of the Trust Fund. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.13, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-74. - Trustee Reimbursement. 
The Trustees shall be entitled to reimbursement for the expenses properly and actually incurred in the performance of their duties with the Trust Fund and to per diem allowance in amounts established by the Board of Trustees, including, without limitation, for attendance at meetings and other functions of the Board of Trustees, attendance at institutes, seminars, conferences or workshops for or on behalf of the Trust Fund. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.14, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-75. - Reports. 
The Board of Trustees shall make reports to and file such information with appropriate public authorities as may be required by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.15, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-76. - Records of Trustees' Transactions. 
The Trustees shall keep true and accurate books of account and a record of all of their transactions and meetings (including actions taken at such meetings and by informal action of the Trustees), which records and books may be audited at least annually by a certified public accountant. A copy of each audit report shall be available for inspection by interested persons at Hialeah Gardens City Hall at reasonable times and after reasonable notice. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.16, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-77. - Construction and Determination by Trustees. 
Subject to the stated purposes of the Fund and the provisions of this Declaration, the Trustees shall have full and exclusive authority to determine all questions of coverage and eligibility, methods of providing or arranging for benefits and all other related matters. They shall have full power to construe the provisions of this Declaration, the terms used herein and the by-laws and regulations issued thereunder. Any such determination and any such construction adopted by the Trustees in good faith shall be binding upon all of the parties hereto and the beneficiaries hereof. No questions or disputes arising under this Declaration shall be subject to the grievance or arbitration procedure established in any collective bargaining agreement between the City and any labor organization, provided, however, that this clause shall not affect the rights and liabilities of any of the parties under any of such collective bargaining agreements. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.17, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-78. - Liability. 
The Trustees, to the extent permitted by applicable law, shall incur no liability in acting upon any instrument, application, notice, request, signed letter, telegram or other paper or document believed by them to be genuine, to contain a true statement of facts, and to be signed by the proper person. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.18, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-79. - Reliance on Written Instruments. 
(a)  By Trustees. Any Trustee, to the extent permitted by her or his fiduciary responsibility and by applicable law, may rely upon any instrument in writing purporting to have been approved by a majority vote of the Trustees and signed in accordance with section 40-61 as conclusive evidence of the fact that a majority of the Trustees have taken the action stated to have been taken in such instrument. In any controversy, claim, demand, suit at law or other proceeding between any Participant or any other person and the Trustees, the Trustees shall be entitled to rely upon any facts appearing in the records of the Trustees, any instruments on file with the Trustees, or with the City, and any facts certified to the Trustees, by the City, any facts which are of public record and any other evidence pertinent to the issue involved. 
(b)  By Others. 
(1)  No party dealing with the Trustees shall be obligated 
(A)  To see the application to the stated Trust purposes of any funds or property of the Trust Fund; or 
(B)  To see that the terms of this Declaration have been complied with; or 
(C)  To inquire into the necessity or expediency of any act of the Trustees. 
(2)  Every instrument executed by the Trustees shall be conclusive evidence in favor of every person relying thereon 
(A)  That at the time of execution of said instrument the Trust was in full force and effect, 
(B)  That the instrument was executed in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Declaration, and 
(C)  That the signing Trustees were duly authorized and empowered to execute the instrument. 
(c)  Reliance on Counsel's Opinion. The Trustees may consult with legal counsel concerning any question which may arise with reference to the duties and powers or with reference to any other matter pertaining to this Declaration or the Trust hereby established. The opinion of such counsel shall be full and complete authorization and protection in respect of any action taken or suffered by the Trustees hereunder in good faith in accordance with the opinion of such counsel. The Trustees shall not be liable therefore to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not relieve the Trustees of any responsibilities or obligations imposed by F.S. Chs. 112, 185, or 286 or other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.19, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-80. - Discharge of Liability. 
The receipt by the Trustees of any money or property or checks (after such checks are honored at the bank and paid to the Trust Fund) shall discharge the person or persons paying or transferring the same to the extent of such payment or transfer. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.20, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-81. - Establishment of Plan. 
(a)  The Hialeah Gardens City Council shall, upon the recommendation of the Board of Trustees, adopt a written Pension Plan wherein the Trustees, as named fiduciaries, shall have the authority to control and manage the operation and administration of the Plan. Such Plan shall provide for the payment of such retirement pension benefits, permanent disability pension benefits, death benefits, and related benefits, as are required by law or feasible by way of illustration and not limitation: 
(1)  conditions of eligibility for Participants and beneficiaries 
(2)  standards for vesting of benefits 
(3)  a schedule of the type and amount of benefits to be paid 
(4)  a procedure for the payment of benefits in the form of a qualified joint and survivor annuity 
(5)  procedures for claiming benefits and for the distribution of benefits 
(6)  a procedure for the separate accounting for the portion of each Employee's accrued benefit, if any, derived from Employee contributions 
(7)  the establishment and maintenance of a funding standard policy 
(8)  a procedure for establishing and carrying out a funding policy 
(9)  any procedures for the allocation of authority for the operation and administration of the Plan 
(10)  the basis on which payments are made from the Plan. 
Such Pension Plan shall at all times comply with all applicable laws. 
(b)  The Trustees shall, by at least three (3) affirmative votes of their total number, recommend amendments to the Plan which shall then be submitted to the Hialeah Gardens City Council for enactment as an ordinance. This Plan and any amendments thereto, shall qualify under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.21, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-82. - Amendment of Plan. 
The Pension Plan may be amended by the Trustees recommending amendments to the City Council provided that such amendments comply with the applicable sections of the then applicable Internal Revenue Code, all other applicable law, and the purposes as set forth in this Declaration and are enacted by the Hialeah Gardens City Council. Additionally, and not by way of limitation, the Trustees may recommend that the City Council amend the Pension Plan, in future, or retroactively where they deem it necessary, to maintain the continuation of the Trust Fund's tax exempt status or to preserve compliance with the then applicable Internal Revenue Code, and all other applicable law. A copy of each amendment of the Pension Plan shall be made available to the Participants and their beneficiaries requesting such. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 5.22, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-83—40-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CONTROVERSIES AND DISPUTES 
 
Sec. 40-91. - Submission to Trustees. 
All questions or controversies of whatever character, arising in any manner or between any persons or entities in connection with the Trust Fund or the operation thereof, which are related to any claim for any benefit by any Participant or any other person, shall, pursuant to Rules and Regulations adopted by the Trustees, be submitted to the Trustees, and the decision of the Trustees, shall be final and binding upon all persons dealing with the Trust Fund or Plan, or claiming benefits thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 6.1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-92. - Settling Disputes. 
The Trustees may in their sole discretion compromise or settle any claim or controversy in such manner as they think best, and any majority decision made by the Trustees in compromise or settlement of a claim or controversy, or any compromise or settlement entered into by the Trustees, shall be conclusive and binding on all parties involved in this Trust, provided that all such settlements are in accordance with the Pension Plan and applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 6.2, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-93—40-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - BENEFICIAL RIGHTS 
 
Sec. 40-101. - No Right, Title or Interest of the City of Hialeah Gardens. 
The City of Hialeah Gardens, any Participant or beneficiary shall not have any right, title or interest in or to the Trust Fund or any part thereof other than vesting under the Pension Plan and other than a pension or other benefit for which a Participant or beneficiary is entitled under the terms and conditions set forth in the Pension Plan. There shall be no prorata or other distribution of any of the assets of the Trust Fund as a result of any group of Employees or Participants and their beneficiaries, ceasing their participation in this Trust Fund for any purpose or reason, except as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 7.1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-102. - Limitation Upon Beneficial Rights of Employees. 
All benefits shall be free from the interference and control of any creditor, and no benefits shall be subject to any assignment or other anticipation, nor to seizure or to sale under any legal, equitable or any other process. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 7.2, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-103—40-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - TERMINATION OF TRUST 
 
Sec. 40-111. - Procedure in Event of Termination. 
In the event of termination, the Trustees shall: 
(a)  Make provision out of the Trust Fund for the payment of any and all obligations of the Trust, including expenses incurred up to the date of termination of the Trust and the expenses incidental to such termination; 
(b)  Arrange for a final audit and report of their transactions and accounts, for the purpose of termination of their Trusteeship; 
(c)  File all notices or reports in connection therewith as may be required by applicable law; 
(d)  Distribute the remaining assets in accordance with F.S. § 185.37 and other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 8.1, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-112—40-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 40-121. - Law Applicable. 
This Trust is created and accepted in the State of Florida and all questions pertaining to the validity or construction of this Trust Agreement and of the acts and transactions of the parties hereto shall be determined in accordance with the laws of the State of Florida, except as to matters governed by Federal Law. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 9.1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-122. - Savings Clause. 
Should any provision of this Agreement and Declaration of Trust be held to be unlawful, or unlawful as to any person or instance, such fact shall not adversely affect the other provisions herein contained or the application of said provisions to any other person or instance, unless such illegality shall make impossible the functioning of this Fund. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 9.2, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-123. - Judicial Settlements. 
The Trustees shall be entitled, at any time, to have a judicial settlement of their accounts and to seek judicial protection by any action or proceeding they determine necessary and, further, to obtain a judicial determination or declaratory judgment as to any question of construction of this Trust Agreement or for instructions as to any action thereunder, and, further, as to any questions relating to the discharge of their duties and obligations under, or in connection with the administration of, this Trust and as to the distribution of assets belonging to the Trust. Any such determination, decision, or judgment shall be binding upon all parties to, or claiming under, this Trust Agreement. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 9.3, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-124. - Withholding Payment. 
In the event any questions or dispute shall arise as to the proper person or persons to whom any payments shall be made hereunder, the Trustees may withhold such payment until there shall have been made an adjudication of such question or dispute which, in the Trustees' sole judgment, is satisfactory to them, or until the Trustees shall have been fully protected against loss by means of such indemnification agreement or bond as they, in their sole judgment, determine to be adequate. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 9.4, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-125. - Qualification of Trust Personnel. 
No person shall serve as a Trustee, administrative manager, custodian, investment manager, or consultant to the Trust Fund or Plan or serve in any other capacity thereof whether as an agent, officer, or employee, unless such person is eligible for service in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 9.5, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-126. - Vesting of Rights. 
No Participant, Beneficiary or Employee or other person shall have vested interest or right in the Trust Fund except as provided by the Pension Plan and Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 9.6, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-127. - Gender. 
Whenever any words are used in this Trust Agreement in the masculine gender, they shall also be construed to include the feminine or neuter gender in all situations where they would so apply; and whenever any words are used in the singular, they shall also be construed to include the plural in all situations where they would so apply and wherever any words are used in the plural, they shall also be construed to include the singular. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 9.7, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-128. - Amendment to Declaration. 
The provisions of this Declaration may be amended at any time by an amendment recommended by a majority vote of the Trustees and enacted as an ordinance by the Hialeah Gardens City Council provided, however, in no event shall the Trust Fund be used for any purpose other than the purposes set forth in this Declaration, and for the purposes of paying the necessary expenses incurred in the administration of this Trust. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. I, § 9.8, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-129—40-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PENSION PLAN  
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS  
Subdivision I. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 40-141. - Actuarial Equivalence, or Actuarially Equivalent. 
Actuarial equivalence or actuarially equivalent shall mean that any benefit payable under the terms of this Plan in a form other than the normal form of benefit shall have the same actuarial present value on the date payment commences as the normal form of benefit. For purposes of establishing the actuarial present value of any form of payment, other than a lump sum distribution, all future payments shall be discounted for interest and mortality by using seven (7) percent interest and the 1983 Group Annuity Mortality Table for Males, with ages set ahead five (5) years in the case of disability retirees. In the case of a lump sum distribution, the actuarial present value shall be determined on the basis of the same Annuity Mortality Table as just described and the thirty (30) year Treasury Security Interest rates for the month prior to the member's date of termination. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-1, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-06, § 2, 4-6-99)  
Sec. 40-142. - Average Final Compensation. 
The term "average final compensation" means one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the average annual compensation received by a participant during the period that includes the highest compensation received for five years of service prior to the employee's normal retirement date. This definition shall be subject to the limitations established and adjusted under section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code and IRS Regulation 1.401(a)(17)-1 relating to plan years beginning before or after 1 January 1994. 
Provided that Average Final Compensation for Participants over the age of forty-two (42) years with more than seventeen (17) years of credited service who retire on or after May 31, 2000 and prior to December 17, 2000 shall mean one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the average annual compensation of the three (3) highest years of service prior to the employee's retirement. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-2, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-06, § 1, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 99-48, § 1, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 1, 12-5-00)  
Sec. 40-143. - Board of Trustees. 
The term "Board of Trustees" shall mean the Trustees designated in this chapter, and any successor Trustees selected as provided therein, acting in a group as the Administrator of this Pension Plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-3, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-144. - City. 
The term "City" means the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida, a municipal corporation. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-4, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-145. - Covered Employment. 
The term "covered employment" shall mean service for which an Employee is obligated to pay contributions to this Pension Plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-5, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-146. - Married. 
(a)  The term "married" means a Participant who is married on the date of receipt of pension benefits. 
(b)  Special Rules. A Participant shall also be considered "married": 
(1)  if the Participant dies before receipt of such benefits, but the Participant was married on the date of the Participant's death; or 
(2)  to the extent provided under an "income reduction" order. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-6, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-29, § 4, 11-16-99)  
Sec. 40-147. - Maternity or Paternity Leave. 
(a)  The term "maternity or paternity leave" means a Participant's absence from work by reason of: 
(1)  the pregnancy of the Participant; or 
(2)  the birth of a child of the Participant; or 
(3)  the placement of a child with the Participant in connection with the adoption of such child by the Participant; or 
(4)  the caring for such child by the Participant for a period beginning immediately following such birth or placement. 
(b)  Crediting Hours of Leave. Solely for purposes of determining whether a break in service has occurred as provided in section 40-201 (Breaks in Service), and not for purposes of vesting or benefit accrual, a Participant who is absent from work in covered employment due to maternity or paternity leave shall be credited with the hours of service which otherwise would normally have been credited to the Participant but for such absence, not to exceed three (3) months hours per Plan Year. 
(c)  Crediting Period. The hours of service absent from work due to maternity or paternity leave shall be credited, solely for purposes of excusing a break in service: 
(1)  during the Plan Year in which the absence began if the crediting of those hours is necessary to prevent a break in service in that Plan Year, or, in all other cases; 
(2)  in the next following Plan Year. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-7, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-148. - Pension. 
The term "pension" or "pension benefit" shall mean an early retirement benefit, a normal retirement benefit or a disability retirement benefit. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-8, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-149. - Pension Plan. 
The term "Pension Plan" shall mean the City of Hialeah Gardens Police Pension Plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-9, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-150. - Plan Year. 
The term "Plan Year" shall mean the twelve-month period from October 1st to the following September 30th. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-10, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-151. - Police Officer. 
The term "police officer" shall mean any person employed by the City who satisfies the definition of police officer in F.S. § 185.02(11). 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-11, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-29, § 5, 11-16-99)  
Sec. 40-152. - Retirement. 
The term "retirement" or "retired" shall mean the complete withdrawal of a Participant from any further employment as an employee, paid consultant or independent contractor of the Police Department of the City. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-12, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-153. - Service. 
(a)  The term "service" means years and completed months of continuous employment as a full-time police officer of the City, commencing on the date of hire, for which a person is paid, or entitled to payment, by the City: 
(1)  for the performance of duties; or 
(2)  for reasons other than the performance of duties, including vacations, holidays, temporary disability, illness, jury duty, military duty, administrative leave, paid leave or approved leave of absence; or 
(3)  as the result of backpay being awarded, or agreed to, by the City (irrespective of mitigation of damages). 
(4)  The term "service" shall also mean time spent in the military service of the United States or United States Merchant Marine by the police officer on leave of absence from the City; provided that the police officer re-entered the City's police service within the time periods provided in USERRA and Chapter 185 of the Florida Statutes or such credited service purchased for military service or service with other public law enforcement employer(s) prior to employment with the City as provided herein. 
(b)  Non-Covered Employment. A person who is paid, or entitled to payment, by the City shall also be credited with service for purposes of participation, vesting, and breaks in service (but not for benefit purposes) based upon service in non-covered employment for the City, provided that the person worked for the City in covered employment immediately before or immediately after the non-covered employment, and further provided that no quit, discharge or retirement occurred between the covered employment and the non-covered employment. 
(c)  Determination of Amount of Service. The amount of service shall be ascertained from the most accurate records available, including records of hours, work shifts, days or weeks for which payment is made or owing, as reported to the Board of Trustees. 
(d)  Crediting Period. Service shall be credited for each year for which duties were performed, or if no duties were performed, then during the year for which the payment relates. 
(e)  Qualified Military Service means any service in the uniformed service (as defined in Chapter 43 of Title 38, United States Code) by any individual if such individual is entitled to reemployment rights under such chapter with respect to such service (Section 414(u)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code). 
(f)  USERRA means Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (P.L. 103-353). 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-13, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-29, § 6, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 99-45, § 2, 3-21-00; Ord. No. 2000-12, § 1, 9-7-00; Ord. No. 2017-14, § 1, 8-15-17)  
Sec. 40-154. - Vested. 
The term "vested" shall mean a non-forfeitable right to a pension benefit under this Pension Plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 1-14, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-155. - Compensation. 
The term compensation or the term salary shall mean the total cash remuneration paid by the City to a police officer for services rendered, in accordance with F.S. § 185.02(4). 
(Ord. No. 99-29, § 7, 11-16-99)  
Secs. 40-156—40-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CREDITED SERVICE  
Subdivision I. - Participation in the Pension Plan 
 
Sec. 40-171. - Participation. 
(a)  A person shall become a Participant on the first day of service. Each full-time police officer employee of the City shall be a Participant in the Plan. 
(b)  A person shall remain a Participant until the earlier of: 
(1)  terminating service prior to earning a vested benefit and prior to reaching normal retirement age; 
(2)  all benefits have been paid to the Participant; or 
(3)  the person dies. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 2-1, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-172—40-180. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Vesting Credits 
 
Sec. 40-181. - Vesting Schedules. 
(a)  Early Retirement Benefit. A Participant shall have a one hundred (100) percent vested right to an early retirement benefit upon earning ten (10) Vesting Credits. 
(b)  Normal Retirement Benefit. A Participant shall have a one hundred (100) percent vested right to a normal retirement benefit upon: 
(1)  earning five (5) Vesting Credits if the Participant began employment as a City police officer before October 1, 1990 or earning ten (10) vesting credits if the Participant began such employment after September 30, 1990; or 
(2)  the termination or partial termination of this Pension Plan (to the extent funded as of such date). 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 3-1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-182. - Vesting Credits. 
(a)  A Participant shall earn one (1) Vesting Credit for each year of service after October 1, 1990. Participants who, prior to September 30, 1992, authorize that their Employer Contribution Accounts in the Retirement Plan of the City of Hialeah Gardens and the monies in their Employee Contribution Accounts in said Retirement Plan be transferred to this Trust Fund will also receive one (1) Vesting Credit for each year that the person was a Participant in the Retirement Plan of the City of Hialeah Gardens. 
(b)  All monies transferred to this Trust Fund from Employee Contribution Accounts in the Retirement Plan of the City of Hialeah Gardens which result from contributions of more than three (3) percent having been made by a Participant to said Retirement Plan shall: 
(1)  be separately accounted for by this Police Pension Trust Fund in the name of said Participant; 
(2)  earn interest at a rate equal to the net investment return of this Trust (after deduction of investment and administrative expenses), and 
(3)  be paid to the Participant as a lump sum payment upon the termination of the Participant's employment with the City or, if the Participant dies before payment is made, payment shall be made to the Participant's named beneficiary. 
(c)  A Participant may lose Vesting Credits as provided in Article 4 (Loss of Credits). The total number of Vesting Credits earned and retained shall determine whether a Participant has a vested right to a pension benefit. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 3-2, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 90-60, § 1, 4-7-92; Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 8-15-17)  
Sec. 40-183. - Limitation on Changes in Vesting Schedules. 
No amendment shall reduce a Participant's vested right to a normal retirement benefit at the time such amendment is adopted, or, if later, at the time such amendment is effective. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 3-3, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-184. - Vesting of Benefits. 
No Participant, beneficiary or other person shall have any vested right to a pension benefit unless the Participant has met the requirements for vesting as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 3-4, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-185. - Purchase of Credited Service for Period of Military Service Prior to Employment with the City. 
Participants of the Pension Plan shall have the option to receive credited service for all purposes of this pension trust fund for periods of active military service in the armed forces or the merchant marine service of the United States prior to City employment under the following conditions and subject to any restrictions established by applicable law: 
(1)  Participants who wish to receive credit for such active military service shall be required to: 
a.  Provide proof, to the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees, of the participant's active military service in the armed forces or merchant marine of the United States; and 
b.  Make a contribution for such credited service in an amount established by a formula and payment by methods as determined by the Board of Trustees, which shall be administered in a uniform and nondiscriminatory manner. 
(2)  Participants shall within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date the participant attains ten (10) years of credited service under this Pension Plan be required: 
a.  To make an irrevocable election to purchase active military service time; and 
b.  To elect the amount of active military service time to be purchased. 
(3)  Once a time period is chosen for purchase, adjustment of the time period shall not be permitted. If an election to purchase active military service credit is not received in such time period, no future election shall be allowed. 
(4)  Each Participant shall be an employee of the City on the date of the election and shall have a total of ten (10) years of credited service with the City immediately prior to the date of such election to be eligible to purchase credit for active military service. 
(5)  Participants eligible to purchase credit for active military service time may purchase such active military service time on a day-for-day basis up to a maximum of five (5) years. 
(6)  In no event may a participant purchase more active military service credit (on a day-for-day basis) than was actually spent on active military service in the armed forces or merchant marine of the United States. 
(7)  There shall be no age limit for any participant who wishes to purchase active military service time. 
(8)  Participants shall be limited to a maximum combined total of five (5) years of purchased credited service for active military service and service with other public law enforcement employers. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, § 2, 9-7-00; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 6-2-15; Ord. No. 2017-14, § 3, 8-15-17)  
Sec. 40-186. - Purchase of Credited Service for Period of Employment with Other Law Enforcement Employer(s). 
Participants of the Pension Plan shall have the option to receive credited service for all purposes of this pension trust fund for periods of service with other public law enforcement employers under the following conditions and subject to any restrictions established by applicable law: 
(1)  Participants who wish to receive credit for such other public law enforcement employers service shall be required to: 
a.  Provide proof, to the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees, of the participant's employment with other public law enforcement employer(s). 
b.  Provide proof to the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees, that the participant is not eligible to receive any pension benefit from the other public law enforcement employer(s). 
c.  Make a contribution for such credited service in an amount established by a formula and payment by methods as determined by the Board of Trustees. 
(2)  Participants shall within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date the participant attains ten (10) years of credited service under this Pension Plan be required: 
a.  To make an irrevocable election to purchase other public law enforcement employer(s) service time; and 
b.  To elect the amount of other public law enforcement employer(s) service time to be purchased. 
(3)  Once a time period is chosen for purchase, adjustment of the time period shall not be permitted. If an election to purchase other public law enforcement employer(s) service time is not received in the time period indicated in subsection (2) above, no further election shall be allowed. 
(4)  Each Participant shall be an employee of the City at the date of the election and have a total of ten (10) years of credited service under this pension trust fund immediately prior to the date of electing to purchase other public law enforcement service time. 
(5)  Participants eligible to purchase other public law enforcement employer(s) service may purchase such other public law enforcement employer(s) service time on a day-for-day basis up to a maximum of five (5) years. 
(6)  In no event may a participant purchase more other public law enforcement employer(s) service credit (on a day-for-day basis) than actually credited under other public law enforcement employers' employment records. 
(7)  There shall be no age limit for any participant who wishes to purchase other public law enforcement employer(s) service time. 
(8)  Participants shall be limited to a maximum combined total of five (5) years of purchased credited service for other public law enforcement employer's service and for active military service. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, § 2, 9-7-00; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 6-2-15)  
Secs. 40-187—40-200. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Loss of Credits 
 
Sec. 40-201. - Breaks in Service. 
(a)  A break in service shall occur when a Participant is no longer employed by the City as a full-time employee. 
(b)  A break in service shall not occur if the Participant is not employed due to the Participant: 
(1)  entering into the Armed Forces of the United States or the United States Merchant Marine on leave of absence provided the person returns to work in the police service of the City within the time periods provided in the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) and Chapter 185 of the Florida Statutes; or 
(2)  becoming employed by the City in non-covered employment which non-covered employment shall not be used to accrue benefits under this plan; or 
(3)  being absent from work due to maternity or paternity leave as provided in section 40-147 (Maternity or Paternity Leave), or due to unpaid leave of absence approved by the City; or 
(4)  becoming temporarily totally disabled or receiving a disability benefit from the Plan; or 
(5)  terminating employment with the City and becoming re-employed by the City within five (5) years of termination provided that the employee did not receive a refund of the employee's accumulated contributions. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 4-1, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-29, § 8, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 99-45, § 3, 3-21-00)  
Sec. 40-202. - Refund of Contributions. 
A Participant who is not vested and suffers a break in service shall be entitled to a refund of the Participants' Accumulated Contributions (payable only upon a written request by the Participant in a form and manner determined by the Board of Trustees). 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 4-2, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 6-2-15)  
Sec. 40-203. - Re-Entry Into The Pension Plan. 
(a)  A person who has been paid a refund of Accumulated Contributions and subsequently earns any Vesting Credits under the Pension Plan may repay to the Pension Plan the Accumulated Contributions previously received, plus interest on that amount at the actuarially assumed interest rate, compounded annually, or such other amount as prescribed in Section 411(c)(2)(D) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  Upon repayment of the refunded Accumulated Contribution, plus interest, the Participant shall be credited with all Vesting Credits previously lost and there shall be no reduction in the value of any subsequent benefit by the value of the Accumulated Contributions previously refunded. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 4-3, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 6-2-15)  
Secs. 40-204—40-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PENSION BENEFITS  
Subdivision I. - Pension Benefits 
 
Sec. 40-211. - Right to Pension Benefits. 
A pension benefit shall be payable if the Participant: 
(a)  has a vested right to a pension benefit; and 
(b)  has reached the applicable retirement age; and 
(c)  has retired; and 
(d)  has filed a claim for pension benefits. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 5-1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-212. - Early Retirement Age. 
The early retirement age shall be the first day of any month on which or after a Participant has earned ten (10) vesting credits and has attained age forty-five (45). 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 5-2, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 2000-09, § 1, 8-15-00)  
Sec. 40-213. - Early Retirement Benefit. 
The early retirement benefit shall be the benefit level provided in Division 3, Subdivision V (Benefit Level) actuarially reduced to take into account the police officer's younger age and the earlier commencement of retirement income payments provided that said reduction shall not exceed three (3) percent for each year by which the Participant is younger than the normal retirement age for said Participant on the effective date of his early retirement. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 5-3, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-214. - Normal Retirement Age. 
(1)  The normal retirement age for any participant eligible for normal retirement prior to October 1, 2011, shall be the first day of the month on which or after the participant attains: 
(a)  age fifty (50) and ten (10) vesting credits; or 
(b)  attains twenty (20) vesting credits regardless of age. 
(2)  The normal retirement age for any participant not eligible for normal retirement prior to October 1, 2011, shall be the first day of the month on which or after the participant attains: 
(a)  age fifty-five (55) and ten (10) vesting credits; or 
(b)  attains twenty (20) vesting credits regardless of age. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 5-4, 5-21-91; Ord No. 93-10, § 2, 9-21-93; Ord. No. 2000-09, § 2, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 2011-07, § 2, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 40-215. - Normal Retirement Benefit. 
The normal retirement benefit shall be the benefit level provided in Division 3, Subdivision V (Benefit Level). 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 5-5, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-216. - Optional Lump-Sum Benefit for Certain Terminated Vested Participants. 
(a)  Definition. A lump sum benefit is a single payment to a vested participant of: 
(1)  For those participants who authorized the transfer of their accounts from the former Hialeah Gardens Police Pension Trust to this trust fund, the greater of the present value of the participant's accrued benefit or the sum of the amount transferred from the former Police Pension Trust to this Trust Fund plus the investment earnings (or minus the investment losses) on such transferred funds plus the Participant's accumulated contributions to this Trust Fund. 
(2)  For all other Participants, the greater of the present value of the Participant's accrued benefit or the Participant's accumulated contributions. 
(b)  No Further Benefits. After electing, applying for and accepting an optional lump sum benefit, a Participant will no longer be eligible to receive benefits of any kind from the Trust Fund. By accepting an optional lump sum benefit, the Participant releases the Trust Fund from any obligation or liability for any type of benefit. Upon a Participant accepting the optional lump sum benefit, the Participant and the Participant's spouse, children, beneficiaries and estate will not be eligible to receive survivor benefits, death benefits, disability benefits, pension benefits, surviving spouse benefits, surviving children's benefits, or any other type of benefit or payment from the Trust Fund. 
(c)  Time for Election. A vested Participant who has terminated employment for any reason, whether by resignation, discharge or retirement, may elect the optional lump sum benefit no later than ten (10) years before reaching normal retirement age. If a Participant is within ten (10) years of normal retirement age, the Participant may not elect the optional lump sum benefit. 
(d)  Method for Election. A Participant desiring a lump sum distribution shall submit a completed application form to the Board of Trustees. The form must be signed by the Participant, the Participant's spouse and any beneficiary designated by the Participant and must be notarized. 
(e)  Approval by Board of Trustees. Upon receiving a fully completed and signed application, the Participant's application shall be placed on the agenda for the board's next meeting. Specific Board approval is required for each lump sum distribution. 
(f)  Delivery of Lump Sum Payment Check. The Participant shall pick up the check for the lump sum payment at the Trust Fund's office, at which time the Participant must sign a general release in favor of the Trust Fund. If the Participant cannot pick up the check, the Participant must first sign the general release which must be received by the Trust Fund before the Participant's check is sent to the Participant. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(h)  Permitted Delay and Limitations in Payment. The Board of Trustees may delay payment of a lump sum distribution for up to six (6) months when, in the Trustees' sole discretion, sufficient cash reserves or liquidity are not available to make a lump sum payment. Also, no more than three (3) optional lump sum payments shall be made in any fiscal year. If lump sum payments are delayed or more than three (3) applications are received in a fiscal year, they will be paid in the order that applications were received and applications in excess of three (3) will be carried over to the next fiscal year. 
(i)  Revocation. A participant may revoke election of a lump sum payment at any time before cashing the lump sum distribution check. In case of revocation, the Participant shall reimburse the Trust Fund for its expense in calculating and disbursing the lump sum payment. 
(Ord. No. 93-10, § 1, 9-21-93; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 6-2-15)  
Sec. 40-217. - Share Plan. 
Pursuant to the requirements of F.S. § 185.35(6), a defined contribution plan component ("Share Plan") is established in addition to the defined benefit component of this local law plan. The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to adopt rules regarding the operation of the Share Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2018-19A, § 1, 11-6-18)  
Secs. 40-217—40-230. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Forms of Benefit Payments 
 
Sec. 40-231. - Forms of Benefit Payments. 
A Participant who has a right to receive a pension benefit as provided in section 40-211 (Right to Pension Benefits) shall automatically be paid the standard form of benefit payment unless a timely election is made to receive an optional form of benefit payment. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 6-1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-232. - Standard Benefits. 
The standard pension benefit shall be a monthly benefit payable until the Participant's death except that if the Participant should die before he has received retirement benefits for a period of ten (10) years, the same monthly benefit will be paid to the beneficiary or beneficiaries as designated by the Participant for the balance of such ten-year period. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 6-2, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-233. - Optional Forms of Benefits. 
(a)  Joint and Survivor Annuity. This form of benefit shall provide monthly payments of a smaller amount for the life of the Participant, with monthly payments continuing thereafter for the life of the Participant's designated beneficiary. The monthly benefit payable to the beneficiary shall be fifty (50) percent, sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent, seventy-five (75) percent or one hundred (100) percent of the monthly benefit payable during the joint lives of the Participant and the beneficiary, as elected by the Participant. If payment of a pension is to be made in the form of a Joint and Survivor Pension, the pension amount shall be adjusted so as to be actuarially equivalent to the standard benefit. The standard pension benefit shall be ten (10) years certain and life. 
(b)  Single Life Annuity. Any Participant may file an election to receive monthly payments for life. 
(c)  Any other actuarially equivalent benefit approved by the Board or provided by F.S. § 185.161. 
(d)  Deferred retirement option plan (DROP). A member may enter into the deferred retirement option plan (DROP), which plan is to be created and administered by the board of trustees of the fund on the first day of any month following the attainment of Normal Retirement Age as defined herein. The maximum duration of participation in the DROP shall not exceed five (5) years and participation will end if the employee resigns, dies or is terminated for just cause prior to completion of said five (5) years. 
A member may participate in the plan only once and after commencement in the DROP he or she shall never have the right to be a contributing member of the Pension Plan again. 
Upon the effective date of the commencement of participation in the DROP, membership in the Pension Plan shall terminate and neither employee nor employer contributions shall be payable. 
The member contributions to the Trust Fund, including those picked up by the city, shall cease and instead of being paid to the Pension Plan, shall be paid to the employee. For purposes of this section, average monthly earnings and creditable service shall remain as they existed on the effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP. The monthly retirement benefits that would have been payable, had the member elected to cease employment and receive a service retirement allowance, shall be credited to a deferred retirement option account. 
The deferred retirement option plan account shall, unless a member elects a self-directed DROP, earn interest at a rate set quarterly by the board of trustees. Such interest shall be equal to the Trust Fund's net rate of investment return for the year and shall be credited to each individual account balance in the account on a quarterly basis. 
The DROP account shall not be subject to any fees, charges, etc., as established by the Board of Trustees. 
If a Participant or DROP Participant elects a self-directed DROP, then the investments, any returns thereon, and the fees for administering the self-directed DROP shall be in accordance with the self-directed DROP options selected by the member or DROP participant. Neither the City, the Trust Fund nor the Board of Trustees shall have any responsibility or liability for any of the options selected by the Participant or DROP participant. 
Participants electing a self-directed DROP must do so no later than thirty (30) days after DROP participation effective date. 
Upon termination of employment, a participant in the DROP shall receive, at his or her option, a lump sum payment from the account equal to the payments to the account, plus earned interest, or an annuity based upon his or her account balance, or the participant may elect any other method of payment if approved by the board of trustees. The monthly benefits that were being paid into the fund during the period of participation shall begin being paid to the retiree. 
If a participant dies during the period of participation in the DROP, a lump sum payment equal to his or her account balance shall be paid to the participant's named beneficiary, or, if none, to his or her estate; in addition, any survivor benefits selected by the participant shall be payable. 
If employment is not terminated at the end of the period specified for participation in the DROP, payments into the account shall cease and no further interest shall be earned or credited to the individual account in the fund for the duration of employment. The amount in the DROP account shall not be payable to the individual until he or she terminates employment. 
If a Participant dies after the period of participation in the plan but is still an employee, a lump sum payment equal to his or her account balance shall be paid to the employee's named beneficiary or, if none, to his or her estate, in addition, any survivor benefits selected by the participant shall be payable. 
A Participant will no longer be required to make contributions to the plan, or, at his or her option, may be permitted to make reduced contributions to the plan, and his retirement benefits will accrue to his benefit through a separate fund administered by the board of trustees. Participants electing to participate in the DROP plan whose contributions to the Trust Fund are either discontinued or reduced, shall receive a return of any contributions made to the Trust Fund on their behalf after the commencement of their participation in the DROP or, at the member's option, said contributions shall be deposited into the separate fund administered by the board of trustees. The DROP to be created and administered by the board of trustees must be created and administered in such a way as to not increase the city's contributions to the Pension Plan. 
(e)  Compliance with Internal Revenue Code Sections 414(k) and 414(i). To the extent required under the Internal Revenue Code, the DROP under the Pension Plan shall be treated as a defined contribution plan to the extent that the member's benefits under the retirement system are based on the member's DROP account. The amount of "annual additions" (as such term is defined in Section 415(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-1(b)) which may be allocated under the DROP to a member's DROP account for a "limitation year" may not exceed the maximum permissible amount under Section 415(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code and Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-(a)(1) (the "Annual Maximum Amount"). For purposes hereof, the term "limitation year" means the twelve-month period beginning October 1. In addition, for purposes of determining a member's Annual Maximum Amount, the member's compensation shall be determined in compliance with Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 6-3, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-29, § 9, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2000-10, § 1, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 2013-17, § 2, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 1, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 6-2-15)  
Sec. 40-234. - Election of Optional Benefits. 
(a)  Manner of Electing Optional Benefits. Optional forms of benefit payments shall only be payable if a timely election is made. Such election must be in writing, signed by the Participant, on a form provided by the Board of Trustees. 
(b)  Time Limits. Any optional form of benefit payment must be elected prior to commencement of benefits from this Pension Plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 6-4, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-235. - Revocation or Change of Election. 
(a)  Revocation by Participant. An election of a standard or optional form of benefit payment may be revoked at any time before cashing or depositing the first benefit check from this Pension Plan. Such a revocation must be in writing, signed by the Participant. 
(b)  If an election is revoked, then the standard form of benefit payment shall be paid unless another election of an optional benefit payment is timely made as provided in section 40-234 (Election of Optional Benefits). 
(c)  After benefits have commenced, a retired Participant may change her or his designation of joint annuitant or beneficiary twice in the manner prescribed in F.S. § 185.341. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 6-5, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-236. - Notice of Forms of Pension Benefits. 
(a)  Written notice of the availability of all forms of pension benefits shall be provided to all vested Participants on an annual basis. 
(b)  The notice shall contain a written explanation of: 
(1)  the terms and conditions of the standard form of benefit; and 
(2)  the right to elect, and to revoke an election of, any optional form of benefit payment. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 6-6, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-237. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-55, § 1, adopted November 15, 2005, repealed § 40-237, which pertained to supplemental retirement benefit and derived from Ord. No. 2005-35, § 1, adopted September 8, 2005. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Secs. 40-238—40-250. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Disability Benefits 
 
Sec. 40-251. - Right to Disability Benefits. 
(a)  Service-Connected. A service-connected disability benefit shall be payable if a Participant: 
(1)  has suffered a service-connected injury, illness, disease, or disability which wholly presents the Participant, either mentally or physically, from rendering useful and efficient service as a police officer and is likely to remain so disabled continuously and permanently, and 
(2)  has filed a claim for disability benefits, and 
(3)  has not reached normal retirement age. 
(b)  Presumption. Any permanent disability, as described in section (a)(1), above, which is the result of or caused by tuberculosis, hypertension, heart disease or hardening of the arteries shall be presumed to have been incurred in the line of duty so as to be service-connected unless a physical examination of the Participant conducted upon initial hiring by the City revealed that such condition existed at that time. 
(c)  Non-Service-Connected. A non-service connected disability benefit shall be payable if a Participant has ten (10) or more vesting credits and is wholly prevented from rendering useful and efficient service as a police officer, has not reached normal retirement age, and has filed a claim for disability benefits. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 7-1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-252. - Amount of Disability Benefits. 
(a)  Service-Connected. The monthly service-connected disability benefit shall be the Participant's accrued retirement benefit or forty-two (42) percent of the Participant's average monthly compensation at the time of disability, whichever is greater, commencing on the date of disability and continuing for life, or, should the Participant die before receiving benefits for at least ten (10) years, the balance shall be payable to the Participant's beneficiary. 
(b)  Non-Service Connected. The monthly non-service connected disability benefit for Participants with at least ten (10) vesting credits shall be the Participant's accrued retirement benefit or twenty-five (25) percent of the Participant's average monthly compensation at the time of disability, whichever is greater, commencing on the date of disability and continuing for life, should the Participant die before receiving benefits for at least ten (10) years, the balance shall be payable to the Participant's beneficiary. 
(c)  Worker's Compensation Offset. The disability benefits provided herein shall be offset by disability income benefits actually received by the Participant from worker's compensation only to the extent by which the total of the worker's compensation benefit plus the disability benefit payable hereunder exceeds the employee's average monthly compensation at the time of the disability. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 7-2, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-253. - Determination of Disability. 
(a)  Initial Determination. The Board may consider reports of physicians, and Social Security, Worker's Compensation and Veterans Administration disability determinations in determining whether a Participant is disabled; however, such reports and determinations shall not be binding upon the Board. The Board may also require the Participant to be examined, at the Plan's expense, by physicians and other medical, vocational and rehabilitation professionals selected by the Board whose reports may be considered by, but shall not be binding upon, the Board in determining disability. The Board shall determine eligibility for disability benefits within sixty (60) days after all required documentation and reports have been submitted to the Board. 
(b)  Continuing Review. The Board may review the status of each disability benefit recipient periodically and may, in its sole discretion, require recipients, as a condition of continued payment of disability benefits, to submit physician's reports or submit to examinations, at the Plan's expense, by physicians or other medical, vocational or rehabilitation professionals. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 7-3, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-254. - Recovery from Disability. 
(a)  Recovery and Re-Employment by City. If a disability benefit recipient recovers and is no longer eligible for a disability benefit, the Participant's disability benefit shall be discontinued. 
(b)  Credit During Disability. A recipient of a disability benefit who has recovered and returned to work shall not receive full vesting credit for all time during which the Participant received a disability benefit but shall not suffer a break in service for the period of his disability. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 7-4, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-255—40-270. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Payment of Benefits 
 
Sec. 40-271. - Payment of Benefits. 
(a)  Frequency of Payments. Pension benefits shall be paid monthly. 
(b)  First Payment. The first payment shall begin on the first day of the month on which or after the Participant meets the requirements of section 40-211 (Right to Pension Benefits), provided that in no event may a member's retirement benefit be delayed beyond the latter of the April 1st following the calendar year in which he attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or April 1st of the year following the calendar year in which he retires. Distributions under this Plan will be made in accordance with regulations under Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(9). Provisions of Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(9) shall override any distribution options in the Plan that may be inconsistent with such section. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan to the contrary, a form of retirement income payable from this Plan shall satisfy the following conditions: 
(1)  If the retirement income is payable before the member's death: 
a.  It shall either be distributed or commence to the member not later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the Participant retires; 
b.  The distribution shall commence not later than the calendar year defined above; and (a) shall be paid over the life of the Participant or over the lifetimes of the Participant and spouse, issue or dependent, or (b) shall be paid over the period extending not beyond the life expectancy of the Participant and spouse, issue or dependent. 
Where a form of retirement income payment has commenced in accordance with the preceding paragraphs and the Participant dies before his entire interest in the plan has been distributed, the remaining portion of such interest in the Pension Plan shall be distributed no less rapidly than under the form of distribution in effect at the time of the Participant's death. 
(2)  If the Participant's death occurs before the distribution of his interest in the Pension Plan has commenced, the Participant's entire interest in the Pension Plan shall be distributed within five years of the Participant's death, unless it is to be distributed in accordance with the following rules: 
a.  The Participant's remaining interest in the Pension Plan is payable to his spouse, issue or dependent; 
b.  The remaining interest is to be distributed over the life of the spouse, issue or dependent or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the spouse, issue or dependent; and 
c.  Such distribution begins within one year of the Participant's death unless the Participant's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary, in which case the distribution need not begin before the date on which the Participant would have attained age 70½ and if the Participant's spouse dies before the distribution to the spouse begins, this section shall be applied as if the spouse were the Participant. 
(c)  Last Payment. The last payment shall be the month coincident with the death of the Participant (or survivor, if applicable) or later, depending on the form of benefit selected. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 8-1, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 6-2-15; Ord. No. 2017-14, § 4, 8-15-17)  
Secs. 40-272—40-280. - Reserved.  
Subdivision V. - Benefit Level 
 
Sec. 40-281. - Calculation of Benefit Amount. 
For any participant eligible for normal retirement prior to October 1, 2011, the participant's monthly benefit level is the product of the vesting credits earned by the participant multiplied by three (3.00) percent of Average Final Compensation. 
For any participant not eligible for normal retirement prior to October 1, 2011, the participant's monthly benefit level is the product of the vesting credits earned by the participant prior to October 1, 2011, multiplied by three (3.00) percent of average final compensation plus the product of the vesting credits earned by the participant on or after October 1, 2011, multiplied by 2.75 percent of average final compensation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, on or after March 1, 2017, the participant's monthly benefit level is the product of the vesting credits earned by the participant, multiplied by three (3.00) percent of average final compensation. 
The actual benefit amount is determined by making the adjustment, if any, for early retirement and for the form of benefit which the participant selects. 
Provided that the monthly benefit level for participants over the age of forty-two (42) years with more than seventeen (17) years of credited service who retire on or after May 31, 2000, and prior to December 17, 2000, is the product of the vesting credits earned multiplied by three point forty-four one five (3.4415) percent of the Average Final Compensation. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 9-1, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 11-4-97; Ord. No. 99-30, § 1, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 99-48, § 2, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 2, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 2011-07, § 3, 8-16-11; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 6-2-15; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1, 4-4-17)  
Sec. 40-282. - Maximum Benefit Amount. 
In no event may a member's annual benefit exceed: one hundred eighty-five thousand dollars ($185,000.00) (adjusted for cost of living in accordance with Internal Revenue Code (IRC) Section 415(d), but only for the year in which such adjustment is effective), or if the member has less than ten (10) years of service with the employer (as defined in IRC Section 415(b)(5) and as modified by IRC Section 415(b)(6)(D)), the applicable limitation in paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of this subsection shall be reduced by multiplying such limitation by a fraction, not to exceed one (1). The numerator of such fraction shall be the number of years, or part thereof, of service with the employer; the denominator shall be ten (10) years. 
For purposes of this subsection, the "annual benefit" means a benefit payable annually in the form of a straight life annuity with no ancillary or incidental benefits and with no member or rollover contributions. To the extent that ancillary benefits are provided, the limits set forth in paragraphs (a) and (b) above will be reduced actuarially, using an interest rate assumption equal to the greater of five (5) percent or the interest rate used in the most recent annual actuarial valuation, to reflect such ancillary benefits. 
If distribution of retirement benefits begins before age sixty-two (62), the dollar limitation as described in paragraph (a) shall be reduced actuarially using an interest rate assumption equal to the greater of five (5) percent or the interest rate used in the most recent annual actuarial valuation; however, retirement benefits shall not be reduced below one hundred eighty-five thousand dollars ($185,000.00) if payment of benefits at or after age fifty-five (55) and not below the actuarial equivalent of one hundred eighty-five thousand dollars ($185,000.00) if payment of benefits begins before age fifty-five (55). If retirement benefits begin after age sixty-five (65), the dollar limitation of paragraph (a) shall be increased actuarially using an interest assumption equal to the lesser of five (5) percent of the interest rate used in the most recent annual actuarial valuation. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 9-2, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 6-2-15; Ord. No. 2017-14, § 5, 8-15-17)  
Secs. 40-283—40-290. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VI. - Employment After Retirement 
 
Sec. 40-291. - Suspension of Benefits. 
(a)  The payment of pension benefits shall be suspended for each month a Participant works as a police officer, consultant or independent contractor of the Police Department of the City of Hialeah Gardens or if disability benefit recipient resumes employment as a police officer. 
(b)  The Board of Trustees may uniformly waive the provisions of this Section for such periods of time as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 10-1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-292. - Notice of Re-Employment and Re-Retirement. 
(a)  Retired Participants must notify the Board of Trustees upon returning to any type of work for the City of Hialeah Gardens Police Department within thirty (30) days after starting work. Notice of re-employment shall be given on a form provided by the Board of Trustees. 
(b)  A Participant must notify the Board of Trustees upon re-retirement if the Participant returns to work for the City of Hialeah Gardens Police Department after having a claim filed for pension benefits. Notice of re-retirement shall be given on a form provided by the Board of Trustees. Pension benefits shall be suspended until notice of re-retirement is given. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 10-2, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-293. - Advance Determination of Prohibited Work. 
A Participant may request, in writing and on a form provided by the Board of Trustees, an advance determination whether certain work for the City Police Department is prohibited under this Pension Plan. A written determination shall be given to the Participant within sixty (60) days of the request, unless special circumstances (such as a hearing) require additional time, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days from receipt of the request. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 10-3, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-294. - Resumption of Benefits. 
(a)  Benefit payments for pension recipients shall resume effective by the first day of the month after receipt of the notice of re-retirement, or verification of retirement, from the Participant. 
(b)  The Board of Trustees may deduct twenty-five (25) percent of each month's benefit payment for benefits previously made which should have been suspended. The first three (3) months are subject to offset without limitation. The Board of Trustees shall notify the Participant of the amount subject to offset, the manner of offset, and the months of work involved. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 10-4, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-295—40-310. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VII. - Pre-Retirement Survivor Benefits 
 
Sec. 40-311. - Pre-retirement Death Benefits for Vested Participants. 
Any Participant whether or not still in active employment, who has a nonforfeitable (vested) right to any portion of the Accrued Benefit, and who dies prior to the commencement of benefits, shall have a survivor benefit payable on his behalf. The survivor benefit shall be payable to the Participant's designated beneficiary. 
The amount of the survivor benefit shall be the benefits which were otherwise payable to the police officer had he survived and shall be payable upon the date the Participant would have reached normal or early retirement age, as elected by the designated beneficiary. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 11-1, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-312—40-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - LUMP SUM DISTRIBUTIONS  
Subdivision I. - Lump Sum Payments 
 
Sec. 40-321. - Involuntary Lump Sum Distributions. 
If the monthly value of a benefit is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less or if the present value of the single sum payment of an accrued benefit is two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or less and the payment of such benefit has not begun, the Board of Trustees may, in its sole discretion, pay the actuarial equivalent of such benefit in a lump sum, or in monthly installments, without the consent of the Participant or the Participant's spouse. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 12-1, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-29, § 10, 11-16-99)  
Sec. 40-322. - Interest Assumption. 
For purposes of computing the present value of a benefit payable under this section the interest assumption to be used shall be the actuarially assumed interest rate adopted by the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 12-2, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-323. - Eligible Rollover Distributions. 
If the recipient of any eligible rollover distribution, as that term is defined in Section 402(f)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code, including any lump sum payments of retirement benefits, lump sum refunds of member contributions, and lump sum returns of member contributions which were picked up by the City, elects to have the distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan or Individual Retirement Account (IRA), and specifies the eligible retirement plan or IRA to which such distribution is to be paid (in such form and at such time as the Board of Trustees may prescribe), then the distribution will be made in the form of a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer to the specified eligible retirement plan or IRA. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, § 1, 4-6-93)  
Secs. 40-324—30-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ADMINISTRATION AND OPERATION OF THE PENSION PLAN  
Subdivision I. - Administration 
 
Sec. 40-331. - Board of Trustees. 
The Board of Trustees shall administer and control the operation of this Pension Plan in accordance with the provisions of this Pension Plan, the Declaration of Trust, this chapter, and other Florida law. The Board of Trustees may, from time to time, establish rules for the interpretation, application and administration of the Pension Plan. In making any such determination or rule, the Board of Trustees shall pursue uniform policies and shall not unreasonably discriminate in favor of, or against, any person or group of persons. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 13-1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-332. - Claim for Benefits. 
(a)  Advance Claim Required. In order to receive a benefit under this Pension Plan, a claim for benefits must be submitted, in writing, and shall be made on duly prescribed form containing the information required in this section. A claim for benefits must be filed before any benefits are payable. 
(b)  Information Required. All Participants and beneficiaries shall furnish such information as the Board of Trustees considers necessary or desirable for the purposes of administering the Pension Plan. This shall include the expected date of retirement of the Participant, the marital status and proof of date of marriage of the Participant, proof of age of the Participant and any designated beneficiaries, and date and proof of death if a claim is filed for a survivor annuity or a death benefit. If proof of age is not submitted as required, other information may be used as the Board of Trustees deems reliable. Any adjustment required by reason of lack of proof, or misstatement of age, shall be made in such a manner as the Board of Trustees deems equitable. Benefits provided under this Pension Plan are conditioned upon the furnishing of such true and complete information as may be needed. The Board of Trustees and any other persons involved in the administration of the Pension Plan shall be entitled to rely upon any certification, statement or representation made by a Participant or beneficiary with respect to age, marital status, death of the Participant, or other facts require to be determined under any of the provisions of the Pension Plan, and the Board of Trustees shall not be liable on account of the payment of any monies or the commission of any act or failure to act, in reliance thereon. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 13-2, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-333. - Multiple Claims Prohibited. 
Once a claim for pension benefits has been approved by the Board of Trustees, no further claims for a pension benefit shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 13-3, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-334. - Notification of Mailing Address. 
(a)  All Participants and beneficiaries shall file with the Board of Trustees, from time to time, in writing, their mailing address and each change of address. Failure to submit such mailing address may result in the payment of benefits being delayed. 
(b)  Any check representing payment hereunder, and any communication addressed to a Participant, beneficiary or other person, at the last address on the records of the Board of Trustees, shall be binding on such persons for all purposes of this Pension Plan. 
(c)  If the Board of Trustees is in doubt whether payments are being received by the person entitled thereto, it may notify such person, by certified mail at the last known address, that all payments of benefits shall be withheld until the Board of Trustees is provided such information as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 13-4, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-335. - Benefits Payable to Minors and Incompetents. 
(a)  Whenever any person entitled to payments under this Pension Plan shall be a minor, under a legal disability, or, in the sole judgment of the Board of Trustees, be otherwise unable to care for their affairs in their own best interest and advantage (whether because of illness, accident, incapacity or other mental or physical condition), the Board of Trustees may direct that all or any portion of such payments be made in any of the following ways (unless a claim has been made by a legal guardian, tutor, conservator, committee or other duly appointed legal representative, in which event payment shall be made to such representative): 
(1)  to the spouse, child, parent, or other blood relative, to be expended on behalf of the person (or on behalf of those dependents as to whom the person has the duty to support); or 
(2)  to a recognized charity or governmental institution to be expended for the benefit of the beneficiary (or for the benefit of those dependents as to whom the person has the duty to support); or 
(3)  to such other persons, organizations or institutions as the Board of Trustees deems appropriate to provide for the care and benefit of the person (or for the benefit of those dependents as to whom the person has the duty to support). 
(b)  The decision of the Board of Trustees shall be final and binding upon all persons. After such decision, the Board of Trustees shall not be obliged to see to the proper application or expenditures of any payments so made. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 13-5, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-336—40-350. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Claims, Notices and Inquiries 
 
Sec. 40-351. - Claims, Notices and Inquiries. 
All claims for benefits, elections for a specific form of benefit, notices of re-employment, notices of re-retirement, verifications of retirement, notices of mailing address, notices of appeal, and all other inquiries and matters concerning the Pension Plan shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees addressed as follows: 
Secretary 
Hialeah Gardens 
Hialeah Gardens Police Pension Plan 
10001 N.W. 87th Avenue 
Hialeah Gardens, Florida 33016 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 14-1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-352. - Response to Claims and Inquiries. 
All inquiries shall be answered promptly. The final decision for approval of benefits shall be made by the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 14-2, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-353. - Denial of Benefits. 
If any claim for benefits is denied, suspended, or terminated, in whole or in part then the claimant shall be furnished with a Notice of denial, suspension or termination no later than thirty (30) days after the final decision has been made. The Notice shall be provided in writing, by certified mail, and shall set forth: 
(1)  the specific reasons for the denial, suspension or termination of benefits; and 
(2)  the specific references to the pertinent provisions of the Pension Plan upon which the action is based and a copy of the Pension Plan provisions shall be furnished with this Notice; and 
(3)  a description of any additional material or information necessary for the claimant to perfect the claim, along with an explanation of why such material or information is necessary; and 
(4)  an explanation of the Claims Review Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 14-3, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-354. - Claims Review Procedure. 
(a)  Requests for Review. If a claim for benefits is denied, suspended or terminated, in whole or in part, then the claimant may appeal to the Board of Trustees for a full and fair review. In order to file an appeal, a written Notice of Appeal must be submitted within sixty (60) days after the Notice of denial, suspension or termination is received by the claimant (or such later time as the Board of Trustees deems reasonable). The Notice of Appeal shall briefly describe the grounds upon which the appeal is based on shall be signed by the claimant. The claimant shall be allowed to review all pertinent documents during normal business hours, and shall be permitted to submit comments and a statement of issues for consideration by the Board of Trustees. 
(b)  Representation. A claimant may designate an attorney, or any other duly authorized person, to act as his or her representative at any stage of the Claims Review Procedure. Any rights provided to the claimant during the Claims Review Procedure shall automatically extend to the representative designated by the claimant. A designation of representative shall be signed by the claimant and the representative, and shall be submitted in writing. 
(c)  Claims Review Board. The Board of Trustees shall rule on all appeals brought under this section. A decision to grant or deny an appeal shall be based solely on the record before the Board of Trustees, unless the Board of Trustees determines, in its sole discretion, that a hearing is necessary for the proper resolution of the appeal. The Board of Trustees shall decide, by majority vote, to grant or deny an appeal, the final decision shall be made by the Board of Trustees, in writing, and shall be made no later than sixty (60) days after receipt of the Notice of Appeal, unless special circumstances (such as the need for a hearing) require an extension of time. In no event, however, should the decision of the Board of Trustees be made later than one hundred twenty (120) days after receipt of the Notice of Appeal. If an appeal is denied, in whole or in part, then the decision shall set forth the specific reasons for the action, with specific references to those Pension Plan provisions upon which the decision is based. The claimant shall be promptly provided with a copy of this decision. The decision of the Board of Trustees shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 14-4, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-355. - Exhaustion of Claims Review Procedure. 
No action in law or in equity shall be brought to contest a denial, suspension or termination of benefits until the claimant has complied with the procedures provided in section 40-354 (Claims Review Procedure), unless the Board of Trustees fails to render a decision within one hundred twenty (120) days after receipt of the Notice of Appeal. In no case, however, shall any action be brought unless instituted within one (1) year from the time the claimant received the Notice of denial, suspension or termination provided in section 40-353 (Denial of Benefits). 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 14-5, 5-21-91)  
Secs. 40-356—40-370. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Funding 
 
Sec. 40-371. - Funding. 
The Plan shall be funded by contributions from Participants, contributions from the City of Hialeah Gardens and the amount derived from the premium taxes provided in F.S. § 185.08 and other income sources as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 15-1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-372. - Participant Contributions. 
All Participants shall make regular contributions at the rate of five (5) percent of earnings, which shall be deposited in the Fund each pay period. The City of Hialeah Gardens shall assume and pay Participant contributions in lieu of payroll deductions from Participants' earnings. No Participant shall have the option of choosing to receive the contributed amounts directly instead of having them paid by the City directly to the Plan. All such contributions by the City shall be deemed and considered as a part of the Participant's Accumulated Contributions and subject to all provisions of this Plan pertaining to Accumulated Contributions of Members. This City "pick up" of contributions is the result of a five (5) percent reduction of each Participant's base pay and of base pay levels which occurred on October 1, 1990 and is intended to comply with Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
If a Participant has not made contributions for any period of covered service, the Participant must pay retroactive contributions for that period in order to receive vesting credit for that period. Such retroactive contributions shall be made over a period of time equal to the period of time for which contributions were not made unless the Participant selects a shorter period. All retroactive contributions due must be paid in full prior to retirement. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 15-2, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 99-29, § 11, 11-16-99)  
Sec. 40-373. - State Contributions. 
The Fund shall receive the premium taxes collected and disbursed by the Florida Insurance Commissioner and Treasurer pursuant to [F.S. §§] 185.08 and 185.10, which monies shall be deposited into the Fund within five (5) days of receipt. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 15-3, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-374. - City Contributions. 
The City of Hialeah Gardens shall contribute to the Plan on at least a quarterly basis an amount which, together with the contributions derived from Participants and the amount derived from premium taxes and other income sources as authorized by law, will be sufficient to meet the normal cost of the Plan and to fund the actuarial deficiency over a period of not more than thirty (30) years. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 15-4, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-375. - Basis of Payments from the Pension Plan. 
All benefits and expenses shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of this Pension Plan and the Trust Agreement and consistent with Florida Statutes and the Internal Revenue Code.  
Secs. 40-376—40-390. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Miscellaneous 
 
Sec. 40-391. - Construction. 
The terms and conditions of this Pension Plan shall be construed subject to the purposes and provisions of the Ordinance and Declaration of Trust establishing the Plan, and subject to state law, the Internal Revenue Code and all other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 16-1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-392. - Standards of Proof. 
The Board of Trustees shall be the sole judge of the standards of proof required in any case. In the application and interpretation of this Pension Plan, the decisions of the Board of Trustees shall be final and binding on the Participants and beneficiaries, the City and all other persons. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 16-2, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-393. - Benefits Not Assignable. 
The right of any person to any payment under this Pension Plan shall not be subject to assignment, alienation or voluntary or involuntary transfer, and to the fullest extent permitted by law, shall not be subject to attachment, execution, garnishment, sequestration or other legal or equitable process; except the recipient of any monthly benefit may authorize the board of trustees to withhold from the monthly benefit those funds necessary to pay for the benefits being received through the city, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the city, and to make any payments for child support or alimony. Other than the withholding specifically permitted herein, if any person attempts to assign, transfer or dispose of such right, or if an attempt is made to subject such right to such process, such assignment, transfer or disposition shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 16-3, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 2004-31, § 1, 11-2-04)  
Sec. 40-394. - Forfeitures. 
Forfeitures and dividends shall not be used to increase the benefits that any Participant would otherwise receive under the Pension Plan at any time prior to the termination of the Pension Plan or the complete discontinuance of contributions to the Pension Plan, but shall be anticipated in determining the costs under the Pension Plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 16-4, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-395. - Merger. 
This Pension Plan shall not merge or consolidate with any other pension plan, nor transfer any assets or liabilities to any other pension plan, unless each Participant in this Pension Plan will receive a benefit immediately after such merger, consolidation or transfer (if the Pension Plan then terminated) which is at least equal to the benefit the Participant was entitled to immediately before such merger, consolidation or transfer (if the Pension Plan had terminated). 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 16-5, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-396. - Termination of Pension Plan. 
In the event of termination of the Pension Plan, the Board of Trustees shall follow the procedures contained in Florida Statutes, the Internal Revenue Code, and all other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 16-6, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-397. - Incorporation by Reference. 
This Pension Plan is maintained for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to Participants and beneficiaries, and is intended to satisfy all the requirements of Florida Statutes and the Internal Revenue Code. Except as specifically provided in this Pension Plan, no part of the funds shall revert to the City. In the event any requirements of such laws have been omitted, they shall be deemed to be incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 16-7, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 2017-14, § 6, 8-15-17)  
Sec. 40-398. - Amendment of Pension Plan. 
This Pension Plan may be amended at any time by vote of the Board of Trustees and the Hialeah Gardens City Council prospectively or retroactively, provided that such amendment complies with the Internal Revenue Code, Florida Statues, all other applicable laws, and the purposes as set forth in the Ordinance and Declaration of Trust. Additionally, and not by way of limitation, the City Council, upon the recommendation the Board of Trustees, may amend this Pension Plan when it is deemed necessary to maintain its tax exempt status, or to preserve compliance with the Internal Revenue Code, Florida Statutes, and all other applicable laws. However, no amendment which reduces the accrued benefits of any Participant shall take effect. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, Ch. II, § 16-8, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 40-399. - Federal Tax Provisions. 
(a)  USERRA. Notwithstanding any provision of this Pension Plan to the contrary, effective as of December 12, 1994, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to Qualified Military Service will be provided in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code, USERRA or Chapter 185, Florida Statutes, as applicable. 
(1)  Death Benefit. In the case of a death or disability occurring on or after January 1, 2007, if a participant dies while performing Qualified Military Service the survivors of the participant are entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of Qualified Military Service) provided under the plan as if the participant had resumed and then terminated employment by the City on account of death. 
(b)  Rollover of Distributions. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the Pension Plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at any time and in any manner prescribed by the Board of Trustees, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  DIRECT ROLLOVER. A payment by the Pension Plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. Effective as of January 1, 2008, a non-spouse Beneficiary may make a direct rollover only to an ""inherited"" individual retirement account as described in Section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. If a non-spouse Beneficiary receives a distribution from the plan, the distribution is not eligible for a 60-day (non-direct) rollover. 
(2)  DISTRIBUTEE. An employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse. Effective as of January 1, 2008, a Member's or former Member's non-spouse Beneficiary is a distributee with regard to the interest of the Member or former Member. 
(3)  ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN. An individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity account described in 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement plan described in Section 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. Effective for distributions made after December 31, 2001, an eligible retirement plan shall also mean an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code and an eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this Pension Plan. 
(4)  ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION. Any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income. 
(c)  Upon the termination of the Pension Plan or on the complete discontinuance of contributions under the Pension Plan, each Member shall have nonforfeitable, 100 percent vested rights to benefits accrued to date of the termination or discontinuance to the extent funded at that time. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, a Member's benefits shall commence no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of (i) the calendar year in which he or she attains age 70½ or (ii) the calendar year in which he or she retires (the "Required Beginning Date"). All distributions from the Pension Plan (including the DROP) shall conform to the regulations issued under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code, including the incidental death benefit provision of Section 401(a)(9)(G) of the Internal Revenue Code. Further, such regulation shall override any plan or DROP provision that is inconsistent with Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Pension Plan, the retirement benefit of a member shall be reduced to the extent that is exceeds amounts specified in Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(f)  Differential Wage Payments. For years beginning after December 31, 2008, (i) an individual receiving a differential wage payment, as defined in Section 3401(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code, shall be treated as an employee of the employer making the payment, (ii) the differential wage payment shall be treated as compensation, and (iii) the plan shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of any provision described in Section 414(u)(1)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code by reason of any contribution or benefit which is based on the differential wage payment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 6-2-15; Ord. No. 2017-14, § 7, 8-15-17)  
Sec. 40-400. - Share Plan Established. 
(a)  The City of Hialeah Gardens Police Pension Trust Fund Share Plan (hereinafter "Share Plan") is hereby established. The purpose is to implement the provisions of F.S. ch. 185, and to provide a mechanism to pay required "special benefits" pursuant to F.S. § 185.35. The Share Plan may be funded exclusively with available premium tax revenue received from the State of Florida pursuant to F.S. ch. 185 and shall be in addition to the monthly defined benefit payable by the City of Hialeah Gardens Police Pension Trust Fund. The Share Plan shall be administered by the Board of Trustees of the City of Hialeah Gardens Police Pension Trust Fund (hereinafter the "Fund"). 
(b)  Rule-Making Authority. The Board of Trustees of the Fund shall be authorized to adopt any rules necessary for the administration of the Share Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, § 1, 8-15-17)  
Chapter 42 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq.; utilities, ch. 54; removal of construction waste and debris required, § 58-41; zoning regulations for collection, recycling and processing facilities, § 78-176. 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless otherwise provided, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City approved collector means an entity which has contracted with the city to provide garbage and trash collection within the city limits. 
Commercial establishments means any hotel, motel, apartment house, roominghouse, or tourist court which contains three or more service units, and any other building, business, or establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a residential unit. 
Container means a galvanized metal, durable plastic, or other suitable material container of the type commonly sold as a garbage can, having a tightfitting metal or plastic top with handle, a waterproof bottom, and constructed so as to permit the free discharge of its contents. 
Garbage means every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storage of edibles, and any other matter of any nature whatsoever which is subject to decay, putrefaction, and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies or other germ-carrying insects or as an attraction to animals. 
Garbage can means a plastic or galvanized metal container of the type commonly sold as a garbage can, of a capacity not less than 20 gallons and not to exceed 30 gallons, unless otherwise issued by the city, having two handles upon the sides thereof, or a bail by which it may be lifted, and a tight fitting metal or plastic top with handle, and so constructed as to permit the free discharge of it contents. 
Garden trash means all accumulations of leaves, grass, shrubbery, cuttings, and other refuse attending the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines, and trees. 
Health nuisance means any condition which exists and affects or could affect the state of being hale, sound or whole in body or mind of any resident of the city or relates to a sanitary condition or infectious or deleterious health influence. 
Health officer means a person appointed by the mayor, ratified by the city council, who may be a building official or code compliance officer. 
Industrial wastes means the waste products of canneries, slaughterhouses, or packing plants, condemned food products, agricultural waste products, wastes and debris from brick, concrete block, roofing shingle or tile plants, debris and wastes accumulated from land clearing, excavation, building, rebuilding, and altering of buildings, structures, roads, streets, sidewalks, or parkways, and any waste materials which, because of their volume or nature, do not lend themselves to collection and incineration commingled with ordinary garbage and trash, or which, because of their nature or surrounding circumstances, should be, for reasons of safety and health, disposed of more often than the city collection service schedule provided for in this chapter. 
Mobile container means a garbage and waste container which is flyproof, ratproof, and leakproof, and which shall be fitted with covers. The container shall be mounted on four wheels or metal slides and be capable of fitting hydraulic attachments for unloading. 
Noncombustible refuse means refuse materials that are unburnable at ordinary incinerator temperatures (800 degrees to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit) such as metals, mineral matter, large quantities of glass or crockery, metal furniture, auto bodies or parts, and other similar materials or refuse not usual to housekeeping or to operation of stores or offices. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag with securing twist-tie. 
Residential unit means any structure or shelter or any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one family. 
Rubbish means refuse, accumulations of paper, excelsior, rags, or wooden or paper boxes or containers, sweepings, and all other accumulations of a nature, other than garbage, which are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of stores, offices, and other business places; also, any bottles, cans, or other containers which, due to their ability to retain water, may serve as breeding places for mosquitoes or other water-breeding insects. Such term shall not include noncombustible refuse, as defined in this section. 
Service unit means four sleeping rooms, or a fraction thereof, where no cooking privileges are provided, located in any commercial establishment. 
Trash means items or material, other than so defined as garbage in this section, of a nonperishable nature. 
Waste means garbage, rubbish, garden trash, noncombustible refuse, and industrial wastes, as defined in this section. 
(Code 1985, § 94.01; Ord. No. 90-71, § 1, 7-21-92; Ord. No. 93-01, § 1, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 2005-53, § 2, 11-15-05) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 42-2. - Garbage containers. 
(a)  No person shall leave for street side pickup any garbage unless contained in a container as that term is defined in section 42-1. No person shall leave for street side pickup any trash unless contained in a container or plastic bag as those terms are defined in section 42-1. Persons desirous of having garbage or trash picked up by collection services shall place the garbage or trash in an area designated by the collection service on the morning of the scheduled collection date. 
(b)  Each commercial establishment located in the city shall have a sufficient number of garbage cans to accommodate all garbage and waste to be removed by the city or other approved agency and each residential unit in the city shall have a minimum of one garbage can for that purpose. Collection service may be discontinued where containers have been condemned as unfit for garbage receptacles until proper containers are provided, and the owners or users thereof may be subject to the provisions of section 1-16. Garbage cans shall be kept tightly covered at all times, shall be capable of being closed so that water, flies, and other insects cannot enter, and shall be easily accessible to the refuse collectors on the property from which the refuse originated. All garbage which is placed therein shall be thoroughly drained of all liquid matter and well wrapped in paper before being placed in the garbage can or mobile container. 
(c)  Where an alley exists and is normally used for the collection of garbage, garbage cans shall be placed on the owner's property as near to the alley as is practicable. If no alley exists, or use of the alley is not practical by reason of the existence of physical obstacles to the placement of the garbage can or mobile container on the edge of the alley, the garbage can or mobile container shall be placed at a point to be designated by the director of the sanitation department. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to place or cause to be placed in a garbage can or refuse container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids, or any dangerous or highly corrosive material of any kind. 
(Code 1985, § 94.02)  
Sec. 42-3. - Transportation of waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, convey, or cause to be hauled or conveyed any waste including discarded building material or discarded furniture upon or along public streets, roads, or alleys except when the material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent the material from falling or being blown from the transporting vehicle. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person not holding a valid contract under this chapter to haul any garbage or rubbish within any area of the city in which waste collection service is maintained by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 94.04)  
Sec. 42-4. - Garbage collection and disposal. 
No person shall remove garbage or waste from any premises in the city or transport garbage or waste through the streets, alleys, or public ways of the city to dump, incinerate, or in any other manner dispose of garbage or waste originating within the limits of the city, or contract for or permit himself to be employed or engaged for such removal, transportation, or disposal, without first having secured a contract and approval for such services from the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 94.05(A))  
Sec. 42-5. - Duty of owner and tenant. 
(a)  Accumulations prohibited. It shall be the duty of the owner and the tenant of each lot, tract or parcel of land, residence, commercial establishment or other property within the city limits to prevent the continued excessive and unsightly accumulation of garbage, garden trash, or other types of trash, waste, rubbish, construction debris or refuse upon the property owned or occupied by the owner. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Collection service required. It shall be the duty of the owner and the tenant of each occupied lot, residence, commercial establishment, parcel of land or other property within the city limits to obtain regular garbage and trash collection services from the city-approved collector. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 94.06; Ord. No. 90-71, § 2, 7-21-92; Ord. No. 93-01, § 2, 4-6-93)  
Sec. 42-6. - Garden rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place garden trash and rubbish on public or private property, except in the rear of the property and adjoining existing alleys, or if no alleys exist, then at some place on the property previously designated by the director of the sanitation department as being a place from which trash will be collected. 
(Code 1985, § 94.07)  
Sec. 42-7. - Rubbish accumulations prohibited; nuisance. 
Any person who shall suffer or permit any filth, straw, hay, excelsior, rubbish, paper, trash, dry goods, boxes, building material of an inflammable nature, building material from any building, or any other materials that are offensive to the public health, or are a menace to the public welfare, either by reason of the danger of fire or otherwise, to be or remain upon the premises of the person or upon the streets, avenues, or alleys adjoining the premises, shall be deemed guilty of keeping and maintaining a nuisance. 
(Code 1985, § 94.08)  
Sec. 42-8. - Bringing garbage, rubbish into city. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or cause to be brought into the corporate limits of the city any waste materials described in subsection (b) of this section for the purpose of depositing, burning, or dumping such waste materials, or for any reason whatever not expressly approved by the city council and so expressly licensed with the purposes spelled out completely on the license. Any license issued by the city is limited to those express purposes so noted on the license. A new license must be secured upon approval of the city council for any purposes falling under sections 42-8 through 42-11 not encompassed within the terms and express wording of any previous license issued. Any license issued by the city is expressly limited to those purposes so noted on the license. Any act encompassed within sections 42-8 through 42-11 and not expressly noted on any license issued is a violation of sections 42-8 through 42-11 and is punishable as such. 
(b)  Those matters and materials encompassed under this section which are forbidden to be brought or caused to be brought into the city limits are waste materials including but not limited to trash, garbage, cuttings, compost, stumps, old boards, lumber, wood, tires, garbage, or any materials allied with or atypical of these materials. This section shall apply to any person, including any agent or employee, who shall be found violating this section within the corporate limits of the city. This section further applies to any person who shall cause others to violate or come within the purview and terms of sections 42-8 through 42-11. 
(Code 1985, § 94.09)  
Sec. 42-9. - Dumping, burning, or abandoning garbage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited within the city limits for the purpose of dumping, burning, abandoning, storing, or filling therein, without express approval of the city, any materials known or designated as waste material, without the express consent and licensing by the city council. Any such license issued shall be expressly limited to the purposes noted on the license. For the purposes of this section, waste materials shall include but are not limited to trash, refuse, cuttings, compost, garbage, abandoned materials, stumps, old boards, wood, tires, garbage, or any other materials allied with or atypical of these materials. 
(Code 1985, § 94.10)  
Sec. 42-10. - Clean fill. 
Sections 42-8 through 42-11 expressly exempt, for the purposes of filling, only that fill known as clean fill, which under these sections means dirt, sand, brick, hard stone and other materials, but not including abandoned automobiles, which are not subject to decomposition. 
(Code 1985, § 94.11)  
Sec. 42-11. - Use of premises as dump. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, use, or allow to be operated or used such person's premises so as to constitute a dump within the city limits. For the purposes of sections 42-8 through 42-11 it is not necessary that a dump indicate payment given or received by the person operating or allowing to be operated the premises in the manner of a dump. It is sufficient under these sections that the premises are in fact being used for dumping purposes. This section, as well as section 42-9, shall apply to any agent, servant, or employee of any of the landowners or persons causing the violation of sections 42-8 through 42-11. The prosecution or arrest of any agent, servant, or employee of any person allowing or causing the violation of sections 42-8 through 42-11 shall not render that person above the application of these sections but such person may be arrested or prosecuted in addition to the agent, servant, or employee. 
(Code 1985, § 94.12)  
Sec. 42-12. - Trash receptacles required at construction sites. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Receptacle means a container wherein trash can be received and contained, and containing a bottom, four sides, and a top. 
Trash means rubbish, waste, or refuse as is normally found at construction sites. 
(b)  If in the opinion of the building inspector or code compliance officer a condition exists at any construction site wherein trash is not self-contained, then and in that event, the building inspector or code compliance officer, as the case may be, may by written notice to the general contractor, person or entity whose name appears on the building permit, given by mail or personal delivery, advise the person or entity that such trash must be placed in a receptacle as defined in this section. 
(c)  If, within ten days after the notice is deposited in the U.S. mail, or within seven days after the notice is personally delivered, the general contractor, person or entity whose name appears on the building permit should fail to comply with the notice, the building inspector or code compliance officer, as the case may be, shall notify the city council of such failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the notice. The general contractor, person or entity whose name appears on the building permit shall be notified in writing, by mail or personal delivery, of the fact that there has not been compliance with this section and shall at the next regular council meeting, but no sooner than ten days from the mailing of the notice, or seven days from personal delivery of the notice, appear before the council to show cause why the penalty provision, as set forth in this section, should not be invoked. 
(d)  If there is a violation of this section, the city council may revoke the building permit issued and prohibit further construction at the construction site wherein the violation exists, until this section is complied with. 
(Code 1985, § 94.13)  
Sec. 42-13. - Garbage, rubbish, and trash prohibited in Samari Lake. 
(a)  The placing, keeping, maintaining, or storing on or in Samari Lake of garbage, garden trash, industrial waste, rubbish, abandoned boats or boat parts, and abandoned vehicles or vehicle parts is prohibited. 
(b)  If there is found on or in Samari Lake garbage, garden trash, industrial waste, rubbish, abandoned boats or boat parts, or abandoned vehicles or vehicle parts, the owner of that portion of Samari Lake wherein the garbage, garden trash, industrial waste, rubbish, abandoned boats or boat parts, or abandoned vehicles or vehicle parts are found shall be given notice of the existence of the condition by registered mail addressed to the owner or owners as their names and addresses appear upon the city tax roll, or at the option of the city may be personally given notice. The notice shall specifically set forth the nature of the condition as it exists, a request for removing or abating the condition within a period of 20 days from the date of the notice to remove the condition, and a statement that if in fact the condition is not abated or removed within 20 days, the city will proceed to remedy the condition, and that if the city does in fact undertake to remedy and abate the condition, that the cost of the work, including all administrative costs and other expenses related to abating or remedying the condition, constitutes a lien on the property if not otherwise paid within 30 days after mailing of a notice setting forth the amount due. 
(Code 1985, § 94.14)  
Sec. 42-14. - Scavenging of recyclable materials; theft of recycling containers. 
(a)  In accordance with the state recycling mandates, the city has established a curbside recycling program for certain areas of the city, in compliance with the 1988 Florida Solid Waste Management and Recycling Statute. The purpose of this section is to encourage recycling activities and to promote the development of a comprehensive recycling program within the city. 
(b)  From the time of placement of recyclable materials for collection, such materials shall become the property of the city or its authorized agents. No person shall be permitted to collect or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any recyclable material which has been placed in curbside recycling containers at any residential, commercial, or industrial property, unless with the prior written consent of the city. 
(c)  No person shall be permitted to collect or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any recycling container placed at any residential property, unless with the prior written consent of the city. 
(d)  This section may be enforced in accordance with F.S. ch. 162, pt. 1 (Local Government Code Enforcement Boards), or F.S. ch. 162, pt. 2 (Supplemental County or Municipal Code or Ordinance Enforcement Procedures). 
(e)  Revenues derived from funds resulting from this section shall be utilized to develop the city's recycling program. 
(f)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-16. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § 1(94.15), 4-16-91; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01)  
Sec. 42-15. - Security deposit. 
All commercial establishments that are users of solid waste (garbage and waste) and/or recycling services of the city shall be required by the city to post a security deposit with the city to secure payment for such services. The amount of the security deposit and the time and method by which it shall be paid shall be set by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 1, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 42-16. - Termination of water and sewer service. 
The water and sewer department is authorized to terminate the water and sewer service to any garbage and waste (solid waste) and/or recycling customer who is delinquent in payment of solid waste and/or recycling charges, in accordance with the procedure as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 2, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 42-17. - Procedure for termination of water and sewer service. 
Delinquent solid waste and/or recycling customers will be provided a written statement to the effect that water service will be terminated for delinquent solid waste and recycling charges. The written notice provided such customer shall apprise such customer that, upon request, the city clerk or his designee will set a hearing before the council and notify the customer of the time and place of said hearing to consider any complaint of erroneous or incorrect billing and to review any disputed bill and to rectify any error. The decision of the council shall be final and binding. If such customer either fails for a period of ten days from receipt of notice to pay the outstanding bill, or to seek such hearing or fails to pay any sum determined to be properly due as a result of such procedures within ten days from the council's determination, such water and sewer service to such customer in arrears shall be immediately disconnected and shall not be reconnected until all past due bills for solid waste and/or recycling charges are paid in full, together with any reconnection charge. All notices shall be mailed by certified mail or posted at the address where the solid waste and/or recycling bills are sent, provided any solid waste and/or recycling customers may, by writing provided to the city clerk, designate another address for such writing. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 3, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 42-18. - Other remedies related to delinquencies. 
The above stated remedy for the collection of delinquencies is in addition to all other remedies provided for by the solid waste collection provider franchise agreement and the City Code. The water and sewer department may promulgate rules and regulations consistent with the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 4, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 42-19. - Fee for collection of recyclables. 
There shall be imposed a fee of $1.50 per month for each single-family dwelling as a charge for the collection and disposing of recyclable matter. Such fee shall, at the option of the city, be added to and made a part of either the waste and trash bill or the water and sewer bill applicable to such single family dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 98-08, § 1, 2, 6-16-98)  
Chapter 46 - TAXATION AND FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Financial matters, art. IV. 
State Law reference— Finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; adoption of budget, F.S. § 200.065. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Additional homestead exemption for qualifying senior citizens. 
(a)  According to section 6 Article VII of the Florida Constitution and F.S. § 196.075 any person 65 years or over who has legal or equitable title to real estate located within the city and maintains thereon his or her permanent residence which qualifies for and receives homestead exemption pursuant to section 6(f), Article VII of the Florida Constitution and whose household income does not exceed $27,030.00 shall be entitled to make application for an additional homestead equal to the assessed value of the property to an owner who has title to real estate in Florida with a just value less than $250,000.00, has maintained permanent residence on the property for not less than 25 years, is 65 or older and whose household income does not exceed the income limitation. 
(b)  Every person claiming the additional homestead exemption provided herein must file an application with the Miami-Dade Property Appraiser not later than March 1 of each year for which such exemption is claimed. Such application shall include a sworn statement of household income for all members of the household and shall be filed on a form prescribed by the Florida Department of Revenue. On or before June 1 of each such year every applicant must file supporting documentation with the county property appraiser. The documentation shall include copies of all federal income tax returns, wages and earning statements and such other documentation as required by the county property appraiser and the Florida Department of Revenue including documentation necessary to verify the income received by all of the members of the household for the prior year. 
(c)  Failure to file the application and sworn statement by March 1 or failure to file the required supporting documentation by June 1 of any given year shall constitute a waiver of the additional exemption privilege for that year. 
(d)  This additional exemption shall be available commencing with the year 2001 tax roll. 
(e)  Commencing January 1, 2002 and each January 1 thereafter, the $20,000 annual income limitation provided herein shall be adjusted annually and applicable as of January 1 of that year. The annual income limitation shall be adjusted by the percentage of change in the average cost-of-living index calendar year for the immediately prior to that year. As used herein "index" shall be the average of the monthly consumer price index figures for the stated period for the United States as a whole issued by the United States Department of Labor. 
(f)  City retains the right to conduct a periodic audit to verify compliance if the city is not satisfied with county or state verification of eligible property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2001-18, § 1, 11-6-01; Ord. No. 2012-38, § 2, 12-18-12; Ord. No. 2012-39, § 1, 12-18-12)  
Secs. 46-2—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, adopted Sept. 16, 2009, amended Art. II title as herein set out. Former Art. II title pertained to occupational licenses. Section 3 of Ord. No. 98-35, adopted Jan. 5, 1999, repealed §§ 46-32—46-50 and reenacted §§ 46-32—46-73 as herein set out. Formerly, §§ 46-32—46-50 pertained to same subject matter and derived from §§ 113.01—113.02(A)—(C), 113.05—113.07(A), 113.08—113.16, 113.18, 113.20(A)—(C) of the 1985 Code; § 1 of Ord. No. 90-24, adopted Aug. 28, 1990; §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 92-02, adopted Sept. 28, 1992; §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 90-27, adopted Nov. 27, 1990; § 1 of Ord. No. 93-17, adopted Nov. 16, 1993; § 1 of Ord. No. 94-02, adopted Apr. 19, 1994; and §§ 1—3 of Ord. No. 95-11, adopted July 18, 1995. 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18; permitted uses allowable in certain areas, § 78-131. 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Levy. 
The city council does hereby levy a local business tax for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession, or occupation within the city. The local business tax is levied on: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within the city. 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within the city. 
(3)  Any person who does not qualify under subsection (1) or subsection (2) and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce, if the license tax is not prohibited by section 8, article I of the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-32. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:] 
Accessory use means a use incidental to, and on the same lot as a principal one. 
Alley means a minor way not intended for general traffic circulation which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Amusement arcade means a building or a part of a building in which five or more pinball machines, video games, or other similar player-operated amusement devices are maintained. 
Automobile wrecking yard (See also "junkyard") means a site at which the dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts takes place. 
Business, profession or occupation defined as (insert definition). The aforementioned does not include the customary religious, charitable or educational activities of nonprofit religious, nonprofit charitable and nonprofit educational institutions in this state; which institutions are more particularly defined and limited as follows: 
Religious institutions shall mean churches and ecclesiastical or denominational organizations, church cemeteries or established physical places for worship in this state at which nonprofit religious services and activities are regularly conducted and carried on, and who have registered with the state and have been approved as not-for-profit organizations by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States. 
Educational institutions shall mean state tax-supported or parochial, church, and nonprofit private schools, colleges or universities conducting regular classes and courses of study required for accreditation by or membership in the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, Department of Education or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. Nonprofit libraries, art galleries, and museums open to the public are defined as educational institutions and eligible for exemption, if in compliance with state and federal laws and regulations for not-for-profit organizations. 
Charitable institutions shall mean only nonprofit corporations operating physical facilities, registered with the state, and approved by the Internal Revenue Service, at which charitable services are provided, and a reasonable percentage of which shall be without cost to those unable to pay. 
Business district. See: Land Development Regulations. 
Chief zoning and code compliance official means a designated authority, charged with the administration and enforcement of the local business tax receipt department and this Code. He or she shall not be removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has been given to be heard on specific charges before each applicable governing authority. 
Code compliance officer means an authorized employee of the city whose duty it is to assure code compliance; See Ordinance No. 97-21. 
Concurrency is a condition where specified facilities and services have or will have the necessary capacity to the adopted level of service standards at the time of impact of the development project. 
Commercial district. See: Land development regulations. 
District means a portion of the territory of the city, exclusive of streets and other public ways, within which certain uses of land, premises, and buildings are not permitted. 
Drive-in facility means any portion of a building or structure from which business is transacted, or is capable of being transacted, directly with customers located in a motor vehicle during such business transactions. 
Garage, repair means a building designed and used for the storage, care, repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles including both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint, and body work (see also service station). 
Home occupation. See: Land development regulations. 
Junkyard means a parcel of land or structure on which waste material or inoperative vehicles and other machinery are collected, stored, salvaged, or sold. 
Kennel means an establishment licensed to operate a facility housing dogs, cats, or other household pets and where grooming, breeding, training, or selling animals is conducted as a business. 
Land use district. See: land development regulations. 
License or valid license is a license that was properly issued for a period of time that has not yet expired, that has not been revoked, was not obtained by providing wrong/false information in the application and that in being used exclusively for the classification for which it was issued. 
New business is that for which a license is issued for the first time, whose owner or owners did not operate a business of the classification in the city prior to the issuing of such license. Change of ownership of a place of business, even if the new owner(s) did not have a previous license in Hialeah Gardens, shall not be considered a new business for the purpose of exemption of part or a total of the license fee. 
Nightclub means a commercial establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and in which dancing is permitted and includes the term "cabaret." Also bar, restaurant, coffeehouse, or similar establishment where a dance floor or entertainment is provided. 
Nonconforming building means any building that does not meet the limitations on building size and location on a lot, for the district in which such building is located. 
Nonconforming use means a lawful use of land that does not comply with the use regulations for its land use district but which complied with applicable regulations at the time the use was established. 
Owner means any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property, and responsibility for any violation in the property. 
Parking space for business or commercial district, see the Land Development Regulations. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, association, corporation, estate, trusts, business trust, trustee, executor, administrator, receiver or other fiduciary and shall include the plural as well as the singular. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by. See: Land Development Regulations. 
Sign. See: Land Development Regulations. 
Site plan means a document or group of documents, in blue or black print containing sketches, text, drawings, maps, photographs, and other material intended to present and explain certain elements of proposed development, including physical design, siting of buildings and structures, interior vehicular and pedestrian access, the provision of improvements, and the interrelationship of these elements. 
Special exception uses. See: Land Development Regulations. 
Variance means a relaxation of the technical regulations of the code where such action will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of actions or the situation of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this code would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the district or uses in an adjoining district. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.01), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-33. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in or manage any business, profession, service or occupation, for which a local business tax receipt and fee are required in this Code in the City of Hialeah Gardens, without first obtaining a certificate of use and such license and paying the required fee except for those exempt businesses, professions and occupations as defined in section 46-34. 
(b)  Separate licenses will be required for each place of business or by each separate classification of business at the same location. 
(c)  All persons must comply with the fee schedule by paying the certificate of use prior to being issued a local business tax receipt. If a certificate of use has been issued by the zoning department, the applicant must pay an annual renewal fee for zoning inspection. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.02), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-34. - Application. 
(a)  The applicant will file an application for certificate of use using the form prescribed by the local business tax receipt department and such license will not be issued unless all applicable required information, review and approvals are provided with the application. In cases in which the approval of a governing agency is required the applicant shall also file proof of approval from such governing agency. 
(b)  Every person engaged in or managing any business, profession, service or occupation in the City of Hialeah Gardens referred to in this article, is required to procure a city license as herein provided and shall, on or before October 1 of each year, and always before engaging in any business, profession, service or occupation, file an application on the prescribed form with the local business tax receipt department, signed by an officer, partner, or owner of the business. 
(c)  All licenses shall be applied for and issued in the real name of the applicant. In cases where the applicant has qualified under Florida laws for the use of a "fictitious name," the license, if issued, shall show the real name as well as the "fictitious" name of the applicant. In such application, the applicant shall set forth the name of the owner; if a firm, the names of all members of the firm; if a corporation, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all officers of the corporation; the location of the business, the full nature of the business, additional information or approvals as prescribed in the application and the certificate of use; where the fee is based on inventory, number of vehicles, seats, employees, gasoline pumps, apartments units, trailers, square footage or any other unit used as base for the calculation of the license or regulation established by the local business tax receipt department. 
(d)  The code compliance department will inspect the business premises to verify other information in the application such as numbers of vehicles, seats, employees, gasoline pumps, apartments units, trailers, square footage or other units used in the calculations of the license fee, declared by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.03), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-35. - Reciprocity. 
Any person who has obtained a professional certification license by or through examination by the Department of Professional Regulation, State of Florida and has obtained a Certificate of Competency in Dade County, Florida, which has requirements similar to those in the various provisions of this Code of Ordinances and other ordinances of the City of Hialeah Gardens with respect to the issuance and granting of license for the several business or occupations, may, without the formality of an examination, be granted a certificate or license by reciprocity, upon the payment of the local business tax receipt fee or charge applicable to such business or occupation. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.04), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-36. - Determination of classification and applicable fee. 
In the event of disagreement between the applicant and the city on the question of proper classification of any business, occupation, profession, service for license purpose, the chief zoning and code compliance official shall decide the proper classification. 
Any person who wishes to appeal any decision of the local business tax receipt department, will have the right to appear before the city council, provided a petition is made, in writing, to the city clerk, within ten working days of the notification of the determination by the local business tax receipt department. 
The provisions of this section, does not include matters pertaining to code compliance or to notice of violations, civil citations or code compliance board orders. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.05), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-37. - Term and duration fractions and transfer of the local business tax receipt. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, licenses shall expire on the thirtieth day of September. Those licenses not renewed by October first, shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October plus an additional five percent for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid; provided that the total delinquency fee shall not exceed 25 percent of the yearly local business tax receipt fee for the delinquent establishment. 
(b)  When a person applies after receiving a civil citation by a City of Hialeah Gardens Code compliance officer for opening a business without first obtaining a local business tax receipt, the code compliance department is hereby authorized to charge an administrative fee of $250.00 to any individual or entity that fails to comply with any provisions of this article. The fee of $250.00 will be additional to the 25 percent of delinquency fee. 
(c)  No license shall be issued for more than one year. 
(d)  All licenses provided for herein, shall be issued for and apply to only one place of business in the City of Hialeah Gardens. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.06), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, adopted Sept. 16, 2008, amended § 46-37 as herein set out. Former § 46-37 pertained to term and duration fractions and transfer of the occupational license. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 46-38. - License for fractional part of the year. 
Unless otherwise provided, new licenses obtained between November first and September thirtieth, will pay one-twelfth of the yearly fee for every month between the month of issue and September inclusive of both the months in which the license is issued and the month of September. Except that when new licenses are issued between September first and September thirtieth, applicants are required to pay for the September fraction of that year's license and the full fee of the license for the license year to begin the following October first. When a person applies after receiving a civil citation for opening a business without first obtaining a local business tax receipt, no fractional fee license will be issued, regardless of the opening date. A full year's fee plus penalties will be required. New application between May first and September first will pay half of the yearly fee. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.07), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-39. - Transfer of location, ownership or change of name. 
(a)  All business licenses may be transferred to a new owner when there is a bona fide sale of the business, upon payment of transfer fee of $25.00 provided such original license has not been revoked or invalidated by actions of the previous owners or decision of the Hialeah Gardens City Council, Miami-Dade County or the State of Florida, except in cases prohibited by ordinance. 
(b)  Upon the written request and presentation to the local business tax receipt department, the original license and evidence of sale (such as, but not limited to, bill of sale, warranty deed and others.) Any license may be transferred from one location to another location in the same land use district of the City of Hialeah Gardens by the same licensee upon payment of transfer fee of $25.00. 
(c)  Licenses issued may be transferred subject, to the following conditions: 
(1)  The seller of the business shall present the license to the local business tax receipt department with the endorsement on the reverse side thereof, assigning all right, title, and interest to the purchaser; 
(2)  The purchaser shall file an application for a license, and shall qualify in all respects as provided by law, and by the provisions of this article and ordinances of the City of Hialeah Gardens as an applicant for a license, as if he had applied for the license in the first instance; 
(3)  A fee shall be paid to the City of Hialeah Gardens in connection with the transfer, amounting to ten percent of the amount that would have been required as a license tax had the purchaser, independent of the transfer, commenced business on the date of the transfer. In those cases where a special investigation of the transferee is required, a minimum fee of $25.00 shall be paid in addition to the transfer fee; 
(4)  Where the licensee has been exempted from payment of all or any part of the license tax therefor, the license shall not be transferable under this section; 
(5)  In the case of alcoholic beverage licenses, it shall require the approval of the chief zoning and code compliance officer and the Hialeah Gardens City Council. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.08), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-40. - Posting of license. 
(a)  Every license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. The holder of any license shall exhibit it to the City of Hialeah Gardens Code Compliance Officer, county inspector, state inspector or any law enforcement officer upon being requested to do so by any of them. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the posting of the license shall be punishable with a payment of a fine of $50.00 and shall not excuse any further failure to comply with the provisions of this section or any amendment thereto. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.09), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01)  
Sec. 46-41. - Multiple licenses at one location. 
(a)  When activities are carried out at the same location that are of a different classification, not necessary to the operation of the business for which a license was issued, a license is required for each business even if conducted under a single ownership. 
(b)  Every person operating what is commonly known as a "sublease" in any store shall pay a license fee for the operation of each business so leased according to the proper classification of the business or occupation as set forth therein. 
(c)  When several owners conduct business at the same location, or operate what is commonly known as a "sublease" in store, business must obtain a certificate of use from zoning. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.10), 1-5-99)  
Sec. 46-42. - Termination on notice of bankruptcy. 
When any person engaged in mercantile or other business in the City of Hialeah Gardens shall make an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or when that person is adjudicated a voluntary or an involuntary bankruptcy or declared insolvent, any license theretofore issued authorizing the person to do business in the city, shall immediately be terminated and, upon the assignment for the benefit of creditors or upon the adjudication in bankruptcy, immediately become null and void. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.11), 1-5-99)  
Sec. 46-43. - Suspension and revocation of local business tax receipt. 
The city council shall either revoke or temporarily suspend the license of any person when it is, determined by the city that: 
(1)  The licensee misrepresented or failed to disclose material information required by this article to be included in the license application form or presented upon request of the license department. 
(2)  The licensee, as part of the licensee's business activity within the city, is engaged in conduct, which is an actual threat to the public health, welfare or safety. 
(3)  Habitual conduct by licensee, his employee or patrons has occurred at the licensee's premises, which violates city, county, state or federal law. Habitual conduct is understood as frequent need for police, code compliance departments of the City of Hialeah Gardens and Metro-Dade Fire to act at the premises because of such conduct. Frequent is deemed to be more than three times a year. 
(4)  The license issued by the city depended upon the licensee's compliance with specific provisions of federal, state, county law or city ordinance or resolution and the licensee has violated such specific provisions of law. 
(5)  The licensee has violated any provision of this article and has failed or refused to cease or correct the violation after notification thereof. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.12), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, adopted Sept. 16, 2008, amended § 46-43 as herein set out. Former § 46-43 pertained to suspension and revocation of occupation licenses. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 46-44. - Standards/rule-making authority/penalties. 
A suspension not exceeding six months may be imposed in cases where the licensee's violation is shown to be inadvertent and can be promptly corrected by the licensee; a revocation of the license shall be imposed in all other cases. The procedures for insuring the closing of an establishment whose license is revoked, will be in the following terms described as follows: 
The chief zoning and code compliance official will issue a "cease and desist" order allowing reasonable time, but not less than five working days for compliance, after which, the city will initiate legal proceedings to insure the closing of the place of business and/or arrest of violators if continued to operate without a valid license. These actions may include impounding of vehicles, equipment, and other property as well as placing liens to insure the recovery of fees, penalties, fines and legal costs. 
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine, not exceeding $500.00 per day for a first time violation or $500.00 dollars per day as a result of a repeat violation. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.13), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01) 
State Law reference— Delinquent penalties, F.S. § 205.053.  
Sec. 46-45. - Hearing when licensee or permittee fails to comply with notice. 
If a licensee or permittee fails to comply with any notice issued, an order in writing to the licensee will be sent by certified mail, notifying the licensee to appear before an administrative officer as specified in Ordinance No. 97-21 at a time to be fixed in such order, which date shall be not less than five days after service thereof. In the event a licensee fails to comply with a lawful order of the city, code compliance master may as per Ordinance No. 97-21, order the closing of the offending business and enforce this order by action of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.14), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01)  
Sec. 46-46. - False statements. 
Any license obtained under the provisions of this article upon a misrepresentation of a material fact shall be deemed null and void and the licensee, who has thereafter engaged in any business under such license, shall be subject to prosecution for conducting business without a valid local business tax receipt, to the same effect and degree as though such license had never been issued. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.15), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-47. - Replacing lost or destroyed licenses. 
For the purpose of replacing any mutilated, destroyed, or lost Hialeah Gardens local business tax receipt, certificate of use, decal or receipt relating to any local business tax receipt granted by the city. The chief zoning and code compliance official is hereby authorized and empowered to cause to be executed and delivered an appropriate duplicate license certificate or receipt, upon the submission of evidence satisfaction the chief zoning and code compliance official that the original certificate or receipt was mutilated, destroyed or lost, and upon the holder of such mutilated, destroyed or lost license furnishing the city with indemnity satisfactory to the licenses department and upon the payment of a fee of $20.00 for each such duplicate, such duplicate, such sum being hereby declared to be a reasonable amount to reimburse the city for the expense incidental to executing and delivering each such duplicate license certificate, decal or receipt. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.16), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-48. - License fee a debt. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a debt due to the city. Any person carrying on any business without first having procured a license from the city to do so, shall be liable to the city for the amount of such license tax recoverable in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.17), 1-5-99)  
Sec. 46-49. - Roadside vendors and peddlers. 
(a)  No roadside vendor shall engage in or manage any business, without first obtaining a certificate of use and such license and paying the required fee. 
(b)  Roadside vendors who become stationary and wait for customers to approach them for an unreasonable period of time, unreasonable defined as five minutes or more, are in violation of this article. It's illegal to sell merchandise from parked vehicles or open stands along a public street or right-of-way. There is an exception for vendors who keep on the move and stop on the swale area, where are not posted "NO PARKING OR STOPPING ANY TIME" only long enough to serve one customer at the customer's request. 
(c)  Habitual violation by licensee, his employee or patrons has occurred more than two times, the code compliance officer, hereby authorized to charge an administrative fee of $50.00 to any individual or entity that fails to comply with any provisions of the section. If there has occurred a violation of this article of the ordinance the code compliance officer is hereby authorized to issue a civil citation fee of $50.00 to any individual or entity that fails to comply with any provisions of the section. 
(d)  If habitual conduct by licensee, his employees or patrons has occurred, which violates section 46-52(3) and requires frequent need for police or code compliance departments to act at the premises because of such conduct. The city council shall have grounds for suspension or revocation of the local business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.01), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-50. - Development orders and certain types of permits. 
Development orders or development activity sets forth the local business tax receipt department for the application review procedures required for obtaining a local business tax receipt of the following activities: 
(1)  Building, installing, enlarging, replacing or substantially restoring a structure, impervious surface, including long-term storage of materials; 
(2)  Erection of a permanent sign unless expressly exempted by the land development regulations pertaining to the City of Hialeah Gardens; 
(3)  Alteration of any bay on the warehouse area, increasing the minimum requirements for off-street parking established by the land development regulations pertaining to the City of Hialeah Gardens; 
(4)  Any reduction of parking requirements on existing warehouse or conflict with the loading spaces; 
(5)  In the event that any question arises concerning the application, the use, regulations, performance standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provisions of this article, the chief zoning and code compliance official shall be responsible for interpretation and shall look to the city comprehensive plan for guidance. Responsibility for interpretation by the said official shall be limited to standards, regulations and requirements of this Code, but shall not be construed to include interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in this Code, nor be constructed as overriding the responsibilities given to any council, board or official named in other sections or articles of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.19), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-51. - Rules and regulations as to enforcement of article. 
(a)  The chief zoning and code compliance official may make such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article, as may be necessary or proper for the enforcement of these provisions hereof. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities of the chief zoning and code compliance official as designated authority, charged with the administration and enforcement of the local business tax receipt and this Code, shall include, but not to be limited to: 
(1)  Reviews all local business tax receipt applications to assure that the license requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Advise the applicant that additional federal, state, county or city may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the local business tax receipt application. 
(3)  Where interpretation is needed as to location of boundaries of the areas of special exception use, where there appears to be conflict between comprehensive plan boundary and actual field conditions the chief zoning and code compliance official shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(4)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.20), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-52. - Denial of license. 
An application for a local business tax receipt under this article may be denied on the following grounds: 
(1)  That the applicant has failed to disclose or misrepresented information required in the application; 
(2)  That the applicant currently has a license under suspension or revocation. Whenever any business license has been suspended or revoked by the City of Hialeah Gardens for any cause whatsoever, no subsequent business license for a similar business shall be issued by the city to the person, firm or corporation whose business license has been revoked or suspended; 
(3)  That the applicant desiring to engage in the business as described in the application has selected a proposed site or type of business activity which conflicts with the land use or other laws of the City of Hialeah Gardens; 
(4)  No local business tax receipt under the same classification, will be issued for a period of one year in a location where a business of the same classification was closed by revocation of license by state, county or city, unless the new owners are approved by the city council, after a background investigation of the applicant by the police department; 
(5)  Any person whose application for a license is denied by the local business tax receipt department may initiate a special exception process with the city. Requirements for special exceptions are outlined in the land development regulations; 
(6)  Any person, firm or corporation whom is found to have issued a payment via a check yet whose check is categorized by the banking authority as to not have sufficient funds shall have the city's local business tax receipt revoked and in addition shall be assessed a delinquency fee of $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.21), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-53. - Exemptions. 
Exemption from the payment of the local business tax set forth herein shall be allowed in those cases provided for in this article, and in the following cases as provided for by Florida Statutes: 
(1)  Disabled veterans, as defined by Florida Statutes, and the unmarried spouse of the deceased disabled veteran of any war in which the United States Armed Forces participated, exempted up to $50.00 annually. 
(2)  Persons with a confirmed disability or physical impairment not capable of manual labor, widows with minor dependents, and persons 65 years of age or older, who meet the requirements of the Florida Statutes. 
(3)  Charitable, religious, fraternal, civil, and service organizations who are chartered as nonprofit organizations by the State of Florida, and who have a valid federal tax exemption number, may upon approval of their request on their application, be exempt from a fee for their city local business tax receipt. This section shall not apply to the certificate of use, licensing and sale of alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.22), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-54. - Bills or notice declared unnecessary. 
(a)  All license renewals are due on October first of each year. Therefore, it is hereby declared to be unnecessary for the city to send out bills or notices to persons engaged in business in the City of Hialeah Gardens. 
(b)  It is unnecessary for the City of Hialeah Gardens Local Business Tax Department to call in advance for appointment to new or existing business in the city with respect to any inspection. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.23), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-55. - Home occupations and professional offices. 
A home occupation or professional office shall be allowed in bona fide dwelling unit, subject to the requirements on section 78-310 and section 78-131(1) through (5) of the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.24), 1-5-99)  
Sec. 46-56. - Investigations and referrals. 
The chief zoning and code compliance official or his designee shall be empowered to investigate alleged violations of this article. In the event the city finds that probable cause exists to believe that a violation has occurred, he shall issue a civil citation to the violator. 
Any person who engages in a course of business activity consisting of repeated or egregious, unfair or deceptive trade practice(s) shall have his local business tax receipt revoked by the city in addition to any other criminal or civil penalties authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.25), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-57. - Construction of article. 
Neither the fact of the adoption of this article nor the fact of its superseding or repealing any portion of any other ordinance of the City of Hialeah Gardens, shall in anyway be construed to affect or waive prosecution for violation of any other ordinances which may have been consummated prior to the effective date hereof, nor shall they be construed as a waiver of any license or of any penal provision applicable to any such violation; nor shall they be construed to affect the validity of any portion of the cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited and all rights and obligations hereto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.26), 1-5-99)  
Sec. 46-58. - Regulatory provisions remain in effect. 
Unless otherwise herein specifically excepted, changed, or differentiated, all qualifying or regulatory provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city applicable to or affecting any of the business operations, occupations or classifications covered by this article shall be and remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.27), 1-5-99)  
Sec. 46-59. - Reinspection fees. 
When extra inspection trips are necessary due to wrong information being given, prior rejection of work due to faulty construction, occupancy not being ready for inspection at the time specified, required corrections not being made or completed at time specified, a fee of $25.00 for each reinspection shall be charged to the application for local business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.31), 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 46-60. - Schedule of local business taxes. 
The amount of local business tax to be paid by each classification of business or occupation shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Local Business Taxes which shall be maintained by the city clerk and available for review during normal business hours at the office of the city clerk. These taxes shall be computed and charged annually unless otherwise specified. Regulatory requirements applicable to specific business activities are as listed in the schedule as well as the amount of the tax. 
Schedule of Local Business Tax: 
Additional to the basic local business tax. 
This schedule sets forth the annual business tax charge. In addition to the basic local business tax for any business, charges will be added as they apply according to the following: Employees, warehouse space and inventory. 
Inventory, as used in and for purposes of this section, shall not include the value of personal or business property of the business, such as fixtures, furniture, machinery, and equipment regularly used in the operation of business and which are not offered for sale as part of the normal business activity of the business being licensed under this section. 
*The local business tax section will require documentation (audits, copies of report to federal, state and local government, affidavits or any other documents needed to verify the amount of inventory reported). Inventory changes must be reported every year at renewal time by the business. Failure to do so will be a violation of this Code. There will be no local business tax for vehicles needed for delivery of goods provided they are used exclusively for products sold by the business. A retail local business tax will be required if retail sales are part of the operation of the business (i.e., outlet store). 
HIALEAH GARDENS LOCAL BUSINESS TAX 
INDUSTRY 	DESCRIPTION AND REGULATION 	ANNUAL 
TAX 
DIVISION A 	AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHING 	
Major Groups 01, 02, 07, 08, 09 	All taxes in this Group 	$100.00 
	Exceptions in Group 07: 	
	0741 Veterinarian services for livestock. 
0742 Veterinarian services. 
State license required. 
Business tax per each veterinarian. 	100.00 
	0782 Lawn care 	100.00 
	0782A Lawn care (by individual) 	100.00 
	EMPLOYEES: 	
A. 	Less than 6 employees 	0.00 
B. 	6 to 15 employees 	95.00 
C. 	16 to 24 employees 	160.00 
D. 	25 or more employees 	190.00 
	WAREHOUSE SPACE: 	
A. 	Business having 4,999 square feet or less 	0.00 
B. 	Business having 5,000 to 10,000 square feet 	95.00 
C. 	Business having 10,001 to 15,000 square feet 	125.00 
D. 	Business having 15,001 to 25,000 square feet 	190.00 
E. 	Business having 25,001 to 99,999 square feet 	250.00 
F. 	Business having 100,000 or more square feet 	500.00 
	INVENTORY: 
BUSINESSES HAVING INVENTORY IN THE AMOUNTS OF: 	
A. 	Under $4,999.00 	0.00 
B. 	From $5,000.00 to $10,000.00 	95.00 
C. 	Over $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 	125.00 
D. 	Over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 	160.00 
E. 	Over $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 	220.00 
F. 	Over $100,000.00 but less than $250,000.00 	250.00 
G. 	Over $250,000.00 	300.00 
DIVISION B 	MINING 	
Major Groups 10, 12, 13, 14 	All taxes in this Group 	
	EMPLOYEES: 	
A. 	Less than 6 employees 	0.00 
B. 	6 to 15 employees 	95.00 
C. 	16 to 24 employees 	160.00 
D. 	25 or more employees 	190.00 
DIVISION B 	WAREHOUSE SPACE: 	
A. 	Businesses having 4,999 square feet or less 	0.00 
B. 	Businesses having 5,000 to 10,000 square feet 	95.00 
C. 	Businesses having 10,001 to 15,000 square feet 	125.00 
D. 	Businesses having 15,001 to 25,000 square feet 	190.00 
E. 	Businesses having 25,001 to 99,999 square feet 	250.00 
F. 	Businesses having 100,000 or more square feet 	500.00 
	INVENTORY: 
BUSINESSES HAVING INVENTORY IN THE AMOUNTS OF: 	
A. 	Under $4,999.00 	0.00 
B. 	From $5,000.00 to $10,000.00 	95.00 
C. 	Over $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 	125.00 
D. 	Over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 	160.00 
E. 	Over $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 	220.00 
F. 	Over $100,000.00 but less than $250,000.00 	250.00 
G. 	Over $250,000.00 	300.00 
DIVISION C 	CONSTRUCTION 	
Major Groups 15, 16, 17 	State license required. Some require Certificate of Capability from Miami-Dade County 	
	Industry Groups 152, 153, 154: 	
	General contractors 	200.00 
	Industry Groups 161, 162, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179 
Highway and street construction, water sewer and pipeline, bridge tunnel and elevation highway, heavy construction, foundation structure, building exterior contractor, electrical contractors 	
	All other contractors: 
  1799L Contract lawn care 
  1799A Contact concrete pump 	150.00 
	EMPLOYEES: 	
A. 	Less than 6 employees 	0.00 
B. 	6 to 15 employees 	95.00 
C. 	16 to 24 employees 	160.00 
D. 	25 or more employees 	190.00 
	WAREHOUSE SPACE: 	
A. 	Businesses having 4,999 square feet or less 	0.00 
B. 	Businesses having 5,000 to 10,000 square feet 	95.00 
C. 	Businesses having 10,001 to 15,000 square feet 	125.00 
D. 	Businesses having 15,001 to 25,000 square feet 	190.00 
E. 	Businesses having 25,001 to 99,999 square feet 	250.00 
F. 	Businesses having 100,000 or more square feet 	500.00 
	INVENTORY: 
BUSINESSES HAVING INVENTORY IN THE AMOUNTS OF: 	
A. 	Under $4,999.00 	0.00 
B. 	From $5,000.00 to $10,000.00 	95.00 
C. 	Over $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 	125.00 
D. 	Over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 	160.00 
E. 	Over $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 	220.00 
F. 	Over $100,000.00 but less than $250,000.00 	250.00 
G. 	Over $250,000.00 	300.00 
DIVISION D 	MANUFACTURING 	
Major Groups 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 	Local business taxes for all manufacturers will be determined using the following scale: 
  Manufacture asphalt, bottling and butcher 
  Manufacture other 
  Manufacture chemical 	  
  
100.00 
150.00 
300.00 
	EMPLOYEES: 	
A. 	Less than 6 employees 	0.00 
B. 	6 to 15 employees 	95.00 
C. 	16 to 24 employees 	160.00 
D. 	25 or more employees 	190.00 
	WAREHOUSE SPACE: 	
A. 	Businesses having 4,999 square feet or less 	0.00 
B. 	Businesses having 5,000 to 10,000 square feet 	95.00 
C. 	Businesses having 10,001 to 15,000 square feet 	125.00 
D. 	Businesses having 15,001 to 25,000 square feet 	190.00 
E. 	Businesses having 25,001 to 99,999 square feet 	250.00 
F. 	Businesses having 100,000 or more square feet 	500.00 
	INVENTORY: 
BUSINESSES HAVING INVENTORY IN THE AMOUNTS OF: 	
A. 	Under $4,999.00 	0.00 
B. 	From $5,000.00 to $10,000.00 	95.00 
C. 	Over $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 	125.00 
D. 	Over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 	160.00 
E. 	Over $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 	220.00 
F. 	Over $100,000.00 but less than $250,000.00 	250.00 
G. 	Over $250,000.00 	300.00 
	*Certain types of manufacturing are regulated or require permits by the state or county and all must comply with zoning, building and fire codes and any city ordinance regarding their activities. A separate retail local business tax will be required if the manufacturer sells directly to the consumer (i.e., outlet stores). 	
	Exception to Group 39 	
	3999A: Arts and crafts by individuals. Arts and crafts practiced at a residential location by one individual. No signs, industrial equipment, noise, dangerous chemicals or waste. Including but not limited to paintings, dolls, certain glass art, sculptures and other products of artistic nature. 	30.00 
DIVISION E 	TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS, ELECTRIC GAS AND SANITARY SERVICES 	
Major Group 40 	Railroad transportation 	
	All local business taxes, if required, will be set by the city council on a need basis 	
Major Group 41 	Local and suburban transit and interurban 	
	Highway transportation of passengers. All vehicles must comply with state, county and local requirements. All local business taxes, when required, per vehicle. 	100.00 
	Exceptions in Group 41 	
	4115: Taxicabs 
     Per vehicle 	100.00 
45.00 
	Plus dispatcher or office 	100.00 
INDUSTRY 	4119: Local passenger transportation, not elsewhere classified. Passenger service by private company, ambulance, armored cars, automobile jitneys, limousines. 
Per vehicle* 	  
  
100.00 
45.00 
	4141, 4142: Chartered bus terminals 	100.00 
	Additional per vehicle 	50.00 
	4151A: Privately owned school buses* not to exceed 24 passengers per vehicle. Required state, county and city regulations compliance inclusive of inspections. Issued when the city council has determined need and necessity of the service for the local business tax year. 
Each vehicle 	  
  
  
  
100.00 
50.00 
	4141B: Privately owned buses or vans transporting more than 24 passengers, each 	100.00 
	*Same regulations apply 	
Major Group 42 	Motor freight transportation and warehousing 	100.00 
	All licenses in this group, unless otherwise specified, per vehicle 	70.00 
	Exceptions: 	
	4215: Courier services, express delivery; etc. Local business taxes will be based on number of employees according to the following schedule: Warehouse or processing centers will pay an additional warehousing local business tax: 	
	EMPLOYEES: 	
A. 	Less than 6 employees 	0.00 
B. 	6 to 15 employees 	95.00 
C. 	16 to 24 employees 	160.00 
D. 	More than 25 employees 	190.00 
	4222, 4225, 4226 and 4231: Warehousing. Warehouse fee is based on size as per the following schedule: 	
	WAREHOUSE SPACE: 	
A. 	Businesses having 4,999 square feet or less 	0.00 
B. 	Businesses having 5,000 to 10,000 square feet 	95.00 
C. 	Businesses having 10,001 to 15,000 square feet 	125.00 
D. 	Businesses having 15,001 to 25,000 square feet 	190.00 
E. 	Businesses having 25,001 to 99,999 square feet 	250.00 
F. 	Businesses having 100,000 or more square feet 	500.00 
	INVENTORY: 
BUSINESSES HAVING INVENTORY IN THE AMOUNTS OF: 	
A. 	Under $4,999.00 	0.00 
B. 	From $5,000.00 to $10,000.00 	95.00 
C. 	Over $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 	125.00 
D. 	Over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 	160.00 
E. 	Over $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 	220.00 
F. 	Over $100,000.00 but less than $250,000.00 	250.00 
G. 	Over $250,000.00 	300.00 
Major Group 44 	Water transportation 	
	All local business taxes in this group 	150.00 
Major Group 45 	Transportation by air 	
	All local business taxes in this group (Air transportation/supplies) 	150.00 
Major Group 46 	Pipelines 	
	All local business taxes in this group will be set by the city council as with fees, permits and regulations. 	
Major Group 47 	Transportation services 	
	All local business taxes in this group 	100.00 
Major Group 48 	Communications 	
	All local business taxes in this group 	150.00 
	Exceptions: 	
	4832: Radio broadcasting station 	200.00 
	4833: Television broadcasting station 	375.00 
	4841: Cable and other pay television services. Fees set by the city council, according to municipal, county, state, and federal laws and regulations of this industry 	
Major Group 49 	Electric, gas and sanitary services 	
	4911: Electric services 	200.00 
	4953: Garbage collection 	100.00 
	Plus per truck 	45.00 
	All other local business taxes in division F 	100.00 
DIVISION F 	WHOLESALE TRADE 	
Major Groups 50, 51 	Exceptions: 	
	5015: Junkyards, council approval required 	225.00 
	5015A: Used automobile parts 	150.00 
	5093: Scrap and waste materials, scavenging, salvage 	150.00 
	5099: Import/export durable goods. When engaging in international trade (import/export) other than trade regulated by this Code; in addition to the regular wholesale fee. 	100.00 
	5199: Import/export nondurable goods. When engaging in international trade (export/import) other than a trade regulated by this Code, in addition to the regular wholesale fee. 	100.00 
	EMPLOYEES: 	
A. 	Less than 6 employees 	0.00 
B. 	6 to 15 employees 	95.00 
C. 	16 to 24 employees 	160.00 
D. 	25 or more employees 	190.00 
	WAREHOUSE SPACE: 	
A. 	Businesses having 4,999 square feet or less 	0.00 
B. 	Businesses having 5,000 to 10,000 square feet 	95.00 
C. 	Businesses having 10,001 to 15,000 square feet 	125.00 
D. 	Businesses having 15,001 to 25,000 square feet 	190.00 
E. 	Businesses having 25,001 to 99,999 square feet 	250.00 
F. 	Businesses having 100,000 or more square feet 	500.00 
	INVENTORY: 
BUSINESSES HAVING INVENTORY IN THE AMOUNTS OF: 	
A. 	Under $4,999.00 	0.00 
B. 	From $5,000.00 to $10,000.00 	95.00 
C. 	Over $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 	125.00 
D. 	Over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 	160.00 
E. 	Over $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 	220.00 
F. 	Over $100,000.00 but less than $250,000.00 	250.00 
G. 	Over $250,000.00 	300.00 
DIVISION G 	RETAIL TRADE 	
	EMPLOYEES: 	
A. 	Less than 6 employees 	0.00 
B. 	6 to 15 employees 	95.00 
C. 	16 to 24 employees 	160.00 
D. 	25 or more employees 	190.00 
DIVISION B 	WAREHOUSE SPACE: 	
A. 	Businesses having 4,999 square feet or less 	0.00 
B. 	Businesses having 5,000 to 10,000 square feet 	95.00 
C. 	Businesses having 10,001 to 15,000 square feet 	125.00 
D. 	Businesses having 15,001 to 25,000 square feet 	190.00 
E. 	Businesses having 25,001 to 99,999 square feet 	250.00 
F. 	Businesses having 100,000 or more square feet 	500.00 
	All licenses in Division G will pay a fee based on inventory, as per the following scale: 	
	INVENTORY: 
BUSINESSES HAVING INVENTORY IN THE AMOUNTS OF: 	
	Up to $1,000.00 inventory 	65.00 
	Per each $1,000.00 of inventory after the initial $1,000.00 	6.50 
	Exceptions: 	
Major Group 55 	Motor vehicle dealers 	
	5511: New and used 	300.00 
	Plus per unit 	1.00 
	5521: Use only 	200.00 
	Plus per unit 	1.00 
	5531: Auto parts 	150.00 
	Per each $10,000.00 of inventory after the initial $1,000.00 	6.50 
	5541: Gas station: 	
	      Up to 6 dispensers units 	100.00 
	      Per unit* over 6, each 	13.00 
	*A dispensing unit is a single outlet, nozzle or hose. Multiple pumps will not be considered as one dispensing unit. 	
	5541A: Air and water at gas station 	5.00 
	5541B: Gas station: Vacuum cleaner, per each unit 	3.00 
	5551: Boat dealer 	300.00 
Major Group 58 	Eating and drinking places* 	
	5806: Food delivery (restaurants offering home delivery service) 	100.00 
	5807: Catering services (commissary) 	100.00 
	5808: Industrial catering (lunch wagons), each vehicle** 	50.00 
	5809: Establishments selling food by the pound, without seating 	100.00 
	Plus fees for seating as provided below. 	
	5810: Coffee shops* (without seating) with less than 50 square feet of service area. No beer, wine or alcoholic beverages sold, offered for sale, delivered or served 	50.00 
	5811: Single-unit restaurants* (with seating) having less than or equal to 850 square feet of service area. No beer, wine or alcoholic beverages sold, offered for sale, delivered or served 	50.00 
	5812: Single-unit restaurants (with seating) having more than 850 square feet of service area 	75.00 
	Additional fees for seating, excluding counter stools and barstools per seating unit 	2.00 
	All restaurants local business taxes required state approval and county local business tax receipts, if applicable. 	
	**Lunch wagons will require stickers from the local business tax section 	
	***When serving alcoholic beverages, beer or wine, all eating places will require a state license and city council approval. 	
	5813: Drinking places, without food 	675.00 
	Additional fees for seating, excluding counter stools and barstools per seating unit 	2.00 
	5813A: Nightclubs, cabarets, discotheques, etc. 	1,250.00 
	Additional fees for seating, excluding counter stools and barstools per seating unit 	2.00 
Major Group 59 	Miscellaneous retail 	
	5912: Drugstores or pharmacies: 	150.00 
	For the first $1,000.00 of inventory in excess of $1,000.00 	65.00 
	Plus, for each $1,000.00 of inventory in excess of $1,000.00 	6.50 
	Plus, when dispensing prescription drugs, licensed pharmacist 	150.00 
	5921: Liquor store (off-premises consumption) council approval 	225.00 
	Other retail items, exclusive of tobacco products 	65.00 
	Plus, per each $1,000.00 of inventory over $1,000.00 	6.50 
	5932: Pawnshop. Police check and reporting requirements plus retail local business tax state license required. 	225.00 
	5932A: Secondhand clothing shoes and furniture: 
      Up to $1,000.00 inventory 
      Per each $1,000.00 of inventory after the initial $1,000.00 	100.00 
65.00 
6.00 
	5944: Retail jewelers: 
     Up to $1,000.00 inventory 
     Per each $1,000.00 of inventory after the initial $1,000.00 	100.00 
65.00 
6.00 
	5961: Catalog and mail order 	100.00 
	5962: Vending machines (retail merchandise)(every vending machine must have a city license sticker), per additional machine 	100.00 
45.00 
	5963: Direct retail house-to-house or party plan (license can be issued to residential address if no warehousing or office is required 	100.00 
	Each 	10.00 
	5963A: Traveling store (not food, vegetables or ice cream) each vehicle (requires sticker) 	190.00 
	5963B: Traveling store, food, agriculture products, fish or ice cream per vehicle (requires sticker) 	100.00 
	5963C: Peddler or itinerant salesperson (requires ID, driver's license or photo ID; no agents or employees; license to cover one individual only) no sales from a vehicle 	
	5984: Propane gas 	100.00 
DIVISION H 	FINANCE, INSURANCE AND REAL ESTATE 	
	EMPLOYEES: 	
A. 	Less than 6 employees 	0.00 
B. 	6 to 15 employees 	95.00 
C. 	16 to 24 employees 	160.00 
D. 	25 or more employees 	190.00 
	WAREHOUSE SPACE: 	
A. 	Businesses having 4,999 square feet or less 	0.00 
B. 	Businesses having 5,000 to 10,000 square feet 	95.00 
C. 	Businesses having 10,001 to 15,000 square feet 	125.00 
D. 	Businesses having 15,001 to 25,000 square feet 	190.00 
E. 	Businesses having 25,001 to 99,999 square feet 	250.00 
F. 	Businesses having 100,000 or more square feet 	500.00 
	INVENTORY: 
BUSINESSES HAVING INVENTORY IN THE AMOUNTS OF: 	
A. 	Under $4,999.00 	0.00 
B. 	From $5,000.00 to $10,000.00 	95.00 
C. 	Over $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 	125.00 
D. 	Over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 	160.00 
E. 	Over $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 	220.00 
F. 	Over $100,000.00 but less than $250,000.00 	250.00 
G. 	Over $250,000.00 	300.00 
Major Group 60 	Industry Group 601: Depository institutions 	1,000.00 
	Exceptions 	
	6021, 6022, 6029, 6035, 6036 (each location or branch) 
National commercial banks, state and commercial banks, savings institutions, savings institutions not federal chartered 	475.00 
	6061, 6062 (credit unions) 	100.00 
	Industry Group 608: Foreign banking and agencies of foreign banks 	1,000.00 
	Industry Group 609: (all) 	500.00 
	Exceptions: 	
	6099A: Check cashing services, money order issuance, travel checks 	100.00 
	6099B: Automatic teller machines (ATM) 	100.00 
	6099C: Check cashing agency 	500.00 
Major Group 61 	Nondepository credit institution 	
	6141: Personal credit institution (per location) 	500.00 
	6141A: Loan, cars 	225.00 
	6153: Short-term business credit institution 
Credit card issuing sales financing, financial transaction, other financial investment activities 	500.00 
	6159: Miscellaneous business credit institutions—Sales finance real estate credit, international trade finance, secondary market finance, secondary market finance, all other nondepository credit intermediation 	500.00 
	6162: Mortgage bankers and brokers—Mortgage and nonmortgage loan brokers 	500.00 
	6163: Loan brokers 	225.00 
	6164: Bail bonds 	225.00 
Major Group 62 	Brokers (all) 	225.00 
Major Group 63 	Insurance carriers (out-of-town local business taxes collected through the League of Cities) 	150.00 
	Exception 	
	6324: When employing physicians, an additional fee for each doctor, insurance agents, brokers and service 	100.00 
Major Group 64 	Insurance agents, brokers and service 	100.00 
	Plus additional fee for each agent or sales person over 2, each 	19.00 
	6411A: Medical billing and medical insurance processing by contract 	200.00 
Major Group 65 	Real estate 	
	6512: Owners/operators of property containing leasable space in nonresidential buildings 	
	Owners/operators of property containing leasable space in a shopping center 	
	6512A: Up to 49,999 square feet of leasable space 	500.00 
	6512B: 50,000 to 99,999 square feet of leasable space 	750.00 
	6512C: 100,000 square feet and over of leasable space 	1,000.00 
	Owners/operators of property containing leasable space in industrial buildings or warehouses 	
	6512D: Up to 49,999 square feet of leasable space 	500.00 
	6512E: 50,000 to 99,999 square feet of leasable space 	750.00 
	6512F: 100,000 square feet and over of leasable space 	1,000.00 
	Owners/operators of property containing leasable space in office buildings 	
	6512G: Up to 49,999 square feet of leasable space 	500.00 
	6512H: 50,000 to 99,999 square feet of leasable space 	750.00 
	6512I: 100,000 square feet and over of leasable space 	1,000.00 
	6513: Operators of apartment buildings 
     Per unit 	100.00 
8.00 
	6514: Dwellings other than apartments, per unit 	8.00 
	6517, 6519: Lessors of railroad property or real property not elsewhere classified 	50.00 
	6531: Real estate agents and managers (state license required) 	100.00 
	Plus: 	
	  Per agent, each 	6.50 
	  Salespersons over 2 	25.00 
	6541, 6552, 6553 	100.00 
Major Group 67 	Holding and other investment offices (abstract companies) 	
	All 	100.00 
DIVISION I 	SERVICES 	
	EMPLOYEES: 	
A. 	Less than 6 employees 	0.00 
B. 	6 to 15 employees 	95.00 
C. 	16 to 24 employees 	160.00 
D. 	25 or more employees 	190.00 
	WAREHOUSE SPACE: 	
A. 	Businesses having 4,999 square feet or less 	0.00 
B. 	Businesses having 5,000 to 10,000 square feet 	95.00 
C. 	Businesses having 10,001 to 15,000 square feet 	125.00 
D. 	Businesses having 15,001 to 25,000 square feet 	190.00 
E. 	Businesses having 25,001 to 99,999 square feet 	250.00 
F. 	Businesses having 100,000 or more square feet 	500.00 
	INVENTORY: 
BUSINESSES HAVING INVENTORY IN THE AMOUNTS OF: 	
A. 	Under $4,999.00 	0.00 
B. 	From $5,000.00 to $10,000.00 	95.00 
C. 	Over $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 	125.00 
D. 	Over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 	160.00 
E. 	Over $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 	220.00 
F. 	Over $100,000.00 but less than $250,000.00 	250.00 
G. 	Over $250,000.00 	300.00 
Major Group 70 	7012: Motels 	100.00 
	Plus: 	
	  Offering hourly or fractional rental charge, per unit 	15.00 
	  Offering rental by the whole day or week, per unit 
  personal services 	5.00 
Major Group 72 	Personal services 	
	7211: Power laundries 	50.00 
	7212: Garment pressing and agents for laundries and dry cleaners 	50.00 
	If plant is outside city limits, additional 	50.00 
	If business conducted from a vehicle (sticker required), per vehicle 	40.00 
	7213: Linen supply 	200.00 
	7215: Coin-operated laundries and dry cleaners (Laundromats): 	157.00 
	Per machine 	2.50 
	7215A: Coin-operated laundry machines in multifamily residential properties: 	
	Per machine 	3.00 
	Each additional machine over 20 	3.00 
	7216: Dry cleaning plants, except rug cleaning 	150.00 
	7218: Industrial launders 	200.00 
	7219: Laundry and garment services, not elsewhere classified 	50.00 
	7219A: Alterations, not tailor, individual 	100.00 
	7221: Photographic studios (portrait) 	150.00 
	7221A: Photographers (no studio) 	100.00 
	7231: Beauty shops (state license required) 	100.00 
	Each additional station over 4 	5.00 
	7241: Barbershops (state license required) 	100.00 
	Each additional station over 4 	5.00 
	7251: Shoe repair shops and shoeshine parlors 	100.00 
	7261: Funeral service and crematories. State licensed embalmers. Requires DERM approval. 	200.00 
	7291: Tax return preparation service (office) 	100.00 
	7291A: Tax return and accounting services (at residence) 	100.00 
	7299: Miscellaneous personal services: 	150.00 
A. 	At office 	150.00 
B. 	At residence (P.O. box, police background, residential affidavit) 	150.00 
Major Group 73 	Business services 	
	7311: Advertising agencies/advertising 	100.00 
	7312: Outdoor advertising agencies (compliance with other state, county and city laws, liability insurance) 	
A. 	Bus benches (contract with city), basis fee 	150.00 
B. 	Billboards as per state, county and city law 	
C. 	Advertising on moving vehicles, no sound 	100.00 
	7319: Advertising not elsewhere classified 	100.00 
	7319A: Handbill, circular or sample distribution: 	
	       Office 	100.00 
	       Plus per individual, each 	20.00 
	7319B: Handbill, circular or sample distribution, individual 	20.00 
	Industry Group 732: 	
	7331: Direct mail advertising services 	100.00 
	7334: Photocopies and duplicating services (addressing, mailing duplicating) 	100.00 
	7335: Commercial photography 	100.00 
	Industry Group 734: 	
	7342: Disinfecting and pest control. Compliance with other state, county and city laws. Liability insurance 	150.00 
	7349: Clean services—Office 	100.00 
	7349A: Individual 	100.00 
	Industry Group 735: Miscellaneous equipment rental and leasing 	300.00 
	7352, 7353, 7359 	
	On rentals—Inventory: 	
A. 	Under $4,999.00 	0.00 
B. 	From $5,000.00 to $10,000.00 	95.00 
C. 	Over $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 	125.00 
D. 	Over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 	160.00 
E. 	Over $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 	220.00 
F. 	Over $100,000.00 but less than $250,000.00 	250.00 
G. 	Over $250,000.00 	300.00 
	When sales are made in additional to rental or leasing, supplementary retail local business tax: 	
	Up to $1,000.00 inventory 	65.00 
	Each additional 736: Personal supply service: 	6.50 
	Industry Group 736: Personal supply services: 	
	7361—7363: Employment agencies, personnel supply agencies 	200.00 
	Industry Group 737: Computer programming, data processing and other computer-related services: 	
	7371, 7372, 7373, 7374, 7375, 7376, 7377: Computer hardware rent or lease 	100.00 
A. 	Under $4,999.00 	0.00 
B. 	From $5,000.00 to $10,000.00 	95.00 
C. 	Over $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 	125.00 
D. 	Over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 	160.00 
E. 	Over $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 	220.00 
F. 	Over $100,000.00 but less than $250,000.00 	250.00 
G. 	Over $250,000.00 	300.00 
	7378: Computer maintenance and repair 	100.00 
	Up to 10 employees 	6.50 
	Each additional employee over 10 	65.00 
	7379: Computer consultants, etc. 	150.00 
	Industry Group 738: Miscellaneous business services 	
	All 	
	Exceptions: 	100.00 
	Investigation office 	100.00 
	Professional detective additional local business tax 	100.00 
	7381: Detective, guard, armored car, guard dog rental, polygraph, fingerprints, investigator detective or guard over 2, each additional 	10.00 
	Per employee, investigator, detective or guard over 2, each additional 	40.00 
	Per vehicle, armored or patrol car 	40.00 
	Per animal, if using guard dogs 	5.00 
	State license. Police approval. Bond. Vehicle sticker. 	
	7382: Security system service. Liability insurance. Miami-Dade County certificate of competency 	150.00 
	7384: Photofinishing labs. No retail 	250.00 
	7384A: Additional over retail local business tax DERM approval required 	50.00 
	7389: Miscellaneous business service 	150.00 
	7389A: Auctioneers (jewelry, antiques and rugs): 	
	First day 	1,250.00 
	Each additional day 	35.00 
	7389B: Goods, wares, merchandise: 	
	First day 	1,250.00 
	Each additional day 	35.00 
	7389C: Unclaimed or damaged freight: 	
	First day 	150.00 
	Each additional day 	12.50 
	7389D: Bondsmen 	225.00 
	Additional employees over tow, each 	20.00 
	7389E: Music by contract or through telephone wires 	300.00 
Major Group 75 	Automotive repair, services and parking 	
	Industry Group 751: Car leases (without drivers): 	
	All 	150.00 
	752—7521: 	70.00 
	Industry Group 753: 	
	7532A: automotive paint. All. DERM 	300.00 
	Automotive paint and body shop 	350.00 
	7534: Tire retreading and repair shops/tire ordinance. DERM 	150.00 
	Industry Group 754: automotive services, except repairs 	100.00 
	Exceptions: 	
	7542: Carwash 	100.00 
	7542A: Carwash, by hand as concession at gas station 	100.00 
	7542B: Carwash and polish by hand, itinerant or at commercial location such as shopping centers. ID required. 	100.00 
	7549: Car inspection and service other than repair or wash 	150.00 
	7549A: Towing service. 	100.00 
	Tow trucks operated and owned by a licensed service station, body or repair shop, service station nor garage. Registration or lease document in the name of licensee. Vehicle sticker. No fee other than the main license of the business: 
One vehicle 
More than 1 vehicle, each 	  
  
  
  
100.00 
45.00 
	7549B: Tow trucks operated independently of stations or repair shops by individuals, only to transport disabled or junk vehicles to an authorized location for a fee, authorized by car owner or shop and not to pick up illegally parked abandoned or repossess vehicles. Sticker. Police background. No parking on residential area. Registration or lease documents in the name of licensee. Address of the commercial location where vehicle will be parked and liability insurance. Affidavit as to above requirements. Only 1 tow truck per local business tax each. 	100.00 
	7549C: Tow trucks used to remove vehicles from private property or parking areas, abandoned vehicles or for repossession. Must comply with state and county laws. 	100.00 
	Police background check. Basic fee 	800.00 
	Plus per each vehicle, sticker required 	100.00 
Major Group 76 	Miscellaneous repair services 	
	All local business taxes in this major group: 	
	Under 10 employees 	65.00 
	Each employee over 10 	6.50 
Major Group 78 	Motion pictures and video 	
	All local business taxes in this group 	225.00 
	Exceptions: 	
	7841: Videotape rental: 	
A. 	Under $4,999.00 	0.00 
B. 	From $5,000.00 to $10,000.00 	95.00 
C. 	Over $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 	125.00 
D. 	Over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 	160.00 
E. 	Over $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 	220.00 
F. 	Over $100,000.00 but less than $250,000.00 	250.00 
G. 	Over $250,000.00 	300.00 
Major Group 79 	Amusement and recreation services 	
	All licenses in this group 	100.00 
	Exceptions: 	
	7911; Operators of banquet halls, dancehalls and discotheques without alcoholic beverages, dance schools, etc. 	200.00 
	7911A: Dance studios or schools not included as educational institutions, per year 	150.00 
	7911B: Banquet halls for hire. Will have identical requirements as to zoning of that of a nightclub licensee, per year 	225.00 
	7912D: Nonalcoholic beverages discotheques, per year 	1,500.00 
	7933: Bowling centers, do not include other retail activities, 
     per lane 
     Plus extra lanes 	  
100.00 
30.00 
	7941: Commercial sports. Local business taxes to be set by city council for any professional sport. 	
	7941A: Boxing. Local business taxes and requirements as per city ordinance and boxing commission: 	
	Promoter, per function 	100.00 
	Boxer, each 	6.50 
	Announcers, each 	6.50 
	Managers, each 	6.50 
	Referees, each 	13.00 
	Special referees, each 	35.00 
	Second, each 	4.00 
	7991: Physical fitness (state may require bond if payment is yearly) 	100.00 
	7993: Coin-operated amusement devices up to 2 	100.00 
	7993A: Individual owner, same location, per machine 	45.00 
	7993C: Machines in amusement center 	
	7993D: Music machines, jukeboxes and video jukeboxes. Only 1 permitted. Requires sticker. 	
	Individual owner, 1 location 	100.00 
	7993E: Music machines, distributors: 	100.00 
	Up to 50 machines 	45.00 
	Over 50 machines plus per machine 	50.00 
	7993F: Kiddie rides (sticker), each 	40.00 
	7997: Sporting clubs, including gun ranges. (Academy riding horses) 	150.00 
	7999: Amusements and recreation services not elsewhere classified: 	
	All 	100.00 
	Exceptions: 	
	7999B: Billiard parlors. License does not include retail, vending or any other games or coin-operated machines, per table. 	30.00 
	7999C: Bingo parlors (for-profit organization), per location 	1,000.00 
	7999D: Concession operation of amusement devices and rides. 
Requirements, bond, inspection, etc. 	1,000.00 
	7999E: Circus, per day 	625.00 
	7999F: Fortunetellers, spiritual consultation, astrologers, horoscopists, mediums, healers, etc. 	1,000.00 
Major Group 80 	Health services. State, county, city DERM 	
	Industry Group 801: State license, DERM requirements. All, per each professional at each location: 	
	8011D: Diagnostic center 	100.00 
	8042A: Opticians 	100.00 
	8049A: Hypnosis 	100.00 
	8049B: Nurse practitioner 	100.00 
	Industry Group 805: 	100.00 
	8051, 8052: All, per each location not contiguous to main address 	
	8059: 7—14 beds 	375.00 
	8059A: 15—more beds 	750.00 
	Industry Group 8060: Hospitals. All retail and other nonhospital required businesses must obtain separate license by hospital or operator of concession. State law requirements 	225.00 
	Industry Group 807: Medical and dental laboratories, all 	100.00 
	Industry Group 808: Home care 	
	Per doctor, each 	100.00 
	Per nurse, therapist or technician, each 	25.00 
	Industry Group 809: Miscellaneous, all 	100.00 
Major Group 81 	Legal services 	
	8111: All (state license), per attorney 	100.00 
Major Group 82 	Educational services 	
	Federal state, county, city laws. All 	100.00 
Major Group 83 	Social services 
Day care 	150.00 
	All laws, HRS approval, each location 	100.00 
Major Group 84 	Museum, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens. All 	
	All 	100.00 
	Except 	
	8442A: Animal, small animal, bird or reptile exhibits, championships or competition other than races, per exhibit day, no betting 	100.00 
Major Group 86 	Membership organizations 	
	All 	100.00 
Major Group 87 	Engineering, accounting, research, management and related services 	
	All. State license requirements apply. Per engineer, architect, consultant, accountant or other accredited professional 	100.00 
Major Group 88 	Private households 	100.00 
	Domestic service. All 	
Major Group 89 	Services not elsewhere classified 	
Major Group 99 	All 	100.00 
	9999B: Temporary tent sales permit 	250.00 
DIVISION J 	PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 	
	No local business tax 	
	SPECIAL FEES 	
	Administration violation fine 	250.00 
	Certificate of use and occupancy, first year 	50.00 
	Certificate of use and occupancy annual renewal 	25.00 
	Inspection required overtime 	45.00 
	Posting of local business tax administration fine 	50.00 
	Public safety impact fee, first year 	25.00 
	Public safety impact fee annual renewal 	12.50 
	Reinspection fees 	25.00 
	Replacing lost or destroyed license 	20.00 
	Special investigation of the transferee 	25.00 
	Transfer fee 	15.00 
	**Note: All special fees, as stated above, shall be nonrefundable. 	
 
The amount of local business tax, which shall be paid by the different classifications of businesses, shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Local Business Tax; such tax shall be computed annually unless otherwise specified. The schedule follows the order and numerical sequences of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (SIC). 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 2(1)—(3)(Att. A), 9-16-08; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 2, 8-2-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-06, § 2(1)—(3)(Att. A), adopted Sept. 16, 2008, deleted former § 46-60, and enacted a new § 46-60 as set out herein. The former § 46-60 pertained to schedule of fees. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 46-61. - Alcoholic beverages license. 
Any new application, location or owner transfer for alcoholic beverage license will not be issued without city council approval additionally: 
(1)  The applicant will file an application for State of Florida Department of Alcohol and Tobacco and with the chief zoning and code compliance official for zoning review and approval. 
(2)  The applicant shall not appear before city council, unless all applicable required information (according to chapter 10), review and approvals is provided with the application. 
(3)  Any restrictions with the approval of the alcohol beverage license by the city council, shall be part of the application to the state. 
(4)  It shall be illegal for a restaurant or cafeteria to sell alcoholic beverages without the serving of a full-course meal. The chief zoning and code compliance official will issue a "cease and desist" order. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.41), 1-5-99)  
Sec. 46-62. - Sexually oriented business. 
For zoning regulating regulations pertaining to sexually oriented businesses, see Ordinance No. 90-09 [sections 18-87 et seq. of this Code]. 
(Ord. No. 98-35, § 1(113.42), 1-5-99)  
Sec. 46-63. - North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). 
(a)  For the purpose of classifying all occupations and economic activities in the newly annexed area of the city (see Ch. 78, Art. IV, Div. 2 of this Code), the city hereby adopts the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) as issued by the internal revenue service and will, from time to time update and clarify definitions of economic activities, as it may become necessary, by ordinance of the city council. The NAICS manual will be used for definitions. 
(b)  The amount of license fees due and to be paid by the different classifications of licenses shall be as set forth in section 46-60, Schedule of Fees. Such fees shall be due and paid annually unless otherwise specified. The schedule follows the order and numerical sequences of the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). Regulatory requirements for specific business activities are listed in the schedule as well as the fees. 
(Ord. No. 2005-18, §§ 1, 2, 5-3-05)  
Secs. 46-64—46-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Insurance premium tax authorized, F.S. § 185.08. 
 
Sec. 46-76. - Excise tax on insurers. 
There is hereby assessed, imposed, and levied on every insurance company, corporation, or other insurer now engaged in or carrying on, or which shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of insuring with respect to casualty risks, as shown by the records of the insurance commissioner of the state, an excise or license tax in addition to any license or excise tax levied by the city which shall be in the amount of 0.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies within the corporate limits of the city. The license or excise tax so levied shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of each year. In the case of multiple peril policies with a single premium for both property and casualty coverage in such policies, 30 percent of such premium shall be used as the basis for the 0.85 percent tax. 
(Code 1985, § 35.03; Ord. No. 90-34, § 1, 4-2-91)  
Secs. 46-77—46-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PURCHASING PROCEDURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Consultants competitive negotiations, F.S. § 287.055. 
 
Sec. 46-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Contractual services means and includes all utility services, cleaning and maintenance services, insurance, leases of property and the rental, repair, or maintenance of equipment, machinery and other city-owned property in excess of $10,000.00. The term shall exclude such professional services as are controlled under the Competitive Consultants Negotiation Act (F.S. § 287.05) and audit services rendered by accountants under F.S. § 473.317. 
Supplies means and includes all supplies, materials, and equipment having a value of $10,000.00 or more. 
Using agency means any department, agency, board (including the autonomous pension board established pursuant to F.S. ch. 185), or other units of the city government using supplies or procuring contractual services, as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1985, § 35.12; Ord. No. 99-17, § 1, 8-17-99) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-107. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all purchases by the city for goods and materials or services excluding, however, the following: 
(1)  Professional services. 
(2)  Goods, materials, or services obtained from or through the federal government, the state, the county, or other municipalities. 
(3)  Goods, materials, and services, excluding contracts for construction, which do not exceed $2,000.00. 
(4)  Contracts for any type of construction the sum of which does not exceed $4,000.00. 
(Code 1985, § 35.10)  
Sec. 46-108. - Responsibility of officials. 
(a)  The mayor, or such employee of the city whom he may designate, shall be the person responsible for implementing the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Except as provided under the provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any city officer, employee, or agent of the city to order the purchase of any supplies or make any contract, and any attempt to do so shall not be binding upon the city. 
(c)  The mayor shall, when possible and practical, do the following: 
(1)  Classify all supplies used by the various departments of city government. 
(2)  Prepare and adopt written specifications of all standard supplies. 
(3)  Prepare written specifications for all contractual services required by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 35.11)  
Sec. 46-109. - Specifications for bids. 
Specifications for bids shall be issued for all goods, materials, or services subject to this article and shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Instructions and information to bidders concerning the bid submission requirements, including the time and date set for receipt of bids, the address of the office to which bids are to be delivered, the maximum time for bid acceptance by the city, the right of the city to reject all offers of bids and any other special information. 
(2)  The purchase description, qualification factors, delivery or performance schedule, and such inspection and acceptance requirements as are not included in the purchase description. 
(3)  The contract terms and conditions including warranty and bonding or other security requirements as applicable. 
(4)  The date, time, and place at which any prebid conference may be held and whether attendance at such conference is a condition for bidding. 
(5)  The place where any documents incorporated by reference may be obtained. 
(Code 1985, § 35.13)  
Sec. 46-110. - Public notice inviting bids. 
(a)  Notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a reasonable time prior to bid opening but, in any event, at least 15 calendar days shall intervene between the last date of publication and the final date for submitting bids, except if, by resolution, the council desires to shorten the period of time. The notice shall state the general description of the goods and services to be purchased, the place where a copy of the specification for the bids may be obtained and the time and place for the opening of bids. In addition, bids may be solicited from all responsible, prospective suppliers by sending such bidders copies of the notice to acquaint them with the proposed purchase. 
(b)  The city clerk shall maintain a list of vendors or contractors who wish to bid on city business and shall submit to them notice of the invitation to bid for supplies or services in which they have expressed an interest. 
(Code 1985, § 35.14)  
Sec. 46-111. - Bid deposits. 
The mayor may require, when he deems it to be expedient, bid deposits, as prescribed in the specifications and the invitation to bid. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of such deposit. Successful bidders shall forfeit such deposit or bid bond if they fail to enter into the contract when it is awarded. 
(Code 1985, § 35.15)  
Sec. 46-112. - Bid openings. 
(a)  All bids shall be submitted to the city clerk within the time provided in the invitation to bid and shall be clearly designated as a sealed bid. The clerk shall retain custody of such bids and ensure that they remain sealed until they are to be opened by the city council. The amount of each bid and other relevant information as may be deemed desirable together with the name of each bidder shall be open to public inspection. 
(b)  All bids are to be opened before a meeting of the city council at a time and place as announced in the invitation to bid. Such meeting shall be held in accordance with F.S. § 286.011. In the absence of a quorum, however, those members of the council present may convene as a committee of the whole for the exclusive purpose of opening and tabulating the bids. 
(Code 1985, § 35.16)  
Sec. 46-113. - Qualified bidders list. 
Bidders may prequalify with the city by completing the form which is on file in the city clerk's office and made a part of this article by reference. Bidders who are not prequalified may be rejected if staff or the council, in its discretion, determine that such bidder is not qualified to perform the work. 
(Code 1985, § 35.17; Ord. No. 95-01, § 1, 5-2-95; Ord. No. 99-17, § 2, 8-17-99)  
Sec. 46-114. - Bid acceptance and evaluations. 
(a)  Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation which were not set forth in the invitation for bids except information contained in the prequalification form referred to in section 46-113. The results of the evaluation and tabulation of bid prices shall be announced at a public hearing within a reasonable time after the bid opening. 
(b)  The city council may request the mayor to make his recommendations regarding the award of the contract and advise the council regarding the results of the prebid qualification conference. After opening the bids, the council may refer the bids to the mayor and his staff for evaluation and recommendation at a later meeting of the council. 
(Code 1985, § 35.18)  
Sec. 46-115. - Award of contract. 
(a)  Any contracts awarded by the city shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the lowest qualified, responsible, and responsive bidder. The decision of the city council shall be final. All contracts shall be approved as to form and correctness by the city attorney and a copy thereof shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in addition to price, the city council may consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the bidder; 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies, or contractual services, to the particular use required; 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
(9)  The number or scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(c)  When the award of a bid is not given to the lowest bidder, the city council shall incorporate into the motion or resolution awarding the contract a full and complete statement of the reasons for making the award to other than the low bidder. 
(Code 1985, § 35.19)  
Sec. 46-116. - Rejection of bidders; waiver. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this article, the city council may reject all bids. The council shall have the right to waive informalities and irregularities in the bid or prequalification form in making any award. 
(b)  Waiver of bid procedure. The city council is authorized to waive requirements of the bid procedures set forth in this article by a four-fifths vote. 
(c)  Only the city council shall have the power to reject bids and to award contracts, by no less than three affirmative votes. The council may, either before or after the bids are opened, reject any or all bids, including parts of all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposal, when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(Code 1985, § 35.20)  
Sec. 46-117. - Prequalifications. 
(a)  The condition of prequalification of bidders may be met by any bidder who has completed the prequalification form and who has delivered a copy of such completed form to the city clerk at least three days prior to the opening of bids. 
(b)  The mayor, or his designee, may require a prebid qualification conference at which all persons who are submitting bids must respond to questions regarding their qualifications and ability to provide the services or supplies under the bid. Such qualifications will include their experience in other contracts in both the public and private sectors. 
(Code 1985, § 35.21)  
Sec. 46-118. - No subdivision of purchases. 
No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 35.22)  
Sec. 46-119. - Open market purchases. 
The mayor is authorized to make open market purchases of supplies or contractual services where the amount involved is less than $2,000.00 or $1,000.00, respectively. In addition, upon the request of the mayor and by resolution, the city council may authorize the mayor to purchase supplies or negotiate for contractual services on the open market, and upon receipt thereof, the council may authorize a contract therefor. 
(Code 1985, § 35.23)  
Sec. 46-120. - Sale of surplus property. 
The sale of surplus property may be authorized by the city council upon recommendation of the mayor. Such sale shall be by sealed bid as provided in this article or may be by public auction. 
(Code 1985, § 35.24)  
Sec. 46-121. - State, county or other governmental agency bids or contracts. 
Whenever advantageous to the city, the city may utilize bids that have been awarded or under contract by the state, county or other governmental agencies. If the city utilizes state, county or other governmental agency bids competitive bidding will not be required. 
(Ord. No. 2002-54, §§ 1, 2, 11-19-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-54, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 19, 2002, set out provisions intended for use as § 46-119. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 46-121.  
Secs. 46-122—46-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - IMPACT FEES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Public safety impact fee, § 78-60. 
 
Sec. 46-146. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Planning and census projections indicate that the population of the city will substantially increase during the next five years, resulting in new development. The increase in new development will directly and adversely impact the existing public safety service network located within the city. 
(b)  In order to maintain adequate law enforcement protection for the existing population and to accommodate the impact of the projected increase in population due to new development, the law enforcement network will have to be expanded. 
(c)  The sources of revenue presently available to the city will be inadequate to fund the entire cost of acquisition of additional public safety service and the acquisition of capital equipment required to accommodate the impact of the new development. 
(Ord. No. 90-08, § 1, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 46-147. - Rules of construction. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
(1)  If there is any conflict between the text of this article and any table, summary table or illustration, the text shall control. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(4)  The phrase "used for" includes arranged for, designed for, maintained for, or occupied for. 
(5)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(6)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(7)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(8)  The word "he" means "he or she"; "his" means "his" or "hers." 
(Ord. No. 90-08, § 2, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 46-148. - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in chapters 28 and 33, Code of Metropolitan Dade County, shall apply to this article except as otherwise provided in the following definitions: 
(1)  Applicant means the person who applies for a building permit or submits a plat or waiver of plat. 
(2)  Building means any structure having a roof entirely separated from any other structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors or windows or any similar opening and erected for the purpose of providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind. 
(3)  Building permit means an official document or certificate issued by the city building department under chapter 33 of the Code of Metropolitan Dade County, authorizing the construction, siting, or change of use of any building. For purposes of this article, the term "building permit" shall also include tie-down permits for those structures or buildings, such as mobile homes, that do not require a building permit in order to be occupied. 
(4)  Development activity, development or activity means any activity for which a building permit is required pursuant to the South Florida Building Code or city ordinance. 
(5)  Development of regional impact means any development which because of its character, magnitude or location would have a substantial impact on the health, safety or welfare of the citizens. 
(6)  Dwelling unit means a building or portion of a building designed for or the primary purpose of which is for residential occupancy, and consisting of one or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one or more persons. The term also includes mobile homes, motels, hotels, roominghouses or any such units converted to condominiums, servants' quarters or congregate living facilities as that term is defined by F.S. § 400.402. 
(7)  Feepayer means a person intending to commence a proposed development for which an impact fee computation is required under this article, or a person who has paid an impact fee. 
(8)  Existing development means the lawful land use physically existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, and any development or additional development for which the landowner holds a valid building permit as of the effective date of this article. Existing development shall also include that maximum level of development activity for which a previous impact fee was paid under the provisions of this article. 
(9)  Impact means the effect of the new development, including additional residential and nonresidential units, on the public safety services in a given area. 
(10)  Nonresidential development means any development not providing for residential dwelling units. 
(11)  Owner means the person holding legal title to the real property. 
(12)  Person, for the purpose of this article, means individuals, partnerships, trusts, corporations, and all other legal entities authorized by state law to own and develop real property. 
(13)  Residential development means any buildings designed to be used as dwelling units. Dwelling unit may be one single-family dwelling unit or two or more dwelling units in a planned project or subdivision. 
(14)  Site means a legally described parcel of property capable of development pursuant to applicable county or city ordinances and regulations. 
(15)  Unit of development means a quantifiable increment of development activity dimensioned in terms of dwelling units or other appropriate measurements contained in the impact fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 90-08, § 3, 4-10-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-149. - Public safety impact fee imposed. 
(a)  All development is deemed to create an impact and therefore create a demand for increased public safety service capacity. As such, the cost of new facilities should be borne by new users to the extent new uses require new facilities. Therefore, any application for a building permit for development activity within the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall be subject to the imposition of a public safety impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. Any person who, after the effective date of this article, seeks to develop land located in the city by applying for a building permit to develop such land shall be required to pay a public safety impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued by the building department until payment has been received for the required impact fee. Payment shall be by cash, cashier's check or money order, payable to the city. 
(c)  Valid building permits issued prior to the effective date of this article and which have not expired or been revoked will not be subject to an impact fee. Permits which have been applied for but have not been issued prior to the effective date of this article will require payment of an impact fee. 
(d)  If a building permit encompassing feepaying development expires or is revoked prior to final inspection, the feepayer shall be entitled to a refund without interest of the impact fee which was paid as a condition for the building permit, less the five percent general administrative charge. If there is a reissuance of the permit, the feepayer shall pay the impact fee in effect at the time the new building permit is issued. If a refund is authorized but not issued before the reissuance of the building permit, the amount of the refund shall be retained by the city and the feepayer shall pay the remainder of the impact fee due for the new permit. The feepayer shall be required to submit a written request for refund to the building official or code compliance officer before a refund can be authorized. 
(Ord. No. 90-08, § 4, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01)  
Sec. 46-150. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following shall be exempt from the impact fee imposed under section 46-149: 
(1)  Governmental or public facilities are exempt from the requirement of the public safety impact fees. Such facilities are those parcels, grounds, buildings or structures owned by municipal, county, state, and federal governments, the county school board and the South Florida Water Management District and related to the operation of those entities and used for governmental purposes, including, but not limited to, governmental officers, police and fire stations, airports, seaports, parking facilities, equipment yards, sanitation facilities, water control structures, schools, parks and similar facilities in or through which general government operations are conducted. Privately owned properties or facilities leased by these governmental entities and used for general government operations and activities and private residential, commercial or industrial activities constructed or operated through lease agreements on public lands or in public facilities shall not be considered governmental or public facilities and shall be subject to this article. 
(2)  A building replacement meeting the requirements of section 104.3(D), South Florida Building Code (replacement necessitated by partial destruction), is exempt. 
(3)  Any development activity which is under a total of 200 square feet is exempt. 
(4)  The issuance of a tie-down permit on a mobile home, on which the applicable impact fee can be documented as having been paid or for which documentation can be provided to determine whether the mobile home was legally in place on the lot, parcel or space prior to the effective date of this article is exempt. 
(5)  A house move originating with this county is exempt. 
(b)  In applying for the exemptions authorized by this section, it shall be the feepayer's responsibility to furnish, as required by the building official or code compliance officer, all materials and information necessary to validate the exemption including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Current opinion of title; 
(2)  Official document from affected governmental owner stating the proposed land use; 
(3)  Master plan; 
(4)  Official zoning hearings; 
(5)  Old and new construction plans; 
(6)  Official certificate of occupancy records; and 
(7)  Statements from the owner stating past and proposed land use. 
(Ord. No. 90-08, § 5, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01)  
Sec. 46-151. - Fee schedule. 
The impact fee schedule to compute the amount of the impact fee to be paid is on file in the city clerk's office. The five percent general administrative charge portion of the fee is nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 95-12, § 2, 7-18-95)  
Sec. 46-152. - Public safety impact fee trust fund. 
The city may receive and deposit, from time to time, additional moneys and funds from other sources, including grants and donations. The public safety impact fee trust fund shall be administered by the chief of police, subject to the approval of the mayor and city council. Such funds shall be subject to audit requirements, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 90-08, § 7, 4-10-90)  
Secs. 46-153—46-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX 
 
Sec. 46-171. - Levied amount. 
Pursuant to the authority and provisions of F.S. § 166.231, there is hereby levied and imposed by the city upon each and every purchase of telecommunications service as defined by F.S. § 203.012 which occur within the city and originates and terminates in this state, a telecommunications tax in the amount of seven percent. Such tax shall apply to the total amount charged for any telecommunications service provided within the city or, if the location of the telecommunications service provided cannot be determined, the total amount billed for such telecommunications service to a telephone or telephone number, a telecommunications number of device, or a customer's billing address located within the city, excluding public telephone charges collected on site, charges for any foreign exchange service or any private line service except when such services are used or sold as a substitute for any telephone company switched service or dedicated facility by which a telephone company provides a communication path, access charges, and any customer access line charges paid to a local telephone company. However, telecommunications service as defined in F.S. § 203.012(5)(b), shall be taxed only on the monthly recurring customer service charges excluding variable usage charges. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. I(§ 1), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-172. - Seller to collect, pay over, discount for sellers. 
It shall be the duty of every seller of such telecommunications service, in acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the city as established by F.S. § 166.231, to collect from the purchaser at the time of payment for such service any tax imposed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this article. It shall be the responsibility of the seller/collector to remit all such taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this article accompanied by a form as determined by the seller. 
(1)  For the purpose of compensating the seller, the seller shall be allowed one percent of the amount of the tax collected and due to the city in the form of a deduction from the amount collected for remittance. The deduction shall be allowed as compensation for the establishment of record keeping systems, the keeping of the records, and for the collection and remittance of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. I(§ 2), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-173. - Sellers failing to collect, report or pay over to city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to continue to provide any telecommunications service within the city who shall fail to collect, report and pay over to the city the taxes imposed and levied pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(1)  If such tax collections as described in section 46-171 above are not paid to the city clerk within 30 days after the first of each month after collection, they will be considered delinquent. All such taxes due from the preceding month shall be subject to interest on the unpaid amount at a rate of one percent per month, or any fraction thereof, from the due date until such time as the payment is received. 
(2)  The penalties set forth for willful noncompliance with this article will be in accordance with those imposed by F.S. § 212.15. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. I(§ 3), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-174. - Exemption for governmental entities and churches. 
(a)  Purchases of telecommunications services by: 
(1)  The United States government, the State of Florida, and all counties, school districts, and municipalities of the state, and by public bodies exempted by law or court; 
(2)  Any other public body as defined in F.S. § 1.01; 
(3)  Any recognized church in this state if used exclusively for church purposes, and by any religious institution that possesses a consumer certificate of exemption issued under F.S. ch. 212, 
are hereby exempt from the taxes levied by this article. 
(b)  Purchases of local telephone services or other telecommunication services for use in the conduct of telecommunication service for hire or otherwise for resale, are exempted from taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. I(§ 4), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-175. - Audit and remittance of taxes. 
(a)  Remittance of tax to the city by seller: Every seller is hereby required to execute and file with the finance department a return setting forth the amount of such public service tax to which the city became entitled under provisions hereof on account of amounts billed to purchasers, less uncollectibles, during the preceding fiscal month on the date returns and payments are required under F.S. ch. 212. The payment shall be made contemporaneously with the filing of the return. 
(b)  Audit: Providers of telecommunications services taxable in accordance with this chapter shall provide to the city, upon 60 days written notice of intent to audit by the city, access to all applicable records for such telecommunication services except an extension of this 60-day period shall be granted if reasonably requested by the provider. Any additional extension by the seller or the city shall be granted only upon 30 days written notice prior to the expiration of the existing extension for the requesting party except in cases of bona fide emergency or waiver of the notice requirement by the other party. The audit shall be conducted in accordance with Florida Statutes, including the determination of any underpayments and/or overpayments of tax due and the assessment of interest and penalties. Any information received by the city in connection with an audit by the city of any such providers' records is confidential and is not subject to the provisions of F.S. § 119.07(1), and in accordance with F.S. § 166.231(9)(e). No company records shall be duplicated or removed from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. I(§ 5), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-176. - Rules and regulations authorized. 
The city clerk is hereby authorized to promulgate and establish reasonable rules and regulations for the reporting and payment of the tax imposed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. I(§ 6), 8-18-98)  
Secs. 46-177—46-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 54. 
 
Sec. 46-191. - Levied; amount. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority and provisions of F.S. § 166.231, there is hereby levied and imposed by the city upon each purchase of electricity, water, and metered or bottled gas within the corporate limits of the city a public service tax in the amount of ten percent. Such tax shall be calculated, levied and imposed upon each separate bill or statement for purchase rendered by the seller of the taxable item to each purchaser of such service. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority and provisions of F.S. § 166.231, there is hereby levied and imposed by the city upon each purchase of fuel oil within the corporate limits of the city a public service tax in the amount of $0.04 per gallon. 
The purchase of fuel oil by a public or private utility for use as a fuel in the generation of electricity or the purchase of fuel oil for use as an aircraft engine fuel or propellant or for use in internal-combustion engines is exempt from taxation hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. II(§ 7), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-192. - Seller to collect, pay over, discount for sellers. 
It shall be the duty of every seller of such utility service, including the city, in acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the city as established by F.S. § 166.231, to collect from the purchaser at the time of payment for such service any tax imposed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this article. It shall be the responsibility of the seller/collector to remit all such taxes imposed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this article, whether or not such taxes were collected from the purchaser by the seller, to the city by the twentieth of the month following the month of collection. If such collections are received by the city clerk and clerk by the twentieth of the month in accordance with the provisions of this article, the seller collector will be allowed a discount equal to the lesser of one percent of the taxes collected or $1,000.00, as compensation for collecting such tax. If such tax collections do not reach the city clerk and clerk until after the twentieth of the month, the full amount of such tax imposed and levied will be due. Taxes not received 30 days after collection will be considered delinquent. All such taxes due from the preceding month shall be subject to interest on the unpaid amount at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction thereof, from the due date until such time as the payment is received. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. II(§ 8), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-193. - Sellers failing to collect, report or pay over to city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to continue to sell or deliver any electricity, water, or gas within the city who shall fail to collect, report and pay over to the city the taxes imposed and levied pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. II(§ 9), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-194. - Exemption for governmental entities and churches. 
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to purchases of electricity, water, or gas by the United States government, the State of Florida and its political subdivisions, or to any recognized church for use exclusively for church purposes. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. II(§ 10), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-195. - Audit and remittance of taxer. 
(a)  The city may at its sole discretion conduct an audit of a seller/collector at such times as it deems necessary, to determine the tax imposed and levied has been properly collected and remitted pursuant to the provision of this article. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the seller/collector to remit all such taxes whether collected or not. The city reserves the right to bill and collect from the seller/collector for unremitted taxes as may be discovered from an audit for 24 months prior to the most recent fiscal year end. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. II(§ 11), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-196. - Rules and regulations authorized. 
The city clerk is hereby authorized to promulgate and establish reasonable rules and regulations for the report and payment of the tax imposed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. II(§ 12), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-197. - Declared additional. 
The tax herein assessed and imposed shall be in addition to all other license taxes now levied by the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. II(§ 13), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-198. - Payment and collection. 
The excise or license tax herein provided for shall be payable and collected in the manner provided for by F.S. ch. 175 and as otherwise provided by law and the city shall be entitled to reasonable attorneys' fees and costs for collection. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. II(§ 14), 8-18-98)  
Sec. 46-199. - Information regarding telecommunications and public service tax. 
The name and address of the person to contact regarding inquiries concerning this tax is Charles Blazek, City Clerk, City of Hialeah Gardens, 10001 NW 87 Ave., Hialeah Gardens, Fl. 33016. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, Art. II(§ 15), 8-18-98)  
Secs. 46-200—46-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - INTERIM PROPRIETARY AND GENERAL SERVICES FEE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-04, §§ 1—8, adopted June 4, 1996, established an interim proprietary and general services fee. Said ordinance did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as Art. VIII, §§ 46-216—46-223. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 54; land use regulations, ch. 78. 
 
Sec. 46-216. - Establishment. 
A fee to be known henceforth as the "interim proprietary and general services fee" is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 96-04, § 1, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 46-217. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is recognized that the city provides police protection, and other municipal services that escalate when a new building or home is completed. It is further recognized that the cost of municipal services that are provided, from the time that a new building or structure is completed and occupied until the improvements are reflected on the tax roll as of January 1 of the year following the date when the improvements were completed, are not compensated. 
(b)  The purpose of the interim proprietary and general services fee is to defray the cost of municipal services provided to newly-improved property prior to the imposition of ad valorem taxes on the property. The fee is neither intended as an ad valorem tax, directly or indirectly, nor is the amount of the fee related to the valuation of the property receiving municipal services. 
(Ord. No. 96-04, § 2, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 46-218. - Applicability. 
There is hereby imposed an interim proprietary and general services fee which shall apply to those properties for which a certificate of occupancy is issued, either permanent or temporary, for full or partial use of the premises. The interim proprietary and general services fee shall be payable upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy until the ensuing January 1, or until such time as the improvements necessitating the certificate of occupancy is assessed by the Dade County Property Appraiser and extended on the tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 96-04, § 3, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 46-219. - Charges. 
For the purpose of this article, a "unit" shall be defined as a single-family residence; each dwelling unit of a townhouse, duplex or multifamily dwelling; a single tenant industrial space; a retail store or a single tenant space in an office or commercial building; or a warehouse bay, except those warehouse facilities subdivided and used primarily as leased storage units, which shall be considered one unit per structure. The term shall not include additions to units, such as additional rooms, improvements involving maintenance, pools, fences or remodeling. The fee shall be $0.03 cents per square foot per month. The fee shall be paid upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, either permanent or temporary. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until such time as the interim proprietary and general services fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 96-04, § 4, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 46-220. - Exemption. 
The interim proprietary and general services fee shall not be imposed upon the following properties: 
(1)  Properties requiring a certificate of occupancy solely for the purpose of change of use; 
(2)  Properties used primarily for tax-exempt purposes; and 
(3)  Properties owned by governmental entities used for governmental purposes or leased to organizations that use the property primarily for tax-exempt purposes. 
(Ord. No. 96-04, § 5, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 46-221. - Revisions. 
The amount of the fee may be revised on an annual basis, with the approval of the city council, in order to reasonably cover the cost of providing municipal services to the improved properties. 
(Ord. No. 96-04, § 6, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 46-222. - Collections and deposit. 
All interim proprietary and general services fees shall be collected by the building and zoning department and shall be deposited into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 96-04, § 7, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 46-223. - Lien provisions. 
All such fees becoming due and payable after October 1, 1996 shall constitute, and are hereby imposed as, special assessment liens against real property, and until fully paid and discharged, or barred by law, shall remain liens equal in rank and dignity with the lien of city and county ad valorem taxes and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles, and claims in, to or against the real property containing the building, structure or dwelling unit. Such fees shall become delinquent if not paid within 60 days after the due date. All delinquent fees shall bear an interest charge of one percent per month, on any or all of the outstanding balance of such fees due, and if not fully paid with all accrued interest by the due date of the next interim proprietary and general services fee payment, will continue to accrue interest. Unpaid and delinquent fees, together with accrued interest, shall remain and constitute special assessment liens against the real property involved. Such liens may be enforced by any of the methods provided in F.S. ch. 85, alternatively, by foreclosure proceedings instituted under the provisions of F.S. ch. 173, or by other legal methods of collection and enforcement of payment thereof. The owner shall pay all costs of collections, including reasonable attorney fees, court costs, abstracting and related lien expenses incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-04, § 8, 6-4-96)  
Chapter 50 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform traffic control law, F.S. ch. 316. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Certain size vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle, except local traffic, in excess of 6,000 pounds gross weight to be driven or travel on any road within the corporate limits of the city, which has a sign posted prohibiting this use. All signs so posted shall be erected in such a manner that they are fairly visible to any motorist about to enter the roadway. Designation of the roads upon which the aforesaid motor vehicles are prohibited shall be made in writing by the mayor to the chief of police of the city. The supervision of the erection and maintenance of the signs will be at the direction of the chief of police. Special permission for exemption from this section, on good cause shown, may be granted in writing for a specified time by the mayor or chief of police. 
(Code 1985, § 70.01)  
Sec. 50-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or causing any provision of this chapter to be violated shall be fined as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1985, § 70.99)  
Secs. 50-3—50-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, F.S. § 316.008. 
 
Sec. 50-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings given in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Code compliance board means the city's code compliance board, established pursuant to F.S. ch. 162, known as the Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act. 
Code compliance department means the city's code compliance department and shall include all individuals employed by the department as code compliance officers who have been designated by the city as such and whose duty it is to enforce the land development code and ordinances enacted by the city and the provisions of the South Florida Building Code, and statutes of the state and the ordinances of the county and the city, including the city building official. 
Commercial district means any area of the city which is zoned for usage other than residential and shall include those areas zoned CM. 
Commercial vehicle means a truck, bus, trailer, semitrailer, truck tractor and semitrailer combination, recreational unit or camper primarily designed as temporary living quarters, which either has its own motor power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle being operated or capable of being operated on the highways of the city, and designed to be used to transport cargo or passengers in commerce. 
Highway means any public thoroughfare including streets, alleys, avenues, roads, rights-of-way and any other area which is open for vehicular travel by the general public unless otherwise excluded in this article. 
Off-street parking areas means those areas of real property including parking spaces, loading spaces, driveway areas and other areas which have been designated for the purpose of temporary parking when the keeping or parking of commercial vehicles is necessary to the operation of the business enterprise located on such property, or any other appropriate storage place or lot maintained in a location so designated for the purpose of parking. 
Operator means any person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon the highway or who is exercising control or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle. 
Overnight parking means those hours between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily. 
Parked means the state of a vehicle being temporarily left unattended by its owner and/or operator. 
Passenger vehicle means only those vehicles designed, used or maintained primarily to transport private passengers and which are currently licensed for travel on the public highways and are capable of and equipped to be lawfully operated in such fashion under their own power. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit of economic organization or activity and shall include the plural as well as the singular. 
Police department means any member of the city police department who is certified pursuant to state law and who has the authority to make arrests and to enforce the penal, criminal, traffic or highway laws of the state. 
Private property means all land and improvements and personal property not owned by the state, the county or the city and lying within the geographical boundaries of the city. 
Property owner means that person who exercises dominion and control over private property, real or personal, including, but not limited to, the legal titleholder of a commercial vehicle as defined in this section, a lessee or any person authorized to exercise or share dominion and control over private property. 
Public property means all land and improvements owned by the state, the county or the city, including, but not limited to, buildings, grounds, parks, playgrounds, streets, sidewalks, parkways, rights-of-way, easements and other similar real property lying within the geographical boundaries of the city. 
Right-of-way means the outside boundaries of a highway, whether such right-of-way has been established by usage, dedication, by the city's official right-of-way map or records or in any other fashion recognized by law. 
Weekend means and includes all hours between 7:00 p.m. on Friday and 7:00 a.m. on the following Monday. 
(Ord. No. 93-05, § 1, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-32. - Prohibited parking on public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park a commercial vehicle on any public property located within the geographical boundaries of the city, or to otherwise obstruct any public street, parkway, highway, road, right-of-way or other similar public property unless otherwise permitted by this article. 
(b)  No overnight or weekend parking of commercial vehicles shall be permitted on public property during the times set forth in the definitions of weekend and overnight parking in section 50-31. Any owner and/or operator of any commercial vehicle so parked will be subject to the enforcement provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-05, § 2, 2-16-93)  
Sec. 50-33. - Mechanical work on commercial vehicles prohibited on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner and/or operator of a commercial vehicle to park such commercial vehicle on any public property for the purpose of performing any work upon such commercial vehicle, including, but not limited to, repairs, mechanical work, maintenance or any other work similar in nature, nor any work involving the use of any types of fluids, oils, solvents or their liquid substances except under such circumstances where the repairs are of an emergency nature which have rendered the vehicle inoperable, and immediately upon completion of such emergency repairs the vehicle shall be removed from the public property and any parts or other debris utilized in conducting such emergency repairs shall be cleaned up by the owner and/or operator of the commercial vehicle or the person performing such emergency repairs thereon. Under no circumstances, however, shall any commercial vehicle so disabled be permitted to remain parked on public property overnight or over a weekend. 
(Ord. No. 93-05, § 3, 2-16-93)  
Sec. 50-34. - Permitted parking. 
(a)  This article shall not apply with regard to any commercial vehicle which is lawfully on the off-street parking area of a property owner when the parking of such commercial vehicle is necessary to the operation of the property owner's business, including employee parking, customer parking and parking for deliveries and services necessary to the operation of such business. 
(b)  All property owners and/or persons having or conducting business in the geographical boundaries of the city shall provide an off-street parking area for their customers and for any deliveries which might be required by such business and shall not use or permit to be used any public property for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 93-05, § 4, 2-16-93)  
Sec. 50-35. - Commercial parking on private property unrelated to business. 
No commercial vehicles of three axles or more shall be permitted to be parked on any private property located within the geographical boundaries of the city unless such private property is occupied and used by a business located thereon, which business shall have a valid local business tax receipt issued by the city, shall otherwise be in compliance with all other ordinances and resolutions of the city, and shall be actively involved in the conducting of a properly and lawfully licensed business activity. No private property shall be used solely for the purpose of parking of commercial vehicles unconnected with any business or business activity being conducted on the property. No private property shall be used solely for the purpose or use as a parking lot for commercial vehicles or as an area for the performance of mechanical work on such vehicles as prohibited by section 50-33. 
(Ord. No. 93-05, § 5, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-09)  
Sec. 50-36. - Penalties for violation of article; procedure for enforcement. 
Any owner and/or operator parking a commercial vehicle or performing mechanical work in violation of the terms of this article shall be subjected to one of the following penalties: 
(1)  Issuance of a traffic citation by a member of the city police department for obstruction of public streets, highways and roads pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 316.2045 and county ordinances. If the commercial vehicle constitutes a danger to vehicular traffic using the highway, it may be ordered removed to the nearest place of safety, with the cost of such removal to be borne by and be a lien against such commercial vehicle, as provided in subsection (3) of this section. 
(2)  Issuance of a notice of violation by a city building official or code compliance officer requiring the owner and/or operator to appear before the city code compliance board, which shall have jurisdiction to impose penalties pursuant to the authority granted by F.S. ch. 162. 
(3)  Towing of the commercial vehicle parked in violation of the terms of this article by the city or its authorized agents to a secure location at the expense of the owner and/or operator, who shall also be responsible for any and all costs related to the storage of such commercial vehicle. The commercial vehicle shall not be released until the cost of such towing and related expenses have been paid and any code compliance fine imposed has also been paid to the city. Upon such towing and storage, the city code compliance division shall make a reasonable effort to determine the name and current address of the owner and/or operator and to inform such owner and/or operator of the fact that the vehicle has been towed, the location where it is being stored and the amount of all fees and penalties which must be paid before the vehicle will be released. For purposes of notification, the code compliance division shall be entitled to rely upon the last-known name and address of the owner and/or operator as reflected in the official records of the state department of motor vehicles or any other official state records containing such information. 
(Ord. No. 93-05, § 6, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 93-08, § 1, 6-15-93; Ord. No. 2001-09, 6-19-01)  
Chapter 54 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 42; public service tax, § 46-191 et seq.; zoning regulations regarding utilities, § 78-175. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Authority of the water and sewer department. 
(a)  There is hereby established a department of water and sewer. The department shall be administered by a department head appointed in accordance with the provisions of the Charter. 
(b)  The department of water and sewer shall exercise exclusive supervisory control over the operation of the water distribution of the city, together with any extensions thereof, and the sanitary sewer system of the city, as well as the treatment and disposal of sewage thereof. 
(c)  The water and sewer department shall operate the water and sewer systems as an enterprise. All costs, expenses, capital improvements, salaries, fees and other appropriate and necessary expenditures shall be paid out of the revenues generated by the sale of water and sewer services and other moneys resulting from the operation of the water and sewer systems. The water and sewer department shall maintain a separate budget as may be approved by the city council. All revenues of the water and sewer systems shall be segregated and deposited in a fund separate and apart from the general funds of the city and used to meet the operation, maintenance, depreciation, labor, interest, bond retirement, sinking funds requirements and additions and improvements or other necessary expenses and indebtedness properly assigned to the operation of the water and sewer systems including personnel, salaries, advisory fees, engineering fees, attorney fees, and other appropriate matters. 
(d)  Contracts for water and sewer services may be entered into in the name of the city by the water and sewer department as may from time to time be authorized by the city council and approved by the mayor. 
(e)  The water and sewer department shall operate within the framework as set forth in the ordinances and resolutions of the city. 
(f)  The water and sewer department may establish rules and regulations governing efficient operation of the water distribution system and the sewer system of the city. Rules and regulations shall be submitted to the water and sewer board at public hearing after at least ten days' notice published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The water and sewer board may approve, delete, amend, change, or modify any proposed rule or regulation after public hearing thereon. All rules and regulations adopted by the water and sewer board shall be submitted for approval to the city council who may adopt, reject, or amend such rules and regulations by ordinance. No rules or regulations shall become effective until adopted by ordinance by the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 50.25(a)—(d), (j), (k)). 
Charter reference— Water and sewer department, art. VIII, §§ 1—4, 6, 7. 
Cross reference— Water and sewer board, § 54-1.1.  
Sec. 54-1.1. - Water and sewer advisory board. 
(a)  There is hereby established a water and sewer advisory board in accordance with the provisions of the Charter, article VIII, section 5. A member shall be an individual of outstanding reputation for integrity, responsibility and business ability. No person who is an officer or employee of the city in any other capacity shall be a member of the water and sewer board. The advisory board shall assist the city council in all matters relating to the operation and maintenance of the water and sewer systems, rates, condition of the system, efficiency of its operations, capital requirements, financing, costs and expenses and other appropriate and necessary matters as may be requested by the mayor or city council by resolution. 
(b)  The water and sewer advisory board shall meet monthly in regular meeting and in special meetings as may be requested by the mayor or city council. The board shall inquire into the management of the water and sewer systems of the city, financial requirements, rates, and all policy matters relating thereto and advise the city council and the mayor as to their findings and recommendations. 
(c)  The water and sewer board shall advise the mayor and the water and sewer department head as to all matters relating to the water and sewer systems of the city, including but not limited to capital requirements, financing, rate structure, and management of the system. The board shall advise the city council of its findings and recommendations relating thereto. In addition, the board shall recommend rules and regulations relating to the efficient operation of the water and sewer systems which shall be effective upon adoption by the city council by ordinance. 
(d)  Rates for water and sewer services shall be established in the following manner: 
(1)  The mayor or city council shall request the water and sewer board to consider the appropriateness of water and sewer rates and charges. The board shall hold a public hearing at which time it shall receive evidence relating to the need and necessity of rates and charges. The board shall permit all members of the public to request information, comment on the appropriateness of the proposed rates, and present other matters in relation thereto. 
(2)  The board shall recommend appropriate rates and charges to the city council together with such findings and recommendations that it deems appropriate. 
(3)  The city council shall hold a public hearing as to the need and necessity of the proposed rates and charges. At the public hearing the city council shall hear the recommendations of the mayor or department head and the recommendations of the water and sewer board and the comments of all interested members of the public. Thereafter the city council shall establish the rates and charges by resolution. 
(4)  All rates and charges for water and sewer services shall be sufficient to defray all costs and expenses of the water and sewer systems, including but not limited to bond issue requirements, capital improvements, salaries, expenses, maintenance, depreciation, interest payments, and other necessary expenses and indebtedness of the water and sewer systems. 
(e)  Bonds, special assessments, and other financing of water and sewer systems shall be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1985, §§ 50.25(e)—(i), 155.65.02B) 
Charter reference— Water and sewer board, art. VIII, §§ 5—7.  
Sec. 54-2. - Water and sewer department regulations adopted. 
(a)  The city council hereby adopts the rules and regulations of the city department of water and sewer, which is made a part of this chapter, and referred to as exhibit A, rules and regulations—general; exhibit B, rules and regulations—sewer service; and exhibit C, rules and regulations—water service, which are not printed in this Code, but are on file in the city clerk's office. Further, the city council hereby adopts the form agreements as set forth in exhibit D, agreement for construction of sanitary sewage facilities, and exhibit E, agreement for construction of water facilities, which are not printed in this Code, but are on file in the city clerk's office. The water and sewer board shall have the power and authority to act in accordance with the rules, regulations and agreements as incorporated in this section by reference. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall in any way limit the power of the city to establish policies in accordance with the Charter applicable to the department of water and sewer, or to amend the rules, regulations and agreements adopted in this section, or to limit the powers of the water and sewer board provided by ordinance in accordance with the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 90-46, §§ 1—5, 12-20-91)  
Sec. 54-3. - Water and sewer board resolutions. 
Competent evidence, for the purpose of this section, means testimony or writings which, in the opinion of the city council, enable it to determine questions of fact presented. Such testimony evidence need not be sworn to and may contain heresay, and any writings need not be authenticated. All resolutions of the water and sewer board shall come to the city council with a presumption of correctness, and the city council shall not overrule, reverse or amend such resolutions or rules without there existing, at a hearing on the matter, competent evidence supporting the decision to overrule, reverse or amend such resolution or rule of the water and sewer board. 
(Ord. No. 90-70, §§ 1, 2, 6-16-92)  
Sec. 54-4. - County water pollution regulations adopted by reference. 
The provisions of section 24-11 of the Code of Metropolitan Dade County, pertaining to prohibitions against water pollution, are hereby adopted by reference as fully as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 1985, § 50.20)  
Sec. 54-5. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person or business association failing to comply with the regulatory requirements or prohibitions of this chapter shall be penalized in the sum of $100.00 per day for every day of failure to comply with this chapter, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any individual or entity who allows the conditions prohibited by section 54-72 to exist, be permitted or maintained, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00 per day for each day during which such condition exists. 
(Code 1985, § 50.99)  
Sec. 54-6. - Water and sewer service charges. 
The rates and charges for water and sewer service are not printed in the Code but are on file in the city clerk's office.  
Secs. 54-7—54-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 54-36—54-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 54-51. - Required. 
The owner of each lot or parcel of land within the city on which any building or other improvement is now located or situated, or shall hereafter be located or situated, to be used or intended for human habitation or occupancy for residential, commercial, industrial, or other use and which lies within 250 feet from any water main located in the city shall be required to connect or cause to be connected the building or improvement with the water main in such a manner as to meet the requirements of the South Florida Building Code and the Dade County Public Works Manual. The connection shall be made and done within 30 days of the completion of the water main or on completion of the construction or erection of the building or improvement. 
(Code 1985, § 50.01)  
Sec. 54-52. - City authorized to make connection. 
If any owner of any lot or parcel of land so improved within the city shall fail or refuse to connect with the water main when required to do so by the terms of section 54-51, then the city shall be authorized to make the connection and enter on the lot or parcel of land for the purpose of making the connection. 
(Code 1985, § 50.02)  
Sec. 54-53. - Recovery of costs. 
The city shall be entitled to recover the cost of making the connection provided for in section 54-52, together with reasonable penalties, interest, and attorney's fees by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. In addition and as an alternative means of collecting the costs of making the connection, the city shall have a lien on the lot or parcel of land for the costs, penalties, interest, and attorney's fees, which shall be of equal dignity with the lien of state and county municipal taxes. The lien may be foreclosed by the city in the same manner as provided by the laws of the state for the foreclosure of mortgages on real estate. 
(Code 1985, § 50.03)  
Sec. 54-54. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 54-54.1. - Scope and intent. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, this article applies to water customers of the Hialeah Gardens Water and Sewer Department, as defined herein. The purpose of this article is to implement the provisions of section 62-555.360 of the Florida Administrative Code, promulgated under authority of F.S. ch. 403, pt. VI, by the department of environmental protection, which requires public water systems to establish a cross-connection control program to detect and prevent cross-connections that create or may create an imminent and substantial danger to public health. In addition to internal isolation required by the Florida Building Code, new water customers shall provide approved backflow preventers next to the service connection for the containment of their premises. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-54.2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in this article: 
ANSI shall mean American National Standards Institute, Inc., 1430 Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10018. 
Approved backflow preventer shall mean a backflow preventer as defined herein that is approved by the department in accordance with applicable state and local regulations including the Florida Building Code. 
ASME shall mean American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 345 E. 47 St., New York, N.Y. 10017. 
ASSE shall mean American Society of Sanitary Engineering, 28901 Clemens Rd., Westlake, Ohio 41445. 
Auxiliary water supply shall mean any water supply on or available to the premises other than the public potable water supply. Auxiliary water supplies include, but are not limited to, another provider's potable water supply; a private water supply such as a well for domestic, irrigation or fire flow purposes; natural source(s) such as a spring, lake, river, stream, canal or ocean; used water; reclaimed water; and industrial fluids. 
AWWA Manual M14 4th Ed. shall mean American Water Works Association Manual of Water Supply Practices "Recommended Procedure for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control," as amended. 
AWWA shall mean the American Water Works Association, 6666 W. Quincy Ave., Denver, Colorado 80235. 
Backflow shall mean the reversal of flow of water or inflow of other substances into a potable water distribution system through a cross-connection. Backflow may degrade the quality of the potable water below required standards. 
Backflow preventer shall mean a mechanical assembly or device or means that prohibits backflow into a potable water system. Only the following types may be approved: 
(1)  Air gap separation (AG) shall mean unobstructed vertical physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and the flood level rim of an open or non-pressure receiving vessel. An approved air gap separation shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top of the rim of the vessel. In no case shall an air gap separation be less than one inch. 
(2)  Double check detector assembly (DCDA) shall mean a specially designed assembly composed of a line-size approved double check valve assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for only very low rates of flow up to three gallons per minute (gpm) and shall show a registration for all rates of flow. The DCDA is used only on fire systems. 
(3)  Double check valve assembly (DC) shall mean an assembly composed of two single, independently acting approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly, and fitting with properly located resilient seated test cocks suitable for testing the water tightness of each check valve. A check valve is a valve that is drip-tight in the normal direction of flow when the inlet pressure is one psi and the outlet pressure is zero. The check valve shall permit no leakage in a direction reverse to the normal flow. The closure element (e.g., clapper) shall be internally weighted or otherwise internally loaded to promote rapid and positive closure. This assembly shall be used only to protect against a nonhealth hazard. 
(4)  Dual check valve (DuC) shall mean a device consisting of two single, independently acting check valves. The closure element (e.g., poppet) shall be internally weighted or otherwise internally loaded to promote rapid and positive closure. This assembly shall be used only to protect against a nonhealth hazard. 
(5)  Pressure vacuum breaker (PVB) shall mean an assembly consisting of an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve, with properly located resilient-seated test cocks and tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves attached at each end. The PVB prevents backsiphonage, but it is not effective, and should not be used, in backpressure conditions. 
(6)  Reduced pressure detector assembly (RPDA) shall mean a specially designed assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. The meter shall register accurately for only very low rates of flow up to three gpm and shall show a registration for all rates of flow. The RPDA is used only on fire systems. 
(7)  Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer (RP) shall mean an assembly containing within its structure a minimum of two independently acting approved check valves, together with an automatically operating pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves. The first check valve reduces the supply pressure by a predetermined amount so that during normal flow and at cessation of normal flow the pressure between the checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. These units are equipped with tightly closing resilient seated shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly, and with properly located resilient seated test cocks. 
Backpressure shall mean any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system above the supply pressure at the point of consideration, which could cause a reversal of the normal direction of flow. 
Backsiphonage shall mean a form of backflow due to a reduction in system pressure which causes a subatmospheric pressure to exist at a site in the water system. 
Building official shall mean that official designated by the appointing authority, as defined in the Florida Building Code. 
Certified backflow preventer tester shall mean a person who has satisfactorily completed a nationally recognized backflow preventer testing training program that meets or exceeds any existing Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) standards or that is determined by the City of Hialeah Gardens to meet the requirements of the latest edition of AWWA M14 Manual. After satisfactorily completing a backflow preventer testing training program, as described above, the person shall be required to pass a written examination administered under the direction of Miami-Dade County Construction Trades Qualifying Board (CTQB). All testers are required to be re-certified by Miami- Dade County CTQB every two years. 
Code inspector or Code compliance officer shall have the meaning and powers defined in section 2-250.3 of the city Code. 
Cross connection shall mean any temporary or permanent physical connection or arrangement between a public water system and any other system or source through which it is possible, given pressure differentials, for any substance other than potable water to flow into the public water system. 
Department shall mean the Hialeah Gardens Water and Sewer Department, including its director, employees, agents, designees, and successors. 
Existing water customer shall mean a water customer as defined herein for which a water meter is installed and operating on or before the effective date of this article. 
Florida Fire Prevention Code shall mean rule 69A-60 Florida Administrative Code. 
Industrial fluid shall mean any fluid or solution which is intended to be or has been used in or results from activities of manufacture, production, fabrication, repair, packaging, processing or sale of goods or services or growing of agricultural crops or for fire suppression purposes. This may include, but is not limited to: polluted used waters; polluted auxiliary water; all types of process waters; chemicals in fluid form, including pesticides and fertilizers; fuels and oils; acids and alkalies; circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling waters that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances. 
Internal isolation shall mean fixture isolation and/or isolation of an area or zone within a customer's premises, downstream of the service connection. Fixture isolation means installing an approved backflow preventer at the source of the potential contamination. Area or zone isolation is confining the potential source of contamination within a specific area. 
NFPA shall mean National Fire Protection Association, Quincy, Massachusetts. 
New water customer shall mean a water customer, as defined herein, who applies for the provision of water service after the effective date of this article. 
Nonhealth hazard shall mean substances which, although not dangerous to health, may impart offensive solids, color, odor or taste to the public water supply. 
Reclaimed water shall mean waste water which has received at least secondary treatment and basic disinfection and is approved for reuse in compliance with regulations of state agencies. 
Residential service connection shall mean any service connection, including any dedicated irrigation or fire service connection, that is two inches or less in diameter and that supplies water to a building or premises, containing only dwelling units. Non-residential service connection is any other service connection. 
Service connection shall mean the terminal end of water delivery from the public water system, that is, where the utility loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its juncture with the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the potable water system. 
State agencies shall mean the department of environmental protection, the department of health, the state fire marshal, their successors, and any other instrumentality of the State of Florida charged under provisions of F.S. ch. 403, pt. VI, or other statute or regulation with testing, inspecting, certifying, enforcing, or otherwise assuring compliance with environmental, health and safety standards, especially those for safe drinking water. 
Tampering shall mean dismantling, removal, or rendering ineffective after installation, testing and certification, except in order to effect an approved replacement. 
Used water shall mean any water supplied to a customer's water system after it has passed through the service connection. 
Water customer shall mean any individual, municipality, corporation, partnership, firm, association or other entity receiving water service from the department for consumption or usage within its premises or for resale to ultimate consumers. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-54.3. - Prohibition of uncontrolled cross-connections. 
It shall be unlawful for any water customer to install or maintain any cross connections without providing backflow prevention to protect the public water supply. To the extent required by law, educational materials shall be provided by the department to water customers and to relevant businesses and employees, alerting them to the dangers of backflow through cross-connections and to prevention measures. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-54.4. - Backflow preventers required. 
Certain water customers of the department shall install a backflow preventer as provided herein. Backflow preventers installed in the facilities listed in [subsection] (3) below shall be tested by a certified backflow preventer tester. 
(1)  Water customers who own or operate or use or engage in the types of businesses, facilities, substances, and activities listed in [subsections] (3) or (4) below shall install an approved backflow preventer of the type indicated below at the service connection entering their property, within the deadlines listed herein. The same deadlines apply to installation of backflow preventers on Classes 3, 4 and 5 fire suppression systems, as defined in section 54-54.5 serving the premises. New water customers who own or operate or use or engage in the types of businesses, facilities, substances, and activities listed in [subsections] (3) or (4) below shall have an approved backflow preventer as a condition of issuance of building permits or of a certificate of occupancy, and the permanent installation of a water meter. This requirement is not limited to those facilities, premises, uses or situations listed herein but also applies to any others distinctly determined by the department to require such protection. Failure to install a required backflow preventer as required herein, will result in civil penalties to be levied against the responsible party. In the event that the customer provides proof that a plumbing permit has been obtained from the applicable building department, and installs the required backflow preventer, within 90 days of notice of the violation, the Hialeah Gardens Water and Sewer Department may choose to waive the applicable penalties. 
(2)  In the event that the use of a property is changed to one listed in [subsections] (3) or (4) below, and such property does not have a backflow preventer, the property owner must notify the department of the new use and comply with this article. 
(3)  Backflow preventers shall be installed by existing water customers in the following facilities within six months after the effective date of this article. 
Category of Customer 	Backflow Preventer 
Beverage processing plant, including any brewery 	RP 
Cannery, packing house, rendering plant, or any facility where fruit, vegetable, or animal matter is processed, excluding any premises where there is only restaurant or food service facility 	RP 
Car wash 	RP 
Chemical plant or facility using water in the manufacturing, processing, compounding, or treatment of chemicals, including any facility where a chemical that does not meet the requirements in paragraph 62-555.320(3)(a), F.A.C., is used as an additive to the water 	RP 
Construction site 	DC 
Dairy, creamery, ice cream plant, cold-storage plant, or ice manufacturing plant 	RP 
Dye plant 	RP 
Film laboratory or processing facility or film manufacturing plant, excluding any small, noncommercial darkroom facility 	RP 
Hospital; medical research center; sanitarium; autopsy facility; medical, dental, or veterinary clinic where surgery is performed; or plasma center 	RP 
Laboratory, excluding any laboratory at an elementary, middle, or high school 	RP 
Laundry (commercial), excluding any self-service laundry or laundromat 	RP 
Marine repair facility, marine cargo handling facility, or boat moorage 	RP 
Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing, or fabricating facility using water in any of its operations or processes, including any aircraft or automotive manufacturing plant 	DC if the facility presents a low hazard; or RP if the facility presents a high hazard 
Mortuary 	RP 
Premises where oil or gas is produced, developed, processed, blended, stored, refined, or transmitted in a pipeline or where oil or gas tanks are repaired or tested, excluding any premises where there is only a fuel dispensing facility 	RP 
Premises where there is an auxiliary or reclaimed water system 	A. At or for a residential service connection: DuC 
B. At or for a non-residential service connection: DC if the auxiliary or reclaimed water is a low hazard; or RP if the auxiliary or reclaimed water is a high hazard 
Premises where there is a cooling tower 	RP 
Premises where there is an irrigation system that is using potable water and that is connected directly to the distribution system via a dedicated irrigation service connection 	PVB if backpressure cannot develop in the downstream piping; or RP if backpressure could develop in the downstream piping 
Radioactive material processing or handling facility or nuclear reactor 	RP 
Paper products plant using a wet process 	RP 
Plating facility, including any aircraft or automotive manufacturing plant 	RP 
Restricted-access facility 	RP 
Steam boiler plant 	RP 
Tall building - i.e., a building with five or more floors at or above ground level 	DC if the customer has no potable water distribution lines connected to the suction side of a booster pump; or RP if the customer has one or more potable water distribution lines connected to the suction side of a booster pump 
Wastewater treatment plant or wastewater pumping station 	RP 
 
Facility: 	Backflow Preventer* 
Beverage processing or bottling plant 	RP 
Chemical and petroleum manufacturing, storage, processing or treatment, including any facility where chemicals are used in processing a product, or where chemical baths are employed 	RP 
Correctional facilities 	RP 
Dyeing plant 	RP 
Exterminating companies 	RP 
Funeral home; morgue 	RP 
Health care facilities: clinics, skilled 	
Nursing, intermediate care, veterinary, ambulatory surgical centers 	RP 
Plating (chemical, electrochemical, mechanical), including any plant with a chromium, cadmium or other plating operation or a galvanizing, anodizing, stripping, oxidizing, etching, passivating, or pickling operation 	RP 
Power plant 	RP 
Radioactive materials present 	RP 
Reclaimed water customer 	RP 
Sewage or stormwater treatment plant, pumping station, or any premises with a wastewater pump 	RP 
 
* Abbreviations refer to types of preventers described in section 54-54.2. 
AG = Air gap 
DC = Double check valve 
DuC = Dual check valve 
PVB = Pressure vacuum breaker 
RP = Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer 
(d)  When an addition is made to an existing building and the addition is 25 percent or more of the area of the existing building, a water customer who owns, operates, uses or engages in a business, facility, substance or activity of a type listed in [subsection] (3) above shall install an approved backflow preventer of the appropriate type. When repairs and alterations amounting to more than 50 percent of the value of the existing building are made during any 12-month period, a water customer who owns, operates, uses or engages in a business, facility, substance or activity of a type listed in [subsection] (3) above shall install an approved backflow preventer of the appropriate type. The value of a building or structure shall be the estimated cost of constructing a new building of like size, design and materials at the site of the original structure, assuming such site to be clear. Cost of additions, alterations and repairs shall be construed as the total cost of labor, materials and services based on current prices for new materials. 
(e)  Any customer that is found to have a backflow preventer installed, that is not in accordance with the type required in section 54-54.4(3) and section 54-54.5(b) will be required to replace the existing backflow preventer with one of the appropriate type, as specified in section 54-54.4(3) and section 54-54.5(b) including the small low lying three-sided barrier wall. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-54.4.1. - Reclaimed water regulations. 
All customers of properties using reclaimed water as an auxiliary source of water supply shall install an appropriate backflow preventer, as listed in section 54-54.4(3) on the potable water service connection, immediately adjacent to the water meter serving the property. Existing customers must effect this installation within six months after the effective date of this article. New water customers who own or operate such facilities shall install an appropriate backflow preventer, as listed in section 54-54.4(3), as a condition to permitting, issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and installation of a water meter. The department shall set forth specific limitations and requirements, in accordance with all rules and regulations promulgated by state agencies, in each customer agreement for use of reclaimed water. No reclaimed water shall be provided by the department except under terms of an agreement with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-54.5. - Fire suppression systems. 
(a)  Fire suppression systems will be classified on the basis of water source and arrangement of supplies as follows: 
Class 1. Direct connections from public service connection only; no pumps, antifreeze or other additives of any kind; all sprinkler drains discharging to atmosphere, dry wells, or other safe outlets. 
Class 2. Same as Class 1 except that booster pumps may be installed in the connections. (Booster pumps do not affect the potability of the system.) It is necessary that pressure in the water main is not reduced below 20 psi to avoid drawing too much water from the main. 
Class 3. Direct connection from the service connection, plus one or more of the following: elevated storage tanks; fire pumps taking suction from aboveground covered reservoirs or tanks; pressure tanks. (All storage facilities are filled or connected to public water only; the water in the tanks is to be maintained in a potable condition. Otherwise, Class 3 systems are the same as Class 5.) 
Class 4. Similar to Class 1 and Class 2, but with an auxiliary water supply dedicated to fire department use and available to the premises, such as an auxiliary supply located within 1,700 feet (518m) of the pumper connection. 
Class 5. Directly supplied from the service connection and interconnected with auxiliary supplies, such as pumps taking suction from reservoirs exposed to contamination, or rivers and ponds; driven wells; mills or other industrial water systems; or where antifreeze or other additives are used. 
(b)  New water customers and existing water customers who are installing new fire suppression systems shall install backflow preventers on all fire suppression systems in accordance with the table below: 
Class 	Minimum Level of Protection * 
Class 1 	DCDA 
Class 2 	DCDA 
Class 3 	DCDA 
Class 4 	RPDA 
Class 5 	RPDA 
 
* Abbreviations refer to types of preventers described in section 54-54.2. 
DCDA = double check detector assembly 
RPDA = reduced pressure detector assembly 
(c)  Existing water customers with Class 1 and Class 2 fire suppression systems are not required to install backflow preventers. 
(d)  All existing systems being modified or upgraded shall have provision for any additional head loss caused by inclusion of the required backflow preventer in the modification design. 
(e)  Exemptions may be granted to water customers with existing systems who can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department and the Miami-Dade Fire Rescue Department that installation of a backflow preventer would degrade the effectiveness of the fire protection system to a level unacceptable for fire suppression purposes. 
(f)  All installations, testing, maintenance, repairs and replacements of backflow preventers used for fire suppression systems shall be performed by a certified fire protection contractor as defined in F.S. § 633.021(5), and certified in accordance with F.S. § 633.521. 
(g)  In accordance with NFPA-13, all fire department connections shall be on the street side of buildings and shall be located and arranged so that hose lines can be readily and conveniently attached to the inlets without interference from any nearby objects including buildings, fences, posts, or other fire department connections. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-54.6. - Technical requirements. 
All approved backflow preventers shall conform to specifications set forth in the applicable building code and to rules and regulations promulgated by state agencies. The following specifications are adopted until and unless superseded: 
(1)  Air gap (AG) shall conform to ANSI/ASME standard A 112.1.2-1991. 
(2)  All other preventers shall have satisfactorily passed a laboratory and field evaluation in accordance with the latest editions of either Section 10 of the ninth edition of the University of Southern California's Manual of Cross-Connection Control and been approved by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC-FCC & HR); or with ANSI/AWWA Standard C510-97 or C511-97. They are required to be testable in line. 
(3)  Reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly (RP) shall conform to ASSE Standard 1013 or ANSI/AWWA Standard C511-97. 
(4)  Double check valve assembly (DC) shall conform to ASSE Standard 1024 or ANSI/AWWA Standard C510-97. 
(5)  Dual check valve (DuC) shall conform to ANSI/ASSE Standard 1024. 
(6)  Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB) shall conform to ANSI/ASSE Standard 1020-1990. 
(7)  Double check detector assembly (DCDA) shall conform to ANSI/ASSE Standard 1048-1995. 
(8)  Reduced pressure detector backflow assembly (RPD) shall conform to ANSI/ASSE Standard 1047-1995. 
(9)  Further specifications for backflow preventers and their installation, and additional and modified ones for specific purposes, may be provided in standard details and/or written specifications issued by the department, in accord with standards adopted by the Florida Building Code and any regulations promulgated by state agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-54.7. - Installation of backflow preventer. 
(a)  Water customers, at their own expense, shall prepare plans and shall obtain a permit for the required backflow preventer. For properties located in the City of Hialeah Gardens, the City of Hialeah Gardens Building Official shall review said plans and charge a fee in accordance with the building department's fee schedule, as may be modified from time to time, for the review of each backflow preventer and the issuance of a permit. In the case of fire suppression systems, the Miami-Dade Fire Rescue Department shall charge a fee in accordance with Administrative Order No. 4-45 of Miami-Dade County to review and inspect each installation. Permitting procedures and standard details shall be established and modified from time to time by means of agreements between and among applicable county, municipal and state agencies. 
(b)  The backflow preventer installer must be a validly licensed contractor possessing a certificate of competency appropriate for the preventer type and location involved. 
(c)  The backflow preventer shall be installed at the customer's expense on the customer's property immediately adjacent to the water meter serving that property. The customer shall provide adequate space for a backflow preventer on the customer's property. The backflow preventer shall be readily accessible for maintenance and testing. No part of it may be beneath the ground surface or submerged under water, and it must not be subject to flooding by a ten-year storm. 
(d)  The installation shall be located at the front property line at one side of the property in accordance with the department's standard details. All backflow preventers that are installed where visible from an area accessible to the public shall be shielded from public view by a visual barrier as listed below: 
(1)  A barrier wall not more than six inches above the highest point of the body of the assembly whereas the stems of the shutoff valves are visible from outside of the wall structure; or 
(2)  A recessed covered space which is part of the building envelope; or 
(3)  A manufactured cover for small diameter assemblies up to two inches. 
Such barriers shall be at least two feet apart from the backflow preventer and must not obstruct access for maintenance and testing. Existing backflow preventer installations, shall be exempt from the installation of a visual barrier. Additionally, any such barrier shall be a minimum of seven and one-half feet apart from any fire department connection including, but not limited to siamese connections and post indicator valves. Said fire department appliances are to be installed in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code, and NFPA standards 13 and 24. 
(e)  Upon completion of the installation, satisfactory testing shall be performed as provided in section 54-55.3(b). Testing requires a water shutdown usually lasting five to 30 minutes. For facilities that require an uninterrupted supply of water, and when it is not possible to provide water service from two separate meters, provisions shall be made for a parallel installation of backflow preventers. The existence of any unprotected bypass around a backflow preventer when the apparatus is in need of testing, repair or replacement is unlawful. 
(f)  The customer shall install plumbing lines of sufficient size to compensate for pressure losses which may result from operation of a backflow preventer. Provision must be made for thermal expansion. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any water connections to exist between the water meter and the backflow preventer. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a backflow preventer from service without the express written consent of the Hialeah Gardens Water and Sewer Department, except for the purposes of replacement, as described in section 54-55.4(c). Unauthorized removal will be considered tampering, as described in section 54-55.2 of the Code of City of Hialeah Gardens. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-54.8. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Buildings of four stories or less without booster pumps which contain only dwelling units (including single family residences, town homes, small apartment buildings), and all other structures or facilities not listed in section 54-54.4, shall be exempt from the requirement of installation of a backflow preventer, provided that: 
(1)  No cross-connections exist or are subsequently installed on the property; 
(2)  No uses or facilities listed in section 54-54.4 receive water through the same service connection; and 
(3)  Any auxiliary water supply is not cross-connected. 
(b)  Exemptions from or exceptions to the department's standard details may be granted by the applicable building official or his designee for installation of backflow preventers where physical limitations are present, provided that the preventer as installed is tested satisfactorily and certified. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-54.9. - Fire hydrants. 
Except for the use of fire hydrants for fire suppression purposes, any use of fire hydrants and fire systems by any person other than the department or the applicable county or municipal fire department without the prior written approval of both, is prohibited and such person may be ordered to cease and desist by the applicable fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-55. - Access required. 
(a)  Any code inspector, certified backflow preventer tester, or authorized representative of the department, at any reasonable time upon reasonable notice and presentation of proper credentials, and upon consent by the property owner or person in charge of the property, building or place, may enter, monitor, sample, test, and inspect, as often as may be necessary, any structure, property, premises, building or place, public or private, residential or nonresidential within the water distribution system of the department, for the purpose of assuring that no cross connections exist and that approved backflow preventers are in place where required. This right of access includes the right to effect any emergency actions necessary, including but not limited to disconnecting water service. Inspections of the facilities listed in section 54-54.4, which pose the greatest potential hazard to the public water supply, are deemed to be a public necessity. 
(b)  No person shall refuse reasonable entry or access to the duly authorized representative who requests entry for any of the purposes set forth in [subsection] (a) above and who presents appropriate credentials identifying himself. 
(c)  No person shall obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such inspection, entry, monitoring, testing, or sampling. 
(d)  An inspection, entry, monitoring, testing and sampling, pursuant to this section may be conducted only after: 
(1)  Consent for the entry, inspection, testing, monitoring and sampling is received from the owner or person in charge of the property, building, premises or place; or 
(2)  An inspection warrant as provided in this section or by law is obtained. 
(e)  An inspection warrant is authorized by this article and may be issued by a judge of any county court or circuit court of this state which has jurisdiction of the place or thing to be searched. 
(f)  The department director or his designee is hereby authorized and empowered to obtain all search or inspection warrants reasonable and necessary to carry out the responsibilities, powers and duties set forth in this article, in accordance with the requirements of the Constitutions of the United States of America and the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-55.1. - Obstruction prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any water customer to maintain or place anything on or near a backflow preventer or other related equipment which obstructs access to the backflow preventer. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-55.2. - Tampering prohibited. 
The intentional tampering with a backflow preventer, rendering it out of compliance with this article, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-55.3. - Testing. 
(a)  Testing standards. All required tests of backflow preventers shall be accomplished in accordance with the procedures in the latest editions of Chapter 8 of AWWA Manual M14 and Section 9 of the University of Southern California's Manual of Cross-Connection Control. 
(b)  Initial. All backflow preventers shall be installed under a plumbing, mechanical or fire permit obtained from the building official. The backflow preventer shall be tested by a certified backflow preventer tester as defined herein and certified as testing satisfactory prior to final plumbing approval being granted and prior to the installation of the permanent water meter. Where a permanent water meter is not yet installed, the certified tester shall obtain water for testing the backflow preventer via a method approved by the department. 
(c)  Routine testing. 
(1)  All backflow preventers installed on a non-residential or multi-family residential property with service size greater than two inches must be tested at least annually to assure that they are performing satisfactorily by a certified backflow preventer tester. 
(2)  All backflow preventers installed on a residential property with service size no greater than two inches must be tested at least biennially to assure that they are performing satisfactorily by a certified backflow preventer tester. 
(3)  The first routine testing of each backflow preventer installed subsequent to enactment of this article shall occur within 12 months of installation for non-residential, and within 24 months for residential customers. 
(d)  Change of occupancy or ownership. Inspection of premises and satisfactory testing of an existing backflow preventer may be required before initiation of water service to a new customer or issuance of a new certificate of occupancy. 
(e)  Deficiencies. If deficiencies are identified during any testing, the tester shall provide the water customer and the department with a listing of the defects, on a form acceptable to the department, within five days of the test, which warns the customer that defects must be repaired within 35 days of the department's receipt of the report. Retesting shall be performed at or before the end of that period. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-55.4. - Repairs and replacement. 
(a)  It is the customer's responsibility to assure that all defects listed by backflow preventer testers are corrected. 
(b)  Failure to complete repairs and have the backflow preventer certified as testing satisfactory within 35 days of the department's receipt of the report listing any deficiency shall result in a civil violation notice. The time allowed for correction shall be ten days. Failure to correct the defect and comply with the civil violation notice may result in a civil action by the city. 
(c)  If a backflow preventer cannot be repaired to test satisfactorily, the customer shall replace it with the type required in section 54-54.4 and have the replacement tested and certified. 
(d)  All repairs and replacement of a backflow preventer shall be done with a valid permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-55.5. - Test reporting. 
Upon completion of testing, a test report form approved by the department shall be completed by the certified backflow preventer tester and submitted to the customer and to the department, no later than ten days following the test. If the backflow preventer required repair before testing satisfactorily, that fact shall be indicated. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-55.6. - Modifications of facilities. 
Water customers shall notify the department of any change of use of their premises or installation of fixtures or facilities which may affect the performance of existing backflow preventers or which may require installation of new backflow preventers. An evaluation of cross-connection protection needs must be performed by the department before any such new uses or fixtures or facilities receive water service. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-55.7. - Reporting and recordkeeping. 
(a)  All incidents of suspected or actual backflow shall be reported to the department by all persons with knowledge. 
(b)  The department shall retain all records incident to the cross-connection control program which are mandated by this article and by rules and regulations promulgated by state agencies pursuant to provisions of F.S. ch. 403, pt. VI. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-55.8. - Enforcement. 
The following enforcement actions are authorized separately or in combination. 
(1)  The department may take emergency action to eliminate a cross connection involving a health hazard, or to stop and prevent backflow, by any practicable means, including disconnection of water service and installation of an approved backflow preventer, billing the customer for the cost of labor, applicable permit fees, and materials (including overhead and fringe benefits). 
(2)  The department may refuse water service to a customer in violation of the provisions of this article, or to a customer who does not pay costs of department emergency action to prevent backflow within 60 days. Water service may be withheld until the violation is corrected, the costs paid, fines for violations of this chapter under city Code paid, and the affected premises or facilities are certified to be in compliance with all requirements stated herein. 
(3)  The department may add any costs of emergency action to prevent backflow which remain unpaid after 60 days to the customer's bill for services and record and enforce a lien when and as authorized by city Code. 
(4)  Any person who violates any provision of this article or any lawful rule, regulation or written order promulgated under it is liable for any damage caused by such violation to the City of Hialeah Gardens, including, but not limited to damage to the public water supply and costs of rectifying harm, and is also liable directly or indirectly for all damage to other parties. The city may undertake court actions to recover its damages, to restrain, abate or correct violations of this article, to permit access and corrective action, and to prevent use and occupancy of any premises where a probable violation of this article could endanger human health. The term "damages" herein shall be understood to include all those which may be recoverable in civil actions in the courts of Florida. 
(5)  This article may be enforced by code, invoking all applicable provisions of the city Code, and the Florida Building Code, including, but not limited to, civil violation notices, administrative hearings, court appeals, and assessment of fines and costs with further penalties for non-payment. 
(6)  In addition to any civil penalty or court award of damages, any violator shall be liable for the reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city in enforcing the provisions of this article including, but not limited to, the labor and material costs (including overhead and fringe benefits) of emergency enforcement actions, inspections, permit fees, preparation of enforcement reports, photographs, title searches, postage, court or hearing attendance time, and other demonstrable administrative costs for enforcement and collection. All such sums shall become delinquent if not paid within 30 days after receipt by the violator of the department's bill itemizing the costs incurred in enforcing the provisions of this article, or after a hearing officer or court order becomes final (the "due date"). All such delinquent sums shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum after the due date. 
(7)  In lieu of the lien for unpaid civil penalties, if the violator is a water customer, the department may include the amount of any ordered civil penalty including costs and expenses in the water customer's bill for service. 
(8)  Upon the rendition of a judgment or decree by any of the courts of this state, including appellate courts, against any person and in favor of the city to enforce compliance with this article or to award damages to the city, the court shall adjudge a reasonable sum as fees for the attorney acting on behalf of the city in that civil action, in addition to court costs. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Sec. 54-55.9. - Fees and charges. 
Fees and charges imposed herein shall be subject to annual review and modification. The city mayor is hereby authorized to establish future modifications to the department's fees by separate implementing order, which fees shall not become effective until approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 3(Exh. A), 1-16-18)  
Secs. 54-56—54-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq. 
 
Sec. 54-71. - Injurious conditions—Enumerated. 
The following conditions existing, permitted, maintained, kept, or caused by any individual or entity shall constitute a condition injurious to health: 
(1)  Untreated or improperly treated human waste, offal, dead animals or parts thereof, human parts, waste derived from hospitals, or dangerous waste materials from manufacturing processes harmful to human or animal life, and air pollution and gasses which are harmful to human or animal life. 
(2)  Improperly built or maintained septic tanks, water closets, or privies. 
(3)  Discharging or allowing the discharge of septic tank pump-out waste or the discharge of any other product, chemical, or waste which can damage underground aquifers into streams or surface waters or underground aquifers, or into ditches, drainage structures, or on the ground surface. 
(4)  Radioactive material. 
(Code 1985, § 50.35)  
Sec. 54-72. - Same—Prohibited. 
No individual or entity shall allow any conditions enumerated in section 54-71 to exist or be maintained or kept within the city limits of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 50.36)  
Sec. 54-73. - Evidence of violation. 
It shall be prima facie evidence that an individual or entity is allowing an injurious condition prohibited by section 54-72 to exist if, in fact, the condition is found on property that such individual or entity has control of, leases, or owns. 
(Code 1985, § 50.37)  
Secs. 54-74—54-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER UTILITY MANAGEMENT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-06, § 1, adopted June 4, 1996, established provisions authorizing a stormwater utility management program. Said ordinance did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as Art. IV, §§ 54-101—54-132 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 30; taxation and finance, ch. 46. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-101. - Authority and general provisions. 
The city is authorized by the Florida Constitution and the provisions of F.S. ch. 166 and § 403.0893, reconstruct, repair, improve and extend stormwater management systems and to establish just and equitable rates, fees and charges for the services and facilities provided by the system. This article shall hereinafter be known and may be cited as the Stormwater Utility Management Program (SUMP) Ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-06, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 54-102. - Findings of fact and statement of purpose. 
(a)  The city operates and maintains a system of storm and surface water management facilities, including but not limited to inlets, conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, drainage easements, retention and detention basins, infiltration facilities and other components. 
(b)  The elements of the city storm and surface water management system that provide for the collection, storage, treatment, and conveyance of stormwater benefit and provide services to all property within the city. 
(c)  The cost of operating and maintaining the stormwater utility management system and the financing of existing and future repairs, replacements, improvements, and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in proportion to the benefits enjoyed, and the services received therefrom. 
(d)  Due to the age of the existing infrastructure, some rehabilitation and replacement may be required. 
(e)  Water quality is degraded because of erosion and the discharge of nutrients, metals, oil, grease, and other substances into and through the stormwater system. 
(f)  Public health, safety, and welfare are adversely affected by poor water quality and flooding resulting from inadequate stormwater management practices. 
(g)  Real property either uses or benefits from the presence and operation of the stormwater utility management system. 
(h)  Florida local governments have the authority to establish stormwater utility management programs pursuant to the home rule powers provided in the Florida Constitution and F.S. ch. 166 and ch. 403. 
(i)  The Florida Legislature, through the adoption of F.S. § 403.0893, specifically authorizes and encourages local governments to provide stormwater utility management services as a utility function for which service charges may be levied. 
(j)  New and dedicated funding for the stormwater utility management program of the city is needed, and the levy of a stormwater utility management fee is the most equitable method of providing this funding. 
(k)  The Federal Clean Water Act, and the implementing regulations adopted by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), require the permitting of certain municipal stormwater systems to ensure that minimum water quality standards are met. 
(l)  The establishment of a stormwater utility management plan now will mitigate the impact of the costs ultimately imposed upon local governments through the adoption by the EPA of permitting standards for separate stormwater systems. 
(m)  Adoption of a stormwater utility management program will generate revenues needed to implement the level of service standards contained in the city's comprehensive master land use plan drainage element and the capital improvement elements which were adopted in conformance with the requirements of F.S. ch. 163. 
(n)  Local natural resource features such as wetlands, lakes and groundwater supplies can be protected and enhanced as part of the stormwater utility management program. 
(Ord. No. 96-06, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 54-103. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most effective application. 
City means mean the City of Hialeah Gardens, Florida. 
Category I means any lot or parcel developed exclusively for residential purposes including, but not limited to single-family homes, duplexes, multi-family apartments, manufactured homes, mobile homes, and condominiums. 
Category II means any developed lot or parcel not in category I or category III, as defined herein. 
Category III means any property which is undeveloped, or having been developed, has not been significantly altered from its natural state by the addition of improvements such as buildings, structures, impervious surfaces, and changes of grade or landscaping. This includes but is not limited to, vacant property, parks, airports, golf courses, well fields, etc. For the purposes of this section, property shall be considered developed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued. 
Director means the director of the public works department or designee. 
Dwelling unit means any residential space identified for habitation by members of a single household unit. 
Impervious area means any part of any parcel of land that has been modified to reduce the land's natural ability to absorb and hold rainfall. 
Stormwater runoff means that part of precipitation that travels over natural, altered or improved surfaces to any stream, channel, canal, river, impoundment area or city owned and maintained rights-of-way. 
Stormwater utility management plan means a plan for receiving, storing, transporting and treating storm and surface waters within the city stormwater management system. 
Stormwater utility management system includes all natural and manmade elements used to convey storm water to a suitable location, internal or external, to the boundaries of the city. The stormwater management system includes, but is not limited to, all pipes, channels, streams, ditches, wetlands, sinkholes, detention/retention basins, ponds and other stormwater conveyance and percolation or treatment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 96-06, 6-4-96)  
Secs. 54-104—54-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY 
 
Sec. 54-126. - Stormwater management utility established; operational status. 
There is hereby created and established a stormwater management utility, which shall be the operational means of implementing and carrying out the functional requirements of the stormwater utility management plan. The stormwater management utility shall also be responsible for the operation of the city's stormwater management system. 
(Ord. No. 96-06, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 54-127. - Stormwater management utility fee. 
A stormwater fee is hereby imposed upon each and every lot and parcel of land within the city, for the services and facilities provided by the stormwater management utility. 
For purposes of imposing the stormwater fee, all lots and parcels of land within the city shall be classified into one of the following three categories: 
(1)  Category I, as previously defined herein; 
(2)  Category II, as previously defined herein; or 
(3)  Category III, as previously defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 96-06, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 54-128. - Assignment of category by director. 
The director shall determine and assign to each and every lot and parcel of land within the city a customer category as previously defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-06, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 54-129. - Stormwater management utility rates. 
A stormwater management utility rate will be established and adjusted annually by city resolution based upon the projected annual operating and capital improvement budgets for the stormwater management utility as applied to the respective runoff coefficients for the applicable land use categories. However, nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from amending any annual rate resolution during any annual period if deemed necessary and appropriate by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 96-06, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 54-130. - Billing and payment; penalties. 
(a)  Bills or statements for the stormwater utility fee shall be rendered either monthly or bimonthly, in accordance with the regular utility billing cycle of the city by the finance department for all properties subject to the fee. Bills shall be payable at the same time, and in the same manner, and subject to the same penalties, as set forth for water services in the city's water and sewer rules and regulations approved and adopted by Ordinance No. 90-46. Any unpaid stormwater fees shall constitute a lien against the property, which lien shall be prior to all other liens on such property, except the liens for state, county and municipal taxes, and shall be on a parity with the liens of such state, county and municipal taxes. Such lien, when delinquent for more than 30 days, may be foreclosed by the city in the manner provided for by the laws of Florida for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property. 
(b)  For properties normally receiving periodic municipal service bills for other services, the stormwater utility fee shall be included in the periodic utility bill rendered to the established customer. 
(c)  For properties not receiving periodic municipal service bills for other services, the bill or statement for the stormwater utility fee shall be sent to the property owner, as determined from the property appraiser tax rolls. In such cases, the finance department may render an annual bill or render a special monthly municipal service bill at the option of the city. 
(d)  The owner of a property is ultimately responsible for all fees imposed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-06, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 54-131. - Adjustment of customer category or rate based upon property characterization or size. 
(a)  Requests for adjustments of the assigned customer category or rate paid shall be submitted to the public works department, on the forms to be provided by the department, and shall set forth; in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. The city's mayor shall have the authority to administer the procedures set forth herein, and to establish the standards and review criteria to be utilized for the adjustment of any category or fee assigned. The public works department shall provide technical assistance and input to the mayor's office during the administration of the adjustment process. No adjustment or credit shall be given for the installation of facilities required by the city or county development codes or state stormwater rules. The following procedures shall apply to all adjustment requests: 
(1)  Adjustment requests will be reviewed by the city within a four-month period from the date a completed application, including all required documentation that is needed to support the application, has been submitted to the public works department. Adjustments resulting from such requests shall be retroactive to the date the application is complete, including submission of all documentation but, in any case, shall not exceed one year. 
(2)  Anyone requesting an adjustment shall be required to provide information along with their application which shall include, but shall not be limited to, survey data and engineering reports, performed by either a professional land surveyor currently registered in the state or a professional engineer currently registered in the state to support their request. The failure to provide such information within four months of the date of the filing of the application form shall result in the automatic denial of the adjustment. 
(3)  Adjustments to the fee to be paid shall be made upon the granting of the adjustment request, in writing, by the mayor, or his/her designee. Denials of adjustment requests shall be made in writing by the mayor, or his/her designee. 
(4)  During the period of time that a request for adjustment is pending, all fees must be paid, and the applicant for an adjustment must also be current on the date the application is filed. 
(b)  Category I customers shall be permitted to request a change in category only. 
(Ord. No. 96-06, 6-4-96)  
Sec. 54-132. - Stormwater management utility enterprise fund. 
There shall be established a stormwater management utility enterprise fund for the deposit of all fees and charges collected pursuant to the stormwater utility management program. These funds shall be collected and maintained for the exclusive use of the city's stormwater management utility, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Stormwater management utility services, such as studies, design services, permit reviews, plan preparations and development reviews; 
(2)  Operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the stormwater collection, storage, treatment and conveyance infrastructure; 
(3)  Project costs related to the construction of major or minor structural improvements in the stormwater related infrastructure as provided in the city wide stormwater utility management program; 
(4)  Administrative costs associated with the management of the stormwater utility management program; 
(5)  Debt service incurred for the financing of stormwater related capital improvements; and 
(6)  Funding of studies associated with the planning of stormwater related infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 96-06, 6-4-96)  
Chapter 56 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 56-1—56-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TOWING 
 
Sec. 56-21. - Applicability and compliance of city regulations. 
The following provisions shall be applicable to towing companies whose services are utilized by the City of Hialeah Gardens for towing. The following rules and regulations shall apply and be complied with by towing companies utilized by the City of Hialeah Gardens: 
Equipment: Each towing company utilized by the city shall have the following equipment: 
(1)  Class A wreckers (minimum three): 
a.  Tow truck shall have a minimum manufacturer's capacity of 10,000 pounds GVW; 
b.  Boom capacity of not less than three tons per boom; 
c.  Drum or power winch pulling capacity of not less than six tons; 
d.  One hundred feet or more of 3/8 -inch cable on each drum; 
e.  Double booms so constructed as to permit splitting each boom to operate independently or jointly; or single boom, hydraulic, elevated and extendable; 
f.  Cradle tow place or tow sling equipped with safety chain. 
(2)  Class B wreckers (minimum one): 
a.  Tow truck shall have a minimum manufacturer's capacity of 10,000 pounds GVW; 
b.  Boom capacity of not less than four tons; 
c.  Two power winches pulling capacity of not less than four tons each; 
d.  Minimum of 100 feet of at least 3/8 -inch cable; 
e.  Single boom hydraulic, elevated and extendable; 
f.  Cradle tow or tow sling to pick up vehicles; 
g.  Dual wheels; 
h.  Two 50-foot spools of extra 3/8 -inch cable, with end hooks. 
(3)  Class C wreckers (minimum one): 
a.  Tow truck shall have a minimum manufacturer's capacity of not less than 45,000 pounds GVW; 
b.  Boom capacity of not less than ten tons per boom; 
c.  Drum or power winch pulling capacity of not less than 20 tons; 
d.  Two hundred feet or more of 9/16 -inch cable or larger on each drum; 
e.  Double booms so constructed as to permit separating each boom to operate independently or jointly, or hydraulic boom, elevated and extendable; 
f.  Vacuum booster or airbrake so constructed as to lock all wheels automatically upon failure. 
(4)  Class D wreckers (minimum one): 
a.  Tow truck shall have a minimum manufacturer's capacity of not less than 66,000 pounds GVW; 
b.  Boom capacity of not less than 30 tons per boom; 
c.  Drum or power winch pulling capacity of not less than 45 tons; 
d.  Two hundred feet or more of ¾-inch cable or larger on each drum; 
e.  Double boom so constructed to permit separating each boom to operate independently or jointly, or hydraulic boom, elevated and extendable; 
f.  Vacuum booster or airbrake so constructed as to lock all wheels automatically upon failure. 
(5)  One 35-ton landroll for recovery or container equipment hauling. 
(6)  Three flatbed trucks. 
(7)  One service vehicle for immediate assistance as it relates to Class 5 (batteries, out of gas, locked out, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 2, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 56-22. - Required equipment. 
Each wrecker shall have the following equipment: 
One heavy duty push broom 
Floodlights on hoist (night scene) 
One axe 
One shovel 
One crowbar/prybar 
One fire extinguisher 
One set of bolt cutters 
Thirty-minute flares 
Four traffic cones, 28-inches high 
Amber beacon lights on all wreckers 
Company name printed on both sides of wrecker (driver and passenger doors) 
All wreckers must be ready at dispatch. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 3, 1-19-99)  
Sec. 56-23. - Additional requirements. 
All towing companies utilized by the City of Hialeah Gardens shall have a minimum of $1,000,000.00 liability insurance coverage and $50,000.00 property damage insurance coverage. 
All towing companies utilized by the City of Hialeah Gardens shall be located within the city, or within three miles of the city limits. 
All towing companies utilized by the city shall have inside storage capacity of a minimum of three cars and outside storage capacity of a minimum of 75 cars. 
All towing companies utilized by the city shall be established for a minimum of five years. 
All towing companies utilized by the city shall comply fully with state and county law and be licensed by the city, and subject to the provisions of Code sections 56-21 et seq. of the Code of the City of Hialeah Gardens and all provisions of chapter 56 of the Code of the City of Hialeah Gardens not in conflict herewith are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 4, 1-19-99; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 2, 12-19-06)  
Sec. 56-24. - Contracts with towing companies. 
The City of Hialeah Gardens may, by resolution, enter into contracts with one or more towing companies to provide towing services for the city. Such towing companies shall meet the qualifications provided herein and may limit the number of towing companies the city contracts with in order to provide a consistent and uniform service as it relates to city ordered towing. Excepting emergency situations, no other towing company shall be utilized by the City of Hialeah Gardens other than those contracted with to perform the services for the city. Such contracts shall be for such term and under such provisions as are in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 5, 1-19-99)  
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS  
Chapter 58 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq.; flood hazard reduction, § 70-31 et seq.; housing regulations, ch. 74. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Building standards, F.S. ch. 553. 
 
Sec. 58-31. - Technical standards adopted. 
The following technical construction standards are hereby adopted: 
(1)  The South Florida Building Code (Dade County edition); 
(2)  The Public Works Manual of Metropolitan Dade County and the standards of the county water and sewer authority department, chapter 28 of subdivisions; 
(3)  The Energy Efficiency Code of Building Construction, 1991 edition, developed by the department of community affairs; 
(4)  The National Electrical Code, 1990 edition; and 
(5)  The requirements for accessibility by physically disabled persons as specified in F.S. ch. 553, part V; 
together with any and all amendments to such codes and statutes from time to time enacted are hereby incorporated into this Code by reference and as if fully set forth herein, and such codes and statutes, as amended, shall be considered technical construction standards to be followed in construction and enforced by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 155.08.01; Ord. No. 90-32, §§ 1—4, 1-22-91; Ord. No. 90-40, § 2, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 58-32. - Construction permit application. 
Applications for a permit for new construction, inclusive of, but not necessarily limited to, roads, buildings, and site work, as well as alterations or repairs of valuation exceeding 50 percent of the appraised value of existing construction, shall be accompanied by a current survey prepared within 90 days of the date of application for such permit. 
(Code 1985, § 150.01)  
Sec. 58-33. - Construction survey. 
The survey required by section 58-32 shall be approved by a duly authorized person licensed by the state to render such approval. The required survey shall indicate existing elevations and conditions, as well as elevations and conditions required by the building official or code compliance officer of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 150.02)  
Sec. 58-34. - Approval of site condition. 
If required by the building official or code compliance officer of the city, approval of existing site condition shall be rendered by a duly authorized person so approved, licensed, and registered by the state to render such approval. 
(Code 1985, § 150.03)  
Sec. 58-35. - Structure permit. 
If the application for building permit is for a structure permit, the applicant for such permit shall submit for approval, prior to tie-beam inspection request, a recent survey indicating finish floor elevation and site conditions. 
(Code 1985, § 150.04)  
Sec. 58-36. - Certificate of completion. 
Prior to a certificate of completion being issued by the building official or code compliance officer, a survey shall be required indicating all completed improvements, finish floor grades, and site grades. This survey shall be submitted for approval by the building official or code compliance officer. 
(Code 1985, § 150.05)  
Sec. 58-37. - Dedication of property to city. 
(a)  Before a building permit is issued for a parcel of land, the owner of the land must dedicate to the city by deed 35 feet on all section lines, half section lines, and quarter section lines, and 30 feet on all other sides of the land involved. The deed shall be in a form approved by the director of the department of public works. 
(b)  Before a building permit is issued for a parcel of land lying within the portion of the city now zoned EU-1 having as one of its boundaries existing or projected N.W. 131st, 133rd, 135th, and 137th Streets, or existing or projected N.W. 97th, 99th, 102nd and 104th Avenues, the owner of the land must dedicate to the city by deed 35 feet on all section lines, half section lines, or quarter section lines, and 30 feet on all sides of the parcel having one of the streets or avenues as a boundary which is not a section line, half section line, or quarter section line. The deed shall be in the form approved by the building official or code compliance officer. This subsection contemplates that all homes built on each of the streets or avenues mentioned in the section of the city now zoned EU-1 shall face in the same direction, and it shall be the duty of the building official or code compliance officer to assure this uniformity in the issuance of building permits so that each of the parcels of property bordered by the streets and avenues aforementioned will be improved with residences facing in the same direction, whether that be north, south, east, or west, and these and other categories of determinations, locations of streets, and dedications not indicated specifically by the terms of this section shall be determined by the building official or code compliance officer. 
(c)  Should there in fact be an existing road or planned road concerning the property as described in subsection (b) of this section, then in fact the dedication required by this section shall be measured from the centerline of the road or planned road. 
(Code 1985, § 150.06)  
Sec. 58-38. - General information of special fees, refunds, extensions and cancellations. 
The building department shall charge and collect for permits at the rates provided for in the following schedules and on file in the city clerk's office. 
(1)  Double fees. 
a.  When work for which a permit is required is commenced prior to the obtaining of a permit, the permit applicant will be required to pay $100.00 plus double permit fee, but in no event the fee shall be less than $200.00. The payment of the required fee shall not relieve them from being subject to any of the penalties therein. The double fee requirements shall be applicable to all divisions of the building and zoning department as noted herein. 
b.  For second offense of doing work without a permit, the permit applicant shall be required to pay twice the double permit fees plus $200.00. 
c.  For each offense thereafter, the permit applicant shall be required to pay twice the double permit fee plus $500.00. 
(2)  Reinspection fees. When extra inspections trips are necessary due to (1) wrong address being given on call for inspection, (2) prior rejection of work due to faulty construction, (3) work not being ready for inspection at time specified, (4) failure to call for final or other inspections, (5) required corrections not being made or completed at time specified, (6) permit cards and plans not available for the inspector, (7) no access to the site provided for the inspector. A fee of $50.00 for each reinspection shall be charged to the permit holder in the trade concerned. 
(3)  Lost, revised and rework plans fee. 
a.  Lost plans: When plans for new buildings, remodeling and additions are lost by the owner or contractor, a recertification fee will be required to review, stamp and approve a new set of plans as a field copy. Such fee shall be based on 30 percent of the original building permit fee, with a minimum fee for group I (SFR) of $50.00, and a minimum fee for all others of $90.00. 
b.  Revised plans processing fee: Plan revisions after permit is issued shall be subject to a fee of 30 percent of the original permit fee up to a maximum of $1,000.00 In no event the fee for review of plan shall be less than $20.00 per sheet or $60.00 per hour or fraction thereof. 
c.  Reworks: A fee of $75.00 may be charged for failure to make required corrections previously indicated. 
d.  Lost permit card fee: A replacement fee of $25.00 shall be charged for the loss of a permit inspection record card after a permit has been issued. 
e.  Records of inspection results $50.00 per report. 
(4)  Refunds, time limitations, cancellations. The fees charged pursuant to this schedule, provided the same are for a permit required by section 301.1 of the SFBC, may be refunded by the chief building official, subject to the following: 
a.  No refunds shall be made on requests involving: 
1.  Permit fees of $100.00 or less; or 
2.  Permits revoked by the building official under authority granted by the SFBC, or permits canceled by court order; or conditional permits; or 
3.  Permits which have expired; or 
4.  Permits under which work has commenced as evidenced by any recorded inspection having been made by the department; or 
5.  The original permit holder when there is a change of contractor. 
b.  A full refund less $100.00 or 50 percent of the permit fee, whichever is greater, rounded to the nearest dollar, shall be granted to a permit holder who: 
Requests a refund, provided: 
1.  The department received a written request from the permit holder prior to the permit expiration date; and 
2.  The permit holder submits with such request the applicant's validated copy of such permit; and 
3.  No work has commenced under such permit as evidenced by any recorded inspection and/or field inspection. 
c.  Where there is a change of contractor or qualifier involving a permit, the second permit holder shall pay a fee of $75.00 to cover the cost of transferring the data from the original permit to the second permit. Except when the original permit has expired or the original permit fee is under $75.00, in which case the original permit fee shall be paid. 
d.  A fee of $55.00 shall be paid by the permit holder who submits a written request for a permit extension as authorized under section 304.3(b) of the SFBC. 
e.  Where a permit has become null and void pursuant to paragraph 304.3 (a) of the SFBC, a credit of 50 percent of the permit fee shall be applied to any reapplication fee for a permit covering the same project and involving the same plans, provided that the complete re-application is made within six months of the expiration date of the original permit, and provided that no refund had been made as provided in this section. 
If re-application is made after six months of the expiration date or if this is not the first re-application made on the project, the full permit fee shall be charged on the renewal application. The permit re-application must be submitted with the plans and the applicant's validated copy of the original permit. The amount of this fee shall be as least equal to or higher than the minimum fee for the trade concerned. 
(5)  Special projects. A fee equal to actual staff time and related costs shall be assessed for special projects requiring research by the department in order to answer questions proposed by developers, attorneys, realtors, or municipalities, etc., in connection with the use, resubdivision, and developments of properties, or to determine if any existing violations are on the property through a review of departmental records. Such special fee only will be levied for requests outside the scope of normal departmental work. A minimum fee of $60.00 shall be charged. A fee equal to $2.00 per page be assessed for preprogrammed computer records on department records. The minimum fee shall be $50.00. 
(6)  General information. 
a.  A $0.01 per square foot fee will be added to building permits for the state to study building code requirements for radon gas and certification and regulation of building code administrators, plans examiners and inspectors. 
b.  A fee of $0.50 per $1,000 job cost, or fractional value of work to be done as has been mandated by Dade County Code Compliance Office under County Ord. 91-74. This Code compliance fee shall be in addition to any other fees and costs that may be payable as a condition of obtaining a permit, and shall be non-refundable. 
(7)  Inspections requiring overtime. Charges for construction inspections, which are requested in advance and which requires that an employee work overtime, will be at a rate of $50.00 per hour including traveling time, in accordance with applicable employee contracted bargaining agreements. 
(8)  Fees based on estimated cost-documentation requirements. The department may require the permit applicant to submit appropriate documentation as proof of estimated cost of construction used to compute permit fees. 
(9)  Owner—Builder. Permit fees established by this article shall be increased by 100 percent except painting of residence or duplex. 
(10)  Courtesy inspection fee. When a homeowner requests that a courtesy inspection be performed by a code compliance officer. In order to establish if any violation exists and a written report is prepared. A fee of $75.00 shall be paid to the city. 
(11)  Telecommunications towers and antennas. 
a.  New telecommunication towers .....$4,000.00 
b.  Collocations .....$2,800.00 
(Code 1985, § 150.07; Ord. No. 89-18, § 1, 11-14-89; Ord. No. 90-28, § 1, 5-7-91; Ord. No. 90-44, § 1, 10-15-91; Ord. No. 90-58, § 1, 2-4-92; Ord. No. 92-03, § 1, 9-28-92; Ord. No. 93-11, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 95-03, § 1, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2005-51, § 1, 11-1-05)  
Sec. 58-39. - Conditions for obtaining building permits. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued until such time as the following conditions have been met in addition to all other conditions as prescribed by county and city ordinances and resolutions and state statutes. 
(1)  Plans are presented to the city setting forth with specificity the location of water lines that have been installed or will be installed to the property for which the building permit is sought. 
(2)  A right-of-way deed is given to the city encompassing the property to be utilized as a street adjacent to the property for which the building permit is sought. 
(3)  A proposal is submitted to the city by a qualified contractor setting forth the cost of installing the water lines as set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(4)  A proposal is submitted to the city by a qualified contractor setting forth the cost of bringing the street or streets up to grade, or paving the street or streets which is or are adjacent to the property for which a building permit is sought. 
(5)  Plans are presented to the city setting forth with specificity the location of areas which will be kept free of parked vehicles in order to facilitate access to buildings by authorized emergency vehicles, as defined by F.S. § 316.033, together with appropriate entrances to the property and appropriate fire lanes and emergency parking areas when property is used as a shopping mall, parking lot, parking garage, planned unit development, mobile home park, industrial or warehouse park or business district or multifamily residential complex or other use which provides for a concentration of buildings within an area of restricted vehicular access. The number of authorized emergency vehicle parking areas and fire access lanes shall be subject to approval by the building inspector and the chief of police taking into consideration the following factors: 
a.  The number of people who are estimated to frequent the property. 
b.  The accessibility of the property by authorized emergency vehicles, including entrance. 
c.  The frequency of calls for emergency services anticipated at the property. 
d.  The need for accessibility to buildings by tenants, vendors, and persons making deliveries to the property. 
e.  Official acts of the county which relate to the particular use of the property as designated by the applicant. 
(6)  All authorized emergency vehicle entrances and parking and fire lanes shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the approved site plan, building permit, or other requirements of this Code. 
(7)  A bond is posted by the owner of the property for which a building permit is sought in the form of placing with the city a deposit sufficient to cover the cost of construction of the improvements required under this article or a bond issued by a good and sufficient surety in such amount payable to the city and guaranteeing the completion of the improvements set forth in this section. 
(8)  A statement submitted to the city and signed by the landowner that the building permit issued is conditioned upon the improvements set forth in this article being made by the owner and acknowledging that no certificate of occupancy will be issued until such time as such improvements are made. 
(b)  If, within 18 months from the date of issuance of the building permit, the streets described in subsection (a) of this section have not been brought to grade and paved or the water lines described in subsection (a) of this section have not been installed, then, in that event, the city, at its option, may, using the deposit made by the owner, install the water lines and complete the streets or may claim the bond proceeds due and payable and from the proceeds install the water lines or complete the streets by bringing the streets up to grade and paving the streets. 
(c)  If the amount of the deposit or the amount of bond required by this section is insufficient to cover the costs of installation of the water lines or the grading and paving of the streets, then, in that event, upon completion of the work done by the city regarding the installation of water lines or the grading and paving of the streets, there shall be a lien placed upon the property for such amounts as are in excess of the deposit or bond. Should such lien not be paid within 90 days from the date it is placed on the public records, then the city may institute foreclosure procedures and in addition to all sums due be entitled to reasonable attorney fees and costs. 
(Code 1985, § 150.08)  
Sec. 58-40. - Landlord's obligation to maintain premises. 
Unless otherwise agreed in writing, the landlord of a dwelling unit other than a single-family home or duplex shall: 
(1)  At all times during the tenancy of such dwelling unit, make reasonable provisions for: 
a.  The extermination of rats, mice, roaches, ants, wood-destroying organisms, and bedbugs. When vacation of the premises is required for such extermination, the landlord shall not be liable for damages but shall abate the rent. The tenant shall be required to vacate the premises on seven days' written notice, if necessary, for extermination pursuant to this subsection. 
b.  Locks and keys. 
c.  The clean and safe condition of common areas. 
d.  Garbage removal and outside receptacles therefor. 
e.  Heat during winter, running hot and cold water. 
(2)  At the commencement of the tenancy of a dwelling unit other than a single-family home or duplex, make reasonable provisions for smoke detection devices. "Smoke detection device" means an electrical or battery-operated device which detects visible or invisible particles of combustion and which is listed by Underwriters Laboratory, Factory Mutual, or any other nationally recognized testing laboratory utilizing nationally accepted testing standards. 
(Ord. No. 90-16, § 1, 6-12-90)  
Sec. 58-41. - Protection of construction materials and removal of construction waste and debris. 
(a)  Findings. Developers, building contractors, and homeowners who undertake construction and building repair work in the city place and keep construction materials on or about the property where construction or repair work is occurring. South Florida is frequently threatened and affected by tropical storms and hurricanes. During tropical storms and hurricanes, the high winds scatter construction materials, converting such construction materials into potentially deadly missiles which are likely to and do cause injury to life and property. Construction materials which are placed or kept on or about a site where construction or repair work is occurring pose an imminent danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the community. Any individual or enterprise that has control of the property where any construction materials are placed or kept is in a superior position to avoid the risk posed by such construction materials during a tropical storm or hurricane. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this section, shall have the meanings given in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction materials includes all lumber, boards, planks, plywood, particle boards, blocks, brick, mortar, cement, rock, conduit, pipe, tubing, floor tile, roof tiles, felt or tar paper, drywall, and sheetrock. 
Construction waste and/or debris means and includes any discarded piece, scraps, and remnants of any lumber, board, plank, plywood, particle board, block, brick, mortar, cement, rock, conduit, pipe, tubing, floor tile, roof tiles, felt or tar paper, drywall, and sheetrock. 
Reasonably clean condition means that there is no accumulation of waste or debris of any kind on the site, whether in a heap, pile, or scattered, except that waste and debris may be placed in an approved dumpster on the site, provided the dumpster is removed and the waste discarded weekly. 
Responsible party means and includes the landowner or homeowner of the site; the developer of the site; any construction manager or superintendent; the general contractor or other qualifier of the project; any architect or engineer who is in a supervisory position, either as a special inspector or as a representative of the owner or developer; and any subcontractor who caused the materials to be brought on to the site. The term shall also include any individual or enterprise that procures a permit for the work. 
Secure means to remove all uninstalled construction materials from any roof or elevated place and to store the materials indoors or on the ground anchored with approved anchors capable of withstanding winds as provided for in the current edition of the South Florida Building Code, in such a manner as to prevent the material from becoming airborne, and shall include bundling or palletizing of materials with strapping, provided the materials are anchored as required under this definition. 
(c)  Site requirements. The following are the requirements for all construction sites: 
(1)  All responsible parties shall keep the site where any construction or building repair is occurring in a reasonably clean condition and free of unsecured construction materials and debris at all times. 
(2)  All construction waste or debris shall be removed from any site where any construction or building repair is occurring within the boundaries of the city, on no less than a weekly basis. 
(3)  No responsible party shall place or keep construction materials in an unsecured manner on any property within the municipal boundaries of the city for a period in excess of ten working days. 
(4)  No responsible party shall place or keep construction materials on any roof or other elevated place above ground level on any property within the municipal boundaries of the city for a period in excess of five working days. 
(5)  No later than ten hours after a storm or hurricane warning is announced by the weather service, all responsible parties shall: 
a.  Remove all construction waste or debris from the property; 
b.  Remove all construction materials from any roof or other elevated place above ground level, causing such materials to be secured on the ground; and 
c.  Secure any and all construction materials. 
(6)  All responsible parties who are in any manner connected with any site where any construction or building repair work is occurring are jointly and severally liable for observing the provisions of this section and for causing all those who are performing any construction or repair work on the site to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Abatement by city. If any responsible party fails to remove all construction waste or debris, or remove all construction materials from any rooftop or other elevated place above ground level, and cause such materials to be secured on the ground, or to secure all construction materials as required by this section, ten hours after a storm or hurricane warning is announced, the city may take all reasonable and necessary steps to remove all waste and debris and secure the construction materials. If the city is required to remove waste or debris or secure construction materials because a responsible party has failed to do so, the responsible party shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city. 
(e)  Permit applicants to be furnished copy of section. Upon making application for any permit related to construction or building repair, the applicant shall be provided with a copy of this section, and shall execute an acknowledgement that the applicant received a copy of this section and understands it. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person or entity convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-16. 
(Ord. No. 95-15, §§ 1—12, 9-19-95) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 42.  
Secs. 58-42—58-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOMES AND MANUFACTURED BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 58-66. - Bringing prefabricated structures into the city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into the territory of the city, without prior consent or approval of the city council, homes, residences, business buildings, and all other structures which have been previously fabricated outside of the territorial limits of the city, in which may reside persons or animals or in which materials may be bought, stored, or deposited, except as those allowed by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 153.01)  
Sec. 58-67. - Temporary office trailers. 
Any corporation, company, or individual who is engaged in construction upon which a license or permit has been issued by the city council or building department of the city may bring upon the construction site a construction shed or trailer, so-called, for the purposes of an office or storage place. Such trailer shall not have live-in privileges and shall not be left upon the premises for a period of time in excess of six months from the date of securement of original license or permit without express approval of the city council, but in all cases shall be removed upon completion of the construction. Trailers thereon must bear a legible nameplate of the contractor. 
(Code 1985, § 153.02)  
Sec. 58-68. - Parking of mobile homes. 
No mobile home shall be parked or allowed to remain in the city for a period of time in excess of 24 hours unless the mobile home shall have been shipped to a properly licensed agency, for sale or for lease to a person or corporation outside of the city limits or within the city limits subject to this article. 
(Code 1985, § 153.03)  
Sec. 58-69. - Exclusions. 
This article is not intended to apply to those trailers not intended as mobile homes and, more particularly, to those trailers designated as tractor-trailers which are used principally for field transportation of materials or items from point to point. A home otherwise designated as a mobile home, so-called, may be removed from such category when properly made stationary with full electrical, sewage, and water facilities, with a permanent base within a designated mobile home park, as may be approved by the building department and any other interested departments of the city. All other mobile homes shall be barred within the city by this article. 
(Code 1985, § 153.04)  
Secs. 58-70—58-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FILLING OF LAND 
 
Sec. 58-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Property means any real property located in the city, whether vacant or occupied, which includes therein lakes, canals, drainage pits, rock pits, and other water-filled areas. 
(Code 1985, § 156.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-97. - Compliance required. 
In addition to all other ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations governing building permits and filling of property, no property shall be filled in whole or in part without the owner, or the owner's legal representative, of that property complying with the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 156.02)  
Sec. 58-98. - Permit requirements and restrictions. 
(a)  Application for fill permit. Prior to the filling of any property, the owner or the owner's representative shall: 
(1)  Make application, under oath, for a property fill permit, which application shall include, among other things, a map designating the area of the lake to be filled. 
(2)  State the type of fill to be utilized. 
(3)  Provide a title certificate or a statement by a member of the Florida Bar designating with specificity the name and address of the owner of the property to be filled. 
(b)  Fencing. All properties requiring fill shall be fenced before filling of the land. 
(c)  Dumping. No dumping signs shall be posted at all sites and shall be enforced except where and when authorized permits therefor are granted. The property owner or his designated representative shall obtain the required permit from the appropriate agency. 
(d)  Security barrier. Unless waived by motion of the city council, the property owner or his designated representative, as registered at city hall, shall provide the necessary security for his property by means of a chainlink fence or appropriate barrier to prevent unauthorized dumping after any act of unauthorized dumping and upon notice from the building official or code compliance officer. 
(e)  Dumping materials restricted. Only persons possessing written authorization from a property owner or his representative shall be authorized to dump materials as defined by the department of environmental resource management on any property within the city. 
(f)  Unlawful dumping. In the event police or the building official or code compliance officer determines that an unlawful act of dumping has occurred in violation of this section or any other statute or code having jurisdiction within the city, the building official or code compliance officer shall issue a cease and desist notice to the property owner. All dumping activity shall terminate. A property owner shall have the right to appeal the entry of the order to the mayor and present argument and evidence indicating that the unauthorized or unlawful dumping did not occur. The property owner may enter into a performance bond conditioned upon construction of required fences and security necessary to prevent unauthorized dumping in the penal amount of $25,000.00. The bond in favor of the city shall remain in full force and effect until the property has been filled and graded. The decision of the mayor denying further dumping until compliance with this section shall be final and subject to appeal. 
(g)  Permits to be obtained prior to landfill operations. The property owner or his designated representative shall obtain all required permits prior to any and all operations designed to fill lands for future construction. These shall include municipal, county, state, and federal permits as required for environmentally sensitive land areas. 
(h)  Structure foundations. All structure foundations must be demucked in accordance with the South Florida Building Code. 
(i)  Permitted fill material. Only clean fill, limited to crushed limerock, sand, dirt, concrete screenings, concrete debris, and other environmentally acceptable materials which comply with the South Florida Building Code will be permitted. 
(1)  Concrete debris restrictions. When using concrete debris only solid concrete construction material will be allowed and shall not exceed 18 inches in diameter and will not exceed ten percent of the total fill area. Such concrete debris shall meet the above-stated specifications prior to being delivered and deposited on the site. 
(2)  Areas of dedication. When filling of areas dedicated or proposed to be dedicated as public right-of-way or road purposes, such areas shall be filled in strict accordance with the requirements as set forth in section 30 of the Dade County Standard Road Specifications entitled "Excavation and embankment." 
(3)  Organic materials. Organic materials (i.e., muck, silt, tree debris) shall be completely removed from the areas to be filled as required by the code prior to the addition of the permitted fill to the site. 
(j)  Prohibited fill material. The following materials are not acceptable for use in the filling of land: petroleum products; roofing materials; lumber or wood; furniture; glass; aluminum; trees or parts of trees; cut vegetation; rubber; wire or cable; insulation materials; plastic materials; fabric materials; and trash and garbage. 
(Code 1985, § 156.03; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 94-06, § 1, 10-18-94)  
Sec. 58-99. - Application fee. 
At the time of the filing of the application for a landfill permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee on file in the city clerk's office. Such fee shall be refunded if the permit is denied. 
(Code 1985, § 156.04)  
Sec. 58-100. - Review of application. 
The application for a landfill permit shall be reviewed by the city council at a public hearing. If the application is in order, and if the request has complied with state statutes, rules, and regulations, county and city ordinances and resolutions, and is in proper form, the permit shall be approved. 
(Code 1985, § 156.05)  
Sec. 58-101. - Duration of permit. 
The permits issued under this article shall be in full force and effect for a period of six months from the date issued. Should filling not commence within such six-month period, then the permit issued under this article shall be considered void. 
(Code 1985, § 156.06)  
Sec. 58-102. - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued under this article may be revoked if, in fact, completion of filling does not occur within six months from the date filling of the property commenced. 
(Code 1985, § 156.07)  
Sec. 58-103. - Filling of Samari Lake prohibited. 
The filling of the lake commonly known as Samari Lake shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1985, § 156.08)  
Secs. 58-104—58-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SOIL AND MUCK 
 
Sec. 58-131. - Permit—Required. 
No person shall dig or excavate or cause to be dug or excavated any soil, rock, muck, marl, sand, or fill from any property within the city limits without first having obtained a permit to do so as provided in section 58-132. 
(Code 1985, § 94.25)  
Sec. 58-132. - Same—Application; issuance. 
(a)  No permit required by this article shall be issued except upon and with the approval of the city council. No application for such permit shall be considered unless there is attached to the application a detailed sketch or plan prepared and certified by a civil engineer licensed to practice under the laws of the state, showing the proposed excavation and ultimate development or restoration of the property in such detail as to meet the requirements of the city engineer; nor shall such application be accepted unless and until the detailed sketch or plan has been approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Each application for a permit under this article shall be filed with the city clerk in writing and verified by oath of the person making the application as to the truth of the statements contained therein. The application shall set forth the name and address of the person owning the property, the legal description and location of the property, the number of cubic yards of material to be excavated or removed, and the purpose thereof. The requirements contained in this section shall be cumulative. 
(Code 1985, § 94.26)  
Sec. 58-133. - Performance bond. 
The city council shall consider the application for a permit under this article and if, in its discretion, the granting of the permit shall not be detrimental to the public safety, health, and welfare of the city, then the city council may, in its discretion, issue or cause to be issued the permit as applied for. However, no permit under this article shall be granted unless and until a performance bond in the form and in an amount approved by the city council has been posted with the city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 94.27)  
Chapter 62 - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Future land use map, § 78-11. 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Adoption; amendments. 
(a)  The Comprehensive Plan, 1989—2000, is hereby adopted as the official comprehensive plan for 1989—2000 of the city. 
(b)  All development undertaken by and all actions taken with regard to land covered by the comprehensive plan shall be consistent with the plan. All land development regulations which are enacted or amended shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, 1989—2000. 
(c)  Any future land development regulation, land development code, or amendment thereto shall be referred to the city council for review and action thereon. 
(d)  The Comprehensive Plan, 1989—2000, adopted by this section may be amended in accordance with the provisions of the state law and rules, as provided in this section, or as amended in the future. 
(Code 1985, § 151.01)  
Sec. 62-2. - Local planning agency. 
The city council is hereby designated as the local planning agency in compliance with the local government comprehensive planning and land development regulation act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq. The city council has the continuing responsibility for monitoring the effectiveness of the comprehensive plan and making recommendations for changes thereto. 
(Code 1985, § 151.02)  
Chapter 66 - CONSISTENCY AND CONCURRENCY 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Concurrency means a condition where specified facilities and services have or will have the necessary capacity to meet the adopted level of service standards at the time of impact of the development project. 
(Code 1985, § 155.29.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-2. - Development to be consistent with comprehensive plan; determination of consistency. 
(a)  No development activity may be approved unless it is found that the development is consistent with the city comprehensive plan and that the provision of certain public facilities will be available at prescribed levels of service concurrent with the impact of the development on those facilities. 
(b)  If a development proposal is found to meet all the requirements of this Code, it shall be presumed to be consistent with the comprehensive plan in all respects except for compliance with the concurrency requirement. The development technical review committee, other public officials, or any citizen may, however, question the consistency of a development proposal with the comprehensive plan. If a question of consistency is raised, the chief zoning and code compliance officer, building official or planning and zoning board, depending on which is responsible for approving the development, shall make a determination of consistency or inconsistency and support that determination with written findings. 
(Code 1985, §§ 155.29.01, 155.29.03)  
Sec. 66-3. - Maintaining level of service standards. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  No development activity may be approved unless it meets the requirements of this chapter, which are designed to ensure that certain public services are available at prescribed levels of service concurrent with the impacts of the environment. 
(2)  All applications for development orders shall demonstrate that the proposed development does not degrade adopted levels of service in the city. 
(3)  An application for a development permit shall demonstrate that the proposed development does not degrade adopted levels of service if there exists no development order under which the permit is sought, and no development order is required prior to the issuance of the permit, e.g., a residence on a parcel of unplatted land. 
(4)  The latest point at which concurrency is determined is the final development order. If no development order is required, the latest point to determine concurrency is the first development permit on a site. 
(b)  Determination of available capacity. For purposes of this chapter the available capacity of a facility shall be determined by: 
(1)  Adding together: 
a.  The total capacity of existing facilities operating at the required level of service; and 
b.  The total capacity of new facilities that will become available concurrent with the impact of the development. The capacity of new facilities may be counted only if one or more of the following is shown: 
1.  Construction of the new facilities is under way at the time of application. 
2.  The new facilities are the subject of a binding executed contract for the construction of the facilities or the provision of services at the time the development permit is issued. 
3.  The new facilities have been included in the city capital improvement program annual budget. 
4.  The new facilities are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement. An enforceable development agreement may include, but is not limited to, development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220, or an agreement or development order pursuant to F.S. ch. 380. Such facilities must be consistent with the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan and approved by the chief zoning and code compliance officer or building official. 
5.  The developer has contributed funds to the city necessary to provide new facilities consistent with the provisions of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan and the various exactions required in this Code. Commitment that the facilities will be built must be evidenced by an appropriate budget amendment, developer agreements or appropriation by the city or other governmental entity. 
(2)  Subtracting from that number the sum of: 
a.  The demand for the service created by existing development; and 
b.  The new demand for the service that will be created concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development by the anticipated completion of other presently approved developments. 
(c)  Burden of showing compliance on developer. The burden of showing the compliance with the level of service requirements of this chapter shall be upon the developer. In order to be approvable, application for development approval shall provide sufficient information showing compliance with these standards. 
(d)  Action upon failure to show available capacity. Where available capacity as determined under subsection (b) of this section cannot be shown, the following methods may be used to maintain adopted level of service: 
(1)  The project owner or developer may provide the necessary improvements to maintain level of service. In such case the application shall include appropriate plans for improvements, documentation that such improvements are designed to provide the capacity necessary to achieve or maintain the level of service, and recordable instruments guaranteeing the construction, consistent with calculations of capacity as determined under subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  The proposed project may be altered sufficiently such that the projected level of service is no less than the adopted level of service. 
(Code 1985, § 155.30)  
Sec. 66-4. - Adopted levels of service. 
(a)  Potable water. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for potable water as established in the potable water subelement of the comprehensive plan: 
(1)  Minimum design flow: 
a.  Residential; 150 gpcd. 
b.  Retail, service, 150 gpcd. 
c.  Commercial, 1,450 gallons per acre per day. 
(2)  Water shall be delivered to users at a pressure no less than 20 pounds per square inch (psi) and no greater than 100 psi. 
(b)  Wastewater. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for wastewater treatment as established in the sanitary sewer subelement of the comprehensive plan: 
Type of 
service 	Peak flow 
Residential 	  100 gpcd 
Commercial 	1,450 gallons per acre per day 
Transient 	  100 gpcd 
 
(c)  Traffic circulation. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for transportation systems as established in the traffic circulation element of the comprehensive plan: 
(1)  Peak hour level of service: 
a.  Arterials, "D." 
b.  Collectors, "D." 
(2)  The impact of proposed development activity on available capacity shall be determined as follows: 
a.  The area of impact of the development (a traffic shed) shall be determined. The traffic shed shall be that area where the primary impact of traffic to and from the site occurs. The city has designed planning districts (north, central, south) for determining impacts and planning capital improvements; such districts or planning sectors shall be used. If the application is for a building permit for a single-family or duplex development, the impact shall be presumed to be limited to the collector or arterial serving the local street giving access to the lot, or to the collector or arterial giving direct access to the lot. 
b.  The projected level of service for arterials and collectors within the traffic shed shall be calculated based upon estimated trips to be generated by the project, or where applicable, the first phase of the project, and taking into consideration the impact of other approved but not completed developments within the traffic shed. Information on committed development within the traffic shed shall be provided by the city. 
(d)  Drainage. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for the drainage system as established in the drainage subelement of the comprehensive plan: 
(1)  On-site retention of the first inch of stormwater runoff. 
(2)  Protection from the degree of flooding that would result during a five-year return frequency of 24 hours' duration. 
(e)  Solid waste. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following level of service for solid waste as established in the solid waste subelement of the comprehensive plan: Collection services to be provided in all areas of the city shall be based on population and shall be sufficient to maintain a level of service of seven pounds per person per day. 
(f)  Open space and recreation. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for the recreational facilities as established in the open space and recreation element of the comprehensive plan: Recreational open space shall be provided at the minimum rate of 2.75 acres of parks per 1,000 permanent resident population. 
(Code 1985, § 155.31)  
Chapter 70 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, adopted Nov. 21, 2017, repealed ch. 70 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former ch. 70, §§ 70-26—70-30, 70-51—70-60, 70-81, 70-82, 70-101, 70-102, 70-121—70-127, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2009-09, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 1, 2009. 
 
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the "Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City of Hialeah Gardens," hereinafter referred to as "this chapter." 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-2. - Scope. 
Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-3. - Intent. 
The purposes of this chapter and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-4. - Coordination with the Florida Building Code. 
This chapter is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-5. - Warning. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-6. - Disclaimer of liability. 
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City Council of the City of Hialeah Gardens or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-7—70-10. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY 
 
Sec. 70-11. - General. 
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-12. - Areas to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas within the City of Hialeah Gardens. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-13. - Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. 
The Flood Insurance Study for Miami-Dade County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated September 11, 2009, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this chapter and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the building department located at 10001 NW 87th Ave, Hialeah Gardens, FL 33016. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-14. - Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. 
To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to article I, division 5 of this chapter the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this chapter and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-15. - Other laws. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-16. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This chapter shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-17. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-18—70-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR 
 
Sec. 70-21. - Designation. 
The public works director or his/her designee is hereby designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-22. - General. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this chapter consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this chapter without the granting of a variance pursuant to article I, division 7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-23. - Applications and permits. 
(a)  The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(b)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(c)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(d)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(e)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(f)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(g)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this chapter is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(h)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-24. - Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. 
For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this chapter is required. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-25. - Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to article I, division 7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-26. - Notices and orders. 
The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-27. - Inspections. 
The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in article I, division 6 of this chapter for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-28. - Other duties of the floodplain administrator. 
The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to section 70-24 of this chapter; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this chapter and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the City of Hialeah Gardens are modified. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-29. - Floodplain management records. 
Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including flood insurance rate maps; letters of map change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this chapter; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood-carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at the building department located at 10001 NW 87th Ave, Hialeah Gardens, FL 33016. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-30—70-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 70-36. - Permits required. 
Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this chapter, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-37. - Floodplain development permits or approvals. 
Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this chapter for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-38. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(2)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
(3)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(4)  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
(5)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(6)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
(7)  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(8)  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(9)  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-39. - Application for a permit or approval. 
To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in article I, division 5 of this chapter. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-40. - Validity of permit or approval. 
The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this chapter, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-41. - Expiration. 
A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-42. - Suspension or revocation. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-43. - Other permits required. 
Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The South Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065, and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the joint coastal permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(5)  Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-44—70-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SITE PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 
 
Sec. 70-51. - Information for development in flood hazard areas. 
The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance with section 70-52(2) or (3) of this chapter. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with section 70-52(1) of this chapter. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this chapter but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-52. - Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate zone A). 
Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-53. - Additional analyses and certifications. 
As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in section 70-54 of this chapter and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as zone AO or zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in section 70-54 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-54. - Submission of additional data. 
When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-55—70-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 70-61. - General. 
Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-62. - Development other than buildings and structures. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-63. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-64. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. 
Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
(1)  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
(2)  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 70-52(3)b. of this chapter, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-65. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. 
As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in section 70-64 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-66. - Manufactured homes. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-67—70-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - VARIANCES AND APPEALS 
 
Sec. 70-71. - General. 
The city council shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this chapter. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the city council shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-72. - Appeals. 
The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-73. - Limitations on authority to grant variances. 
The city council shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in section 70-77 of this chapter, the conditions of issuance set forth in section 70-78 of this chapter, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The city council has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-74. - Restrictions in floodways. 
A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in section 70-53 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-75. - Historic buildings. 
A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-76. - Functionally dependent uses. 
A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this chapter, provided the variance meets the requirements of section 70-74, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-77. - Considerations for issuance of variances. 
In reviewing requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this chapter, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-78. - Conditions for issuance of variances. 
Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this chapter or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the city council that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-79, 70-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 70-81. - Violations. 
Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this chapter that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this chapter, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-82. - Authority. 
For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this chapter and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-83. - Unlawful continuance. 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-84—70-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 70-90. - General. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this article. Where terms are not defined in this chapter and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. Where terms are not defined in this chapter or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
ASCE 24. A standard titled "Flood Resistant Design and Construction" that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
Back of sidewalk. The elevation of the highest surface of the sidewalk abutting the property relative to the datums on the FIRM. 
Base flood. A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "one-percent-annual chance flood." 
Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202; see "Basement (for flood loads)".] 
Crown of road. The elevation of the highest surface of street pavement within the right-of-way abutting the property relative to the datum on the FIRM. 
Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. 
In areas designated as zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 29, 1972. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 29, 1972. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this chapter. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings. 
Letter of map change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle; or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this chapter, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
New construction. For the purposes of administration of this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after September 29, 1972 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 29, 1972. 
Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in F.S. § 320.01.] 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [see in F.S. § 320.01) 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1—V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
Start of construction. The date of issuance of permits for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this chapter or the Florida Building Code. 
Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT  
DIVISION 1. - BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 70-91. - Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
Pursuant to section 70-38 of this chapter, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of article III, division 7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-92. - Specific methods of construction and requirements. 
Pursuant to chapter 8, article III of the Miami-Dade County Code of Ordinances, the following specific methods of construction and requirements apply: 
(1)  Additional elevation of buildings. 
a.  For buildings located in the special flood hazard area, the minimum elevation requirements in the Florida Building Code shall be to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot, or the back of the sidewalk elevation plus one foot, or if there is no sidewalk, the elevation of the crown of the road or street abutting such building site plus one foot, whichever is higher. 
b.  For residential buildings not located in the special flood hazard area, the minimum lowest floor elevation requirements shall be of a minimum of eight inches above the back of sidewalk elevation, or if there is no sidewalk, a minimum of eight inches above the elevation of the crown of road or street abutting such building site whichever is higher. 
c.  For non-residential buildings not located in the special flood hazard area, the minimum lowest floor elevation shall be a minimum of four inches above the back of sidewalk, or if there is no sidewalk, a minimum of four inches above the elevation of the crown of road or street abutting such building site, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-93—70-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 70-96. - Minimum requirements. 
Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-97. - Subdivision plats. 
Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 70-52(1) of this chapter; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of article III, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-98—70-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SITE IMPROVEMENTS, UTILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 
 
Sec. 70-101. - Minimum requirements. 
All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-102. - Sanitary sewage facilities. 
All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into floodwaters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-103. - Water supply facilities. 
All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-104. - Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. 
No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in section 70-53(1) of this chapter demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-105. - Limitations on placement of fill. 
Subject to the limitations of this chapter, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-106. - Discharges. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to dispose of any rainwater, stormwater runoff or other liquids by causing or allowing same to flow on, over or across any adjoining property, sidewalk, easement or right-of-way, either public or private. Such discharges shall be properly retained on the property where they originate or fall. Exceptions to this condition may be allowed on a limited basis for necessary repairs or refinishing of swimming pools, based on a case-by-case review and approval by the city department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-107. - Canals. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to encroach on or into any secondary or private canals, canal maintenance easements, or other surface waters within the city boundaries without the review and approval of the city's department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-108. - Limitations on grade changes. 
For any new construction or substantial improvement, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any party to lower the elevation or otherwise cut down any existing or natural grades on a building site. An exception to this condition can consist of placement of stormwater management systems, as may be required by the city, Miami-Dade County, or South Florida Water Management District. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-109, 70-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 
 
Sec. 70-111. - General. 
All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-112. - Foundations. 
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 and this chapter. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to section 70-116 of this chapter are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-113. - Anchoring. 
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-114. - Elevation. 
Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with section 70-115 or 70-116 of this chapter, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-115. - General elevation requirement. 
Unless subject to the requirements of section 70-116 of this chapter, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (zone A). 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-116. - Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. 
Manufactured homes that are not subject to section 70-115 of this chapter, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
(1)  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (zone A); or 
(2)  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-117. - Enclosures. 
Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 for such enclosed areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-118. - Utility equipment. 
Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-119, 70-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND PARK TRAILERS 
 
Sec. 70-121. - Temporary placement. 
Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-122. - Permanent placement. 
Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in section 70-121 of this chapter for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of article III, division 4 of this chapter for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-123—70-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - TANKS 
 
Sec. 70-126. - Underground tanks. 
Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-127. - Above-ground tanks, not elevated. 
Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of section 70-128 of this chapter shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-128. - Above-ground tanks, elevated. 
Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-129. - Tank inlets and vents. 
Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Secs. 70-130—70-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - OTHER DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 70-136. - General requirements for other development. 
All development, including manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this chapter or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of section 70-53(1) of this chapter if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-137. - Fences in regulated floodways. 
Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of section 70-53(1) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-138. - Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. 
Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 70-53(1) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Sec. 70-139. - Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. 
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 70-53(1) of this chapter. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of section 70-53(3) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 11-21-17)  
Chapter 74 - HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Minimum standards adopted. 
(a)  The provisions of chapter 17, article I, sections 17-1 through 17-40, inclusive, entitled Metropolitan Dade County Minimum Housing Standards, of the Dade County Code, are hereby enacted by reference as the minimum housing standards required throughout the city. 
(b)  The document marked, designated, and known as the South Florida Building Code, which is made a part of this Code by reference, is adopted as a minimum standard for the purposes expressed therein and shall be known as the Building Code of Hialeah Gardens. Such document shall be fully effective to the same extent as if every word, phrase, sentence, or section of the South Florida Building Code were fully incorporated in this section, except as modified or added to in this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 152.01)  
Chapter 78 - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 25, 2006 amended Ch. 78 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 78, §§ 78-1—78-201, pertained to land use regulations, and derived from Code 1985, §§ 155.02—157.71; Ord. No. 90-30, § 1, adopted Nov. 27, 1990; Ord. No. 90-35, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 7, 1991; Ord. No. 90-42, § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 1991; Ord. No. 90-57, § 2, adopted Feb. 4, 1992; Ord. No. 90-62, § 1, adopted Apr. 7, 1992; Ord. No. 93-04, § 1, adopted Feb. 16, 1993; Ord. No. 93-14, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 1993; Ord. No. 95-10, § 2, adopted July 6, 1995; Ord. No. 95-17, § 2, Oct. 17, 1995; Ord. No. 97-05, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 16, 1997; Ord. No. 97-11, § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 1997; Ord. No. 97-20A, §§ 1, 2, adopted Mar. 13, 1998; Ord. No. 98-02, §§ 1, 2, adopted Apr. 7, 1998; Ord. No. 98-03, § 1, adopted Apr. 7, 1998; Ord. No. 98-17, § 2, adopted Jan. 1, 1998; Ord. No. 98-35, § 1, adopted Jan. 5, 1999; Ord. No. 2001-02, § 2, adopted Mar. 7, 2001; Ord. No. 2002-50, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2002; Ord. No. 2004-30, § 1, adopted Oct. 12, 2004; Ord. No. 2005-09, § 2, adopted Feb. 15, 2005; and Ord. No. 2005-36, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 2005. 
Cross reference— Code compliance, § 2-211 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; number of cats restricted in residential areas, § 14-39. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be entitled "Land Development Regulations." 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-2. - Purpose and authority. 
These land use regulations are enacted pursuant to the requirements and authority of F.S. § 163.3202, the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act; the City Charter; and the general powers in F.S. chs. 125 and 166. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-3. - Intent of land development regulations. 
With regard to these land development regulations in general, the provisions of this chapter are intended: 
(1)  To implement and promote consistency with goals, objectives and policies of the city's Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  To foster and preserve public health, safety, comfort and welfare, and to aid in the harmonious, orderly, and progressive development of the city in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(3)  To specify the duties and responsibilities of the city in the administration of this chapter. 
(4)  To establish clear, consistent and certain regulations, procedures and development standards for obtaining development order and permitting approvals for all proposed development in the city. 
(5)  To adopt a development review process that is efficient, effective, and equitable. 
(6)  To provide specific procedures to ensure that development orders and permits are conditioned on the availability of public facilities and services that meet level of service requirements (concurrency). 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-4. - Applicability to development. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development, public and private, in the city. No development, except as specifically provided in this chapter, shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to this chapter. 
(1)  With respect to transferability, unless otherwise specified, development orders and permits run with the land. 
(2)  Nothing in this chapter shall supersede the jurisdictional authority of county, state or federal entities. 
(3)  This chapter shall supersede all other land development regulations, or parts thereof, where there exists inconsistency or conflict with specific sections contained herein. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-5. - Rules of interpretation. 
(a)  Generally. In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the objectives and purposes of the city; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(b)  Responsibility for interpretation. If any question arises concerning the application of regulations, performance standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of this chapter, the chief zoning official, or designee, shall be responsible for interpretation and shall look to the comprehensive plan for guidance. Responsibility for interpretation by such official shall be limited to standards, regulations and requirements of this chapter, but shall not be construed to include interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in these land development regulations, nor be construed as overriding the responsibilities given to any council, board or official named in other sections or articles of this chapter. 
(c)  Rules of construction. The language used in this chapter shall be interpreted according to the following rules unless that interpretation would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
(1)  Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by consecutive calendar days excluding Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays. 
(2)  Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize delegation to professional level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
(3)  Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine and neuter. 
(4)  Number. Words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular. 
(5)  Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
(6)  Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or present. 
(7)  Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
(8)  Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless otherwise indicated. 
(9)  Day. The word "day" shall mean a calendar day, unless a working day is indicated. 
(10)  Boundaries. Interpretations regarding boundaries of land use districts shall be made in accordance with the following: 
a.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any street shall be construed as following the centerline of the street. 
b.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any platted lot line or other property line shall be construed as following such line. 
c.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following section lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-6. - Relationship to Comprehensive Plan. 
F.S. § 163.3194(1)(b) requires each local government enact a unified land development code and also requires that all land development regulations within said code be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the enacting local government. The land development regulations adopted in this chapter shall meet this standard of consistency, and implement the adopted goals, objectives and policies of the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-7. - Future land use map. 
The city's future land use map, as amended from time to time, is hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06) 
Cross reference— Comprehensive plan, ch. 62.  
Sec. 78-8. - Official zoning district map. 
The city's official zoning district map is established and incorporated as part of these regulations. The official zoning district map delineates the boundaries of all zoning districts as adopted by the city council, as amended from time to time, and shall be kept on file with the chief zoning official. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-9. - Changes, amendments, or supplements. 
All changes, amendments, or supplements to this chapter and to the zoning district map shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Comprehensive Plan, and applicable state law. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-10. - Existing nonconforming development. 
A use, building or structure shall be considered nonconforming if it is not in full compliance with all regulations of the land use district in which it is situated. A use, building, or structure, lawfully in existence on August 15, 2006, which shall be made nonconforming upon the passage of this chapter or any applicable amendment thereto, may be continued and not be considered to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(1)  Regulation of nonconforming uses and structures. No existing building or premises devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted, or structurally altered except when changed to a conforming use, or when required to do so by law and as follows: 
a.  A nonconforming structure which has less than 50 percent of its previous existing floor area made unsafe or unusable may be restored, reconstructed, or used as before. All repairs shall be completed within one year after damages occur or the use shall not be rebuilt except as a conforming use. 
b.  Normal maintenance, repair, and incidental alteration of a structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, provided it does not extend the area or volume of space occupied by the nonconforming use. A building or other structure containing residential nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve interior livability. However, no structural alterations shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling units. 
(2)  Termination of nonconforming uses and structures. Nonconforming uses, buildings or structures shall not be re-established and shall be considered in violation of the provisions of this chapter when: 
a.  A nonconforming use, building or structure is not used for a period of six months or more or the use is changed to a more restricted or conforming use for any period of time. 
b.  When 50 percent or more of the existing floor area of a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire or other casualty or act of God and as a result becomes unsafe or unusable, the use permitted of the building or structure as a nonconforming use shall be terminated. 
(3)  Special provisions for specific nonconformities. 
a.  Nonconformity with stormwater management requirements. An existing development that does not currently comply must be brought into full compliance with the stormwater management requirements of this chapter when the use of the development is intensified, resulting in an increase in stormwater runoff or added concentration of pollutants in the runoff. 
b.  Nonconformity with parking and loading requirements. Full compliance with this chapter shall be required where the seating capacity or other factor controlling the number of parking or loading spaces required is increased by ten percent or more. 
c.  Nonconforming signs. All nonconforming signs shall be prohibited; except signs that are within ten percent of height and size limitations, and that in all other respects conform to the requirements of these land use regulations, shall be deemed to be in conformity. 
A nonconforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition as required by these land use regulations, but it shall not be: 
Structurally changed, altered, expanded, or reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds 20 percent of the appraised replacement cost as determined by the city. 
1.  Nonconforming signs along federal highways. If it is determined that nonconforming signs exist along a federal interstate or primary aid highway, the City Council shall develop a plan for their expeditious removal in accordance with state and federal law. 
d.  Nonconforming vehicle use areas. 
1.  Compliance upon replacement or resurfacing. An existing vehicle use area that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter must be brought into full compliance when a total of 25 percent or more of the paving of the vehicle use area is replaced or resurfaced within any two-year period. 
2.  Compliance upon expansion. When the square footage of a vehicle use area is increased, compliance with this chapter is required as follows: 
i.  Expansion by ten percent or less. When a vehicle use area is expanded by ten percent or less, only the expansion area must be brought into compliance with this chapter. 
ii.  Expansion by more than ten percent. When a vehicle use area is expanded by more than ten percent, the entire vehicle use area shall be brought into compliance with this chapter. 
Repeated resurfacing, replacement or expansions of paving of any size shall be combined in determining whether the above threshold has been reached. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06) 
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 82.  
Sec. 78-10.1. - Governmental right-of-way takings. 
If as a result of a governmental taking, either by the city or by another governmental or public agency, by condemnation or negotiation, existing structures, lots, use areas or other permitted uses would, but for this section, become non-compliant or further non-compliant with provisions of section 78-10 of the city Code, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Purpose/applicability. 
a.  The intent of this section is to legalize nonconforming with provisions of section 78-10 of the city Code, resulting through the lawful use of eminent domain, an order of a court of competent jurisdiction, or the voluntary dedication of property. 
b.  The term "legal nonconformity" or "legal nonconforming" shall refer to a noncompliance with applicable provisions of section 78-10 of the city Code resulting from the lawful use of eminent domain, an order of a court of competent jurisdiction, or the voluntary dedication of property. 
c.  The term "legal nonconforming" shall refer to a use, building, improvement, or lot that is rendered noncompliant with applicable provisions of section 78-10 of the city Code, through the lawful use of eminent domain, an order of a court of competent jurisdiction, or the voluntary dedication of property. 
d.  For purposes of this section, the term "expansion" shall mean an improvement, addition, enlargement, extension, or modification to a structure that increases the square footage of the structure, or reconstruction substitution or structural alteration thereto. 
(2)  Legal nonconforming lots. 
a.  Development on a legal nonconforming lot having legal nonconformity as to the lot frontage and/or lot area requirements of the applicable land use district shall be permitted, provided that the development meets all other requirements of the applicable land use district. 
b.  Expansions of structures on legal nonconforming lots shall be permitted in accordance with this section. 
(3)  Legal nonconforming uses. 
a.  A legal nonconforming use may continue. 
b.  If a legal nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of six months or more, or the use is changed to a more restricted or conforming use for any period of time, the use may not be reestablished. A use shall be considered discontinued once the activities and commerce, essential to the continuation of the use are abandoned, unless the property owner is able to demonstrate that there was no intent to abandon the use. Discontinuance due to acts of force majeure shall not constitute abandonment provided a good faith effort is made to reestablish the use. 
c.  No such legal nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased to occupy a greater area of land or structure, except that expansions of legal nonconforming single-family residences shall be permitted. 
(4)  Legal nonconforming structures. 
a.  To prevent changes in regulation from unduly burdening property owners, legal nonconforming structures may continue to be used and maintained. Expansions, repairs, alterations, and improvements to legal nonconforming structures shall be permitted only in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  Internal and external repairs, alterations and improvements that do not increase the square footage of the legal nonconforming structure shall be permitted. 
2.  Expansions to a legal nonconforming structure shall be permitted as follows: 
(i)  If the total square footage of the proposed improvement is less than 50 percent of the structure's net square footage at the time it became legal nonconforming, the improvement shall comply with current regulations. 
(ii)  If the total square footage of the proposed improvement is equal to or exceeds 50 percent of the structure's net square footage at the time it became legal nonconforming, the entire structure and site improvements shall be brought into compliance with current regulations. 
(iii)  Once the cumulative total of additional square footage or improvements equals to 50 percent of the structure's net square footage at the time it became legal nonconforming, no additional expansions shall be permitted and the entire structure and site improvements shall be brought into compliance with current regulations. 
(iv)  For purposes of this section, net square footage shall refer to the square footage indicated on the building permit or determined through equivalent evidence such as aerial photographs, tax roll information, certificates of use or occupancy, or design professional certifications. 
b.  If a legal nonconforming structure is damaged by fire, flood, explosion, wind, war, riot or any other act of force majeure, repairs shall be subject to the following provisions: 
1.  If the repair/replacement cost is less than 50 percent of the value of the structure based upon the average of two independent appraisals, the structure may be reconstructed up to the same building height and within the same building footprint existing prior to the damage, provided that an application for final building permit has been submitted within 12 months of the date of such damage unless extended by the board of county commissioners. 
2.  If the repair/replacement cost is equal to or exceeds 50 percent of the building's value based upon the average of two independent appraisals, the building and site improvements shall be brought into compliance with current regulations. 
3.  Routine internal and external maintenance, repairs and material replacement such as re-roofing, painting, window or door replacement, mechanical equipment repair and replacement, plumbing and electrical maintenance, and similar repair, maintenance, and replacements shall be permitted. 
c.  If a legal nonconforming building is deemed to be unsafe, pursuant to chapter 8 of this Code, and demolition is required, the building shall be rebuilt in accordance with current regulations. 
d.  In addition to the requirements of this section, all repairs, improvements, and expansions to a legal nonconforming building shall comply with the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, § 1, 6-19-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-05, § 1, adopted June 19, 2018, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 78-10.1 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 78-11. - Northwest district annexation area. 
(a)  Description of annexed area. The area annexed by the city in 2003 is bounded on the southwest by the centerline of the Miami canal, on the west by the centerline of the Homestead Extension of the Florida Turnpike, on the north by the centerline of Northwest 170th Street, on the east by the centerline of Northwest 107th Avenue, and includes on the easterly side a 330-foot strip between the centerline of the following roads Northwest 137th Street on the south, Northwest 138th Street on the north, Northwest 97th Avenue on the east and Northwest 117th Avenue on the west. 
(b)  Applicability of city land development regulations to annexed area Existing city ordinances and land development regulations shall apply to property within the annexed area except where inconsistent or in conflict with the supplemental land development regulations for the annexed area which have been incorporated in Article III of this chapter. 
(c)  Correlation of city and county zoning designations. Prior to annexation by the city the land in the annexed area was subject to and governed by Miami-Dade County land use regulations and zoning districts. The Miami-Dade County zoning designations for property within the annexed area at the time of annexation shall be retained and are adopted by the city for said area except as specifically modified herein. Except for these zoning designations ("zoning districts") which are adopted for the property within the annexed area no other portion or provision of the Miami-Dade County code is incorporated or adopted by reference in this chapter. 
The Miami-Dade County zoning designations and the corresponding new city zoning designations are set forth as follows: 
County 	City 
GU ..... 	UZ 
(unclassified) * 
IU-1 ..... 	IN-1 
IU-2 ..... 	IN-2 
NONE ..... 	IN-C 
BU-1 ..... 	B-1 
BU-1A ..... 	B-1 
BU-2 ..... 	B-2 
BU-3 ..... 	B-3 
AU ..... 	N/A 
 
The UZ zoning district designation (Unclassified) shall be any area of the city that is not specifically covered by another zoning district designation. 
(d)  Previous agreements. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant or other recorded and binding agreement with governmental authorities; provided, however, that where city ordinances and rules and regulations impose a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or requires greater open spaces than are imposed or required by existing Miami-Dade County ordinances, rules, or regulations, this chapter and city ordinances, rules, and regulations shall control. 
(e)  Official zoning district map. The official zoning district map delineates the boundaries of all zoning districts as adopted by the city council, as amended from time to time, and shall be kept on file with the chief zoning official. 
(f)  Errors or omissions. If, because of error or omission in prior zoning ordinances, any property in the annexed area is not shown as being in a zoning district, the classification of such property shall be UZ (unclassified). 
(g)  Vested rights for annexation areas. Any ancillary use pursuant to a lawful, valid, permanent certificate of use and occupancy or approved site plan or zoning resolution issued by Miami-Dade County before the adoption of this chapter will be considered a legal, nonconforming use when such use is in compliance with the city's percentage of use and parking requirements on said effective date. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-12. - Vested rights and previously issued development permits or approved plans. 
(a)  Vested rights. 
(1)  Purpose. Any property owner whose property is rezoned or whose use of property is restricted as a result of a zoning action undertaken by the city, and who claims a vested right to develop or use his property contrary to this chapter, may submit an application for a determination of vested rights to the zoning department within one year after the later of: 
a.  The effective date that the official resolution or zoning action by the city is taken; or 
b.  The date of final judicial action. 
(2)  Standard. Reliance solely on the prior zoning of the property absent a duly filed application and receipt of permits shall not constitute a basis for a determination of vested rights. 
(3)  Application. Any property owner filing for a determination of vested rights with the zoning department shall do so on a form approved by the city. 
In addition to the application form, the applicant shall attach copies of any applicable development permits, development orders and/or any other documents which support or negate the claim of vested rights. The mere existence of zoning prior to the effective date of the zoning action in question shall not automatically vest rights. 
(4)  Notice procedures for vested rights. Notice procedures for vested rights are set forth in this chapter under Article II. 
(5)  Review procedures for vested rights. Review procedures for vested rights are set forth in this chapter under Article IV. 
(6)  Effect of vested rights determination. A determination by the city council that a property owner is entitled to a vested right shall entitle development or use in accordance with such determination. However, a vested rights determination shall not limit the applicability of other provisions of this chapter, nor shall it entitle the applicant to the issuance of any development permit not specified in the final vested rights determination. 
(b)  Previously issued development permits. The provisions of this section and any amendments thereto shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and valid development permit if: 
(1)  The development activity authorized by the permit has commenced or will commence within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter; and 
(2)  The development activity continues without interruption until the development is complete, except due to war or natural disaster. 
(c)  Previously approved development plans. Projects with unexpired development plans shall be required to meet only the regulations in effect when the development plan was originally approved. If the development plan expires, or is otherwise invalidated, any further development on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or amendments thereto. Any claim to vested rights must be filed with the city within one year of adoption of amendments to this section. 
(d)  Consistency with plan. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize development that is inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-13. - Contributions, dedications and impact fees required. 
(a)  Dedication of park lands or contributions in lieu thereof. As a condition of approval of a final plat of a subdivision, a planned unit development (PUD), mixed-use residential development (MU) or site plan, each subdivider or developer shall dedicate lands for park and recreational purposes to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, or provide cash contributions in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the city. 
(1)  Dedication of park land. 
a.  The amount of land required to be dedicated per unit by dwelling type shall be as follows: 
1.  Single-family development: 0.0130 net acre. 
2.  Zero-lot line development: 0.0119 net acre. 
3.  Townhouse development: 0.0106 net acre. 
4.  Multifamily development: 0.0080 net acre. 
b.  In determining the actual land dedication of park, recreation and open space, only the developable area of a subdivision, PUD or MU shall be calculated in determining the need and necessity for public and private parks and recreational facilities or open space. 
c.  In determining the amount of park and recreational lands to be dedicated in accordance with this article, the net residential density shall be considered. Such dedication or payment shall be completed before the issuance of building permits authorized by the city. 
d.  A comprehensive park and recreation plan submitted by the developer or subdivider as part of the application for site plan approval shall describe and identify the nature of a recreation facility, scenic easement, or other facility to be provided. This plan shall be subject to approval by the mayor and city council as to compatibility and consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. 
e.  Depending on the size of a development, a portion of the park and recreation area of subdivisions may at the option of the city council be provided in the form of private open space in lieu of dedicated public open space. The extent to which shall be determined by the city council based upon the needs of the residents. The substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher quality of recreational facilities. Detailed plans of such areas including specifications of facilities to be installed shall be approved by the mayor and city council and, before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or developer shall provide a covenant that these private recreation areas will be maintained in perpetuity by the property owners' association or by some other mechanism. Additionally, a dormant special taxing district shall be established in the event that the property owners' association fails to maintain private open space or is disbanded. 
(2)  Contributions in lieu of park land. Contributions in lieu of park land shall be based on the fair market value of the land within the area of proposed improvement as specified herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as a park and recreation facility. In order to determine the fair market value, the developer or subdivider shall deposit with the city sufficient funds to enable the city to acquire the services of a qualified real estate appraiser to determine the fair market value thereof. Upon the determination by the appraiser of the fair market value, the developer or subdivider shall deposit with the city into a special park and recreation development fund the sum determined to represent a cash contribution in lieu of land. If the developer or subdivider objects to the appraisal determining the fair market value of the approved land in the area of his development, the developer or subdivider may submit additional information or appraisals to the city. The city council may approve and accept the amount of the contribution in lieu of land, or request additional information from the applicant. 
(b)  Criteria for requiring dedication and contributions in lieu of park lands. 
(1)  In certain situations the developer or subdivider may upon approval by the mayor and city council provide for a combination of lands and contributions of land upon occurrence of the following events: 
a.  That only a portion of lands to be developed are to be offered for sale in accordance with an approved site plan. 
b.  That the development does not contain lands suitable for a park location. 
c.  That the major part of the development has already been acquired and contains park lands and only an additional area is needed for the development of the completed site. 
(2)  Where the Comprehensive Plan or standards of the city call for a larger amount of park and recreation land sites in a particular subdivision or planned unit development than the developers are required to dedicate, the park land needed over and above the developer's contribution shall be designated on the comprehensive plan for subsequent purchase by the city. 
(3)  Where the subdivision is less than four acres, public open space which is required to be dedicated, where possible, may be combined with the dedications from the adjoining developments in order to produce suitable park and recreational areas. 
(4)  All park lands to be submitted as a dedicated site as well as their surroundings shall be suitable for park purposes. Grading of sites dedicated for park and recreation uses shall be completed, facilities installed and accepted by the city prior to the granting of certificates of occupancy to the developments or the residential units. 
(5)  All sites shall be dedicated in usable condition in accordance with the approved plan for full service of electricity, water, sewer, streets, drainage, curbs, and the like as required by the location of the site, or acceptable provision made therefor. Sidewalks and trees normally included within the definition of improved sites may be provided at a later date, subject to written agreement with the city due to a delay in time between dedication of any site and construction of facilities located thereon. 
(6)  Compliance with this article is required as a condition to the annexation of any lands to the city and provision for dedication of park land shall be incorporated within any pre-annexation agreement. 
(7)  Dedications of lands for parks, open space and recreational purposes shall be made at the time of final plat and shall be recorded on the face of the plat. 
(c)  Park trust fund. 
(1)  Maintenance of park funds. Such funds shall be invested in accordance with the laws of the state and shall be separately accounted for and distinguished from the general funds of the city. 
The city may receive and deposit from time to time additional moneys and funds from other sources, including grants and dedications. The park trust fund shall be administered by the mayor, or his designee, subject to the approval of the city council in the same manner as provided by law for city funds generally. A separate budget shall be established each year for disbursement from the fund. The fund shall be subject to audit requirements as provided by law. 
(2)  Use of funds. The park trust fund shall be used by the city to acquire park lands, scenic easements, and recreational facilities of all types and nature and for the maintenance thereof. In addition, the principal and income derived therefrom may be used to pay the principal and interest of bonds issued and secured thereby for park acquisition purposes, recreational facilities, and the maintenance thereof. 
(3)  Schedule of payments. All monies due for park trust funds contributions shall be payable prior to the time a certificate of occupancy is issued provided, however, that payment of park trust funds contributions may be made at the time of application for a building permit and, if made at said time, a three percent credit on the total amount due shall be given to the contributor. 
(d)  Public safety impact fee. All new developments are required to contribute funds for additional public safety services necessitated by such development. Chapter 46, Article V, Impact Fees, and any subsequent amendments, shall provide for the imposition of impact fees, and shall specify exemptions and fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06) 
Cross reference— Impact fee, § 46-146 et seq.  
Sec. 78-14. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-15. - Low THC facilities, cannabis dispensaries, medical marijuana treatment facilities, and independent testing laboratories. 
(a)  With the exception of low THC cannabis, as defined in this section, cannabis dispensaries, medical marijuana treatment facilities, and independent testing laboratories are prohibited within the territorial jurisdiction of the City of Hialeah Gardens as provided at F.S. § 381.986. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words, terms, and phrases including their respective derivatives have the following meanings: 
Cannabis means all parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant and every compound, manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin. Also known as marijuana. 
Cannabis dispensary means an establishment where the cultivation of the cannabis plant, sale of the cannabis plant, sale of any part of the cannabis plant, including its flowers and any derivative product of the cannabis plant, not including low-THC cannabis, is dispensed at retail. 
Derivative product means any form of cannabis suitable for routes of administration. 
Independent testing laboratory means a laboratory, including the managers, employees, or contractors of the laboratory, which has no direct or indirect interest in a dispensing organization. 
Low THC cannabis means a plant of the genus Cannabis, the dried flowers of which contain 0.8 percent or less of tetrahydrocannabinol and more the ten percent of cannabidiol weight for weight; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; or any compound, manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant or its seed or resin that is dispensed only from a dispensing organization approved by the Florida Department of Health pursuant to F.S. § 381.986. 
Low THC cannabis dispensary means an establishment where low THC cannabis is dispensed at retail. 
Medical cannabis means all parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin that is dispensed only from a dispensing organization for medical use by an eligible patient as defined in F.S. § 499.0295. 
Medical marijuana treatment facility means business entities that cultivate, process, and dispense cannabis for medicinal purposes to qualified patients. 
(Ord. No. 2020-04, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-04, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 18, 2020, has been codified as § 78-15 at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 78-16—78-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 78-20. - Purpose and authority. 
This article sets forth the duties and responsibilities of the agencies and boards described herein and the notice provisions required for obtaining land use changes, site plans, plats, special exceptions, variances, vested rights, re-zonings, any other development orders and certain types of permits. 
Under the provisions of this chapter the city shall have the authority to review development as defined in this chapter and in F.S. § 380.04. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-21. - Duties and responsibilities of city council. 
The council shall have the following duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  To initially adopt and subsequently amend the provisions and requirements of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan as may be considered necessary from time to time, after such amendments are reviewed and recommended by the planning and zoning board. 
(2)  To establish by ordinance the duties and responsibilities of the planning and zoning board. 
(3)  To have final authority for approval of subdivisions and subdivision plats pursuant to F.S. ch. 177.071. 
(4)  To make changes or amendments to the various zones as specified in this chapter. 
(5)  To hear and decide certain appeals. 
(6)  To have final authority for vacation, abandonment, or acceptance of dedicated public ways including rights-of-way or easements. 
(7)  To perform any other deliberations or actions not otherwise assigned to any other board, committee, or staff, which may be necessary or desirable for the implementation of this chapter. 
The city council may act only after public notice and hearings as provided by law and upon initiation by its own motion or by petition. 
Meetings of the city council with reference to land use, zoning, variances, site plans, platting, appeals, vested rights and special exceptions shall be in accordance with the rules of procedure for regular city council meetings. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-22. - Duties and responsibilities of planning and zoning board. 
The planning and zoning board shall have the following duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  The planning and zoning board review and recommend to the city council any amendments to the provisions and requirements of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan as may be considered necessary from time to time. 
(2)  The planning and zoning board shall have the duty to hear all matters concerning zoning and zoning variances, special exceptions and vested rights. After hearing the matter before it, the board shall make a written recommendation to the city council of the action the board believes should be taken. 
(3)  The planning and zoning board shall establish rules and regulations for its own operation not inconsistent with the provisions of applicable state statutes or this chapter. 
(4)  The planning and zoning board shall meet at the call of the chair, at the written request of three or more regular members, or within 30 days, or as soon as reasonably possible, after receipt of a matter to be acted on by the board. Three members of the planning and zoning board shall constitute a quorum. All meetings of the planning and zoning board shall be public and a record of all resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations of the board shall be made, which shall be a public record on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-23. - Duties and responsibilities of technical review committee (TRC). 
The technical review committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  For development applications (such as site plans, plats, special exceptions, variances, and re-zonings), as deemed necessary by the zoning department, the committee shall make an initial determination of conformance with applicable regulations. 
(2)  The voting membership of the committee shall be composed of an employee or consultant appointed from each of the following departments, agencies and entities: 
a.  Building department; 
b.  Zoning department; 
c.  Code compliance department; 
d.  Water and sewer department; 
e.  Public works department; and 
f.  Police department; 
and shall provide a recommendation on development proposals, as necessary, which shall be made available to the applicant, to the planning and zoning board and to the city council. 
In addition, the committee will solicit and allow relevant comments from the fire department and/or other governmental agencies as needed. 
(3)  The technical review committee shall meet at least monthly to review development proposals as prescribed in this chapter. 
(4)  The chief zoning official shall be coordinator, and chair and may call additional meetings and or refer matters to the committee for comment. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-24. - Duties and responsibilities of the zoning department. 
The zoning department shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  The zoning department shall promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by providing an equitable, expeditious, effective, and inexpensive method of enforcing the zoning, sign, and related technical codes in force of the city. 
(2)  Provide staff support to the city council and planning and zoning board on matters pertaining to the city's Code and Comprehensive Plan. 
(3)  Receive, process, and determine completeness of all applications for comprehensive plan amendments, development approval, zone changes, variances, use permits, vested rights or appeals, local business tax receipt or other permits that may be required by this chapter. 
(4)  Make determinations, interpretations, and decisions regarding applicable zones, allowable uses, special exceptions, zone boundaries, or any other provision of this chapter. 
(5)  Recommend, recommend with conditions, or deny development orders as specified in this chapter, or refer them to the planning and zoning board as may be considered necessary. 
(6)  Make substantial compliance determinations. 
(7)  Schedule proceedings before the planning and zoning board. 
(8)  Duties associated with the routine administration of this chapter unless otherwise specified herein or governed by general law. 
(9)  The zoning department shall determine if a violation requires a variance or if the violation shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 78-25. - Petition initiated by the city for development application. 
Whenever the city acts as petitioner for changes in land use or zoning classification, a change of conditions or regulations of any district, or a change to any other provision of this chapter, it shall make written application do so. 
The application shall be accompanied by any necessary information or documentation supporting the request and shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state law. 
The planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing or hearings thereon, with due public notice as required pursuant to Florida Statutes. The planning and zoning board shall submit in writing its recommendations on the proposed change to the city council for official action. 
The city council shall then proceed to amend, supplement, repeal, or leave unchanged the regulations in accordance with the applicable provision of local and state law. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-26. - Petition initiated by other than the city for development application. 
Whenever the fee simple owner of any property desires a change in land use or zoning classification, a change of conditions or regulations of any district, or a change to any other provision of this chapter, the applicant shall do so to the zoning department in a form as prescribed by the city, together with the appropriate fee as set forth in a separate ordinance to cover the cost of notice for a public hearing. 
The written application shall be signed by the owner or owner's designee. The application shall be accompanied by any necessary information or documentation supporting the request and shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state law. 
The planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing or hearings thereon, with due public notice. The planning and zoning board shall submit in writing its recommendations on the proposed change to the city council for official action. 
The city council shall then proceed to amend, supplement, repeal, or leave unchanged the regulations in accordance with the applicable provision of local and state law. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-27. - Notice requirements and procedures for public hearings. 
_____ 
Development Application Type 	Type of Notice Required 	Technical Review Committee* 	Planning and Zoning Board 	City Council 
Appeals 	Mail 			10 days prior to hearing 
	Advertisement 			
Comprehensive Land Use Plan Amendment 	Mail 		15 days 	30 days 
	Posting 		7 days 	
	Advertisement 		10 days 	10 days 
Land Development Regulations 	Advertisement 		10 days 	10 days 
Site Plan 	Advertisement 		10 days 	10 days 
Special Exceptions 	Mail 		15 days 	15 or 30 days 
	Posting 		7 days 	7 days 
	Advertisement 		10 days 	10 or 30 days 
Subdivision Plats 	Advertisement 			10 days 
Rezoning 	Mail 		15 days 	15 days 
	Posting 		7 days 	7 days 
	Advertisement 		10 days 	10 days 
Variances 	Mail 		15 days 	15 days 
	Posting 		7 days 	7 days 
	Advertisement 		10 days 	10 days 
Vested Rights 	Advertisement 		10 days 	10 days 
 
Typically notice is given only to the applicant. 
** The 30-day notice provision is in effect if a development application is to be heard by the city council initially. 
In order to provide adequate public notice for all hearings concerning changes or modifications in the classification or regulation affecting any property, including special exception use, variance, land use amendment or zoning change in any zoning districts, vested rights or appealing a decision of the city, the following shall be done: 
(1)  Notice to property owners. 
a.  Any applicant desiring a public hearing shall file a written petition setting forth the desired change or modification. 
b.  The applicant shall pay to the city the appropriate public hearing and notice fees (including postage) according to the type of application requested. All must be received upon submittal of the application for such hearing. A schedule of fees, as may be amended from time to time, is on file in the city clerk's office. 
c.  Prior to any action being taken by any board or agency of the city, owners of property within 1,500 feet in each direction of any parcel wherein a request is being made, shall be notified by regular mail at least 15 days prior to the time that such request shall be considered. 
Notices shall be mailed by the city to all owners of record within such required radius. If additional mailings are required for any reason, the applicant shall pay the city the cost of said mailings. No hearing before any board or agency shall be held until seven days after mailing of notices. Failure to receive notice by any affected property owner shall not constitute grounds to set aside any action or relief granted. 
(2)  Notice in publication of general circulation. 
a.  An advertisement shall be published in a newspaper or other publication of general circulation, pursuant to section 78-27, Notice Requirements and Procedures for Public Hearings. 
(3)  Posting of public notice. 
a.  A sign shall be prepared and posted on the property by the city setting forth a notice of public hearing before any board or agency and shall remain posted on the property through the date of the public hearing. All costs of posting the property and preparing the notice shall be paid by the applicant. 
(4)  Failure to comply with the notice requirements of this section shall constitute a withdrawal of the application and no action on the application shall be taken by any board or agency of the city until compliance with this section. 
(5)  Should a request for special exceptions be presented in the first instance to the city council and not to the planning and zoning board, then the notice required by this section shall be given to such property owners 30 days prior to the taking of any action on such request by the city council. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Secs. 78-28, 78-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICT TYPE AND USE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 78-30. - Purpose. 
The city, in furtherance of implementing the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, has created zoning districts in order to have a greater range of densities and intensities of uses within the existing framework of the future land use categories. The creation of zoning districts allows for classifying and regulating the use and development of the lands and waters of the city. These zoning districts are established for the purpose of protecting, promoting, and improving the public health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare of the community. These districts control the location of uses and regulate the location, height, and bulk of buildings to be erected or structurally altered for such uses; to control population density and the intensity of use of lot areas; and to require adequate yards and other open spaces surrounding such buildings. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-31. - Schedule of districts. 
In accordance with the land development regulations, the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
(1) 	Estates one-family residential 	
	 One dwelling unit/1.25 acres gross ..... 	(E-1) 
(2) 	Single-family residential 	
	 One dwelling unit/14,000 sq. ft. net (2.9 DU's/net acre) ..... 	(R-1) 
(3) 	One- and two-family residential 	
	 3.75 dwelling units/net acre ..... 	(R-2) 
(4) 	Single-family residential zero-lot-line 	
	 Six dwelling units/net acre ..... 	(R-1Z) 
(5) 	Single-family residential patio detached 	
	 Eight dwelling units/net acre ..... 	(R-1P) 
(6) 	Townhouse 	
	 12 dwelling units/net acre ..... 	(R-TH) 
(7) 	Multi-family 	
	 16 dwelling units/net acre ..... 	(R-M1) 
(8) 	Multi-family 	
	 25 dwelling units/net acre ..... 	(R-M2) 
(9) 	Neighborhood business ..... 	(B-1) 
(10) 	General business ..... 	(B-2) 
(11) 	Commercial business ..... 	(B-3) 
(12) 	Light industrial ..... 	(IN-1) 
(13) 	Heavy industrial ..... 	(IN-2) 
(14) 	Controlled industrial ..... 	(IN-C) 
(15) 	Community facilities ..... 	(CF) 
(16) 	Parks and open space and water ..... 	(POS) 
(17) 	Rights-of-way ..... 	(RW) 
(18) 	Planned unit development ..... 	(PUD) 
(19) 	Mixed use residential commercial ..... 	(MU) 
(20) 	Mixed use entertainment ..... 	(MU-E) 
 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-32. - Relationship of zoning districts to land use categories. 
The following is a table of the future land use designations and the corresponding zoning districts: 
Zoning Districts By Future Land Use Category 
Future Land Use Category 	Zoning District 
Estate Residential (EU) 	E-1 
Low Density Single-Family Residential (LDR) 	R-1 
	R-2 
Moderate Single-Family Residential (MOR) 	R-1Z 
	R-1P 
Medium Density Residential (MER) 	R-TH 
	R-M1 
High Density Residential (HDR) 	R-M2 
Neighborhood Retail (NR) 	B-1 
General Business (BU) 	B-2 
Commercial Business (CM) 	B-3 
Industrial Use (IN) 	IN-1 
	IN-2 
	IN-C 
Community Facilities (CF) 	CF 
Parks and Open Space and Water (POS) 	POS 
Rights-of-Way 	RW 
— 	Planned Unit Development (PUD) 
— 	Mixed Use Residential Commercial (MU) and Mixed Use Entertainment (MU-E) 
 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-33. - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
The district boundary lines are intended generally to follow the centerlines of waterways and streets, existing lot lines, section lines, or municipal boundary lines, all as shown on the future land use map. Where a district boundary line does not follow such a line, or in a case of uncertainty as to the true location of a district boundary line in a particular instance, the building official or chief zoning official shall request the technical review committee render its determination with respect thereto; however, no boundary shall be changed by the technical review committee. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-34. - Application of zoning district regulations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the following general prohibitions shall apply: 
(1)  No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to, or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be designed, used, or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as permitted in the district in which the building or land is located. 
(2)  No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit designated in this chapter for the district in which the building is located. 
(3)  No building shall be erected and no existing buildings shall be moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, lot area, and building location and bulk regulations designated in this chapter for the district in which the building or open space is located. 
(4)  No yard or other open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-35. - Zoning district cross reference. 
Zoning District Cross Reference—Permitted Zoning Districts 
	E-1 	R-1 	R-2 	R-1Z 	R-1P 	R-TH 	R-M1 	R-M2 	B-1 	B-2 	B-3 	IN-1 	IN-2 	IN-C 	CF 	POS 	RW 	PUD 	MU 
E-1 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 											
R-1 		X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 											
R-2 			X 			X 	X 	X 											
R-1Z 				X 	X 	X 	X 	X 										X 	
R-1P 					X 	X 	X 	X 										X 	
R-TH 						X 	X 	X 										X 	X 
R-M1 							X 	X 										X 	
R-M2 								X 										X 	X 
B-1 									X 	X 	X 							X 	X 
B-2 										X 	X 							X 	X 
B-3 											X 	X 							
IN-1 												X 	X 	X 					
IN-2 													X 						
IN-C 														X 					
CF 				X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 		X 	X 
POS 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 		X 	X 
RW 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
PUD 																		X 	
MU 																			X 
 
By reading vertically, this table depicts by zoning district those other districts whose permitted uses are generally allowed. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-36. - Permitted, permitted similar, accessory and special exception uses—Generally. 
(a)  Permitted and permitted similar uses. Permitted uses allowed within each zoning district are defined and described in subsequent sections of this article. 
No land, body of water and/or structure in the applicable zoning district shall be used or permitted to be used, and no structure shall be hereafter erected, constructed, arranged or intended to be used, occupied or maintained for any purpose except as set forth in the description of uses permitted for said district. 
With regard to the uses permitted within any zoning classification, the city's chief zoning official shall have the authority to make a determination that a proposed use is sufficiently similar to a specifically permitted use to be allowed as a "similar use." In determining similarity between a proposed use and a use specifically described herein the chief zoning official shall be guided by the intent of the zoning classification and shall further consider common characteristics, the generation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and the compatibility of the proposed use with the uses specifically described and permitted within the zoning classification. 
In addition, certain uses listed under each category are allowed only if special supplemental site design standards and/or other requirements are met. These certain uses are denoted by an asterisk (*) and have the supplemental standards and/or requirements described in Article V, Division 6 of this chapter. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures are considered incidental or subordinate to a principal use or structure located on the same lot. 
(c)  Special exception uses. Uses not permitted by right but may provide for an individual or community serving need and which, subject to conditions, would not impact the integrity of the zoning district. These uses shall be authorized by the city council subsequent to review by the city and shall additionally comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The use is a permitted special use as set forth in the special exception uses for that district. 
(2)  The use is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience will be protected. 
(3)  The use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood where it is to be located. 
(4)  The use will be compatible with adjoining developments and the proposed character of the district where it is to be located. 
(5)  Adequate landscaping and screening is provided as required in this chapter, or as otherwise required. 
(6)  Adequate off-street parking and loading is provided. Ingress and egress is designed so as to cause minimum interference with traffic on abutting streets and the use has adequate frontage on a public or approved private street. 
(7)  The use conforms with all applicable regulations governing the district where located, except as may otherwise be determined for planned unit developments. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-37. - Estate 1 family residential district (E-1) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following are allowed in the E-1 zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Professional offices restricted to those regulated by the State of Florida Department of Professional Regulation, and having no more than one employee which is the owner/occupant. Medical and dental offices are prohibited. 
(3)  Child day care family home* 
(4)  Park and open space and water (POS) and right-of-way (RW) Uses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  Private pools, courts, cabanas and other similar uses to meet the leisure needs of the residents. 
(2)  Private detached garages and sheds. 
(3)  Carports. 
(4)  Stables. 
(5)  Guesthouse (as defined under Article X, Definitions). 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  None allowed. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-38. - Single-family residential district (R-1) uses. 
The following are allowed in the R-1 zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  Permitted uses. 
a.  Detached single-family dwellings. 
b.  Uses permitted in the E-1 District. 
c.  POS and RW. 
(2)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
a.  All E-1 accessory uses, except stables and guesthouses. 
(3)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
a.  Professional offices and home occupations. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-39. - One- and two-family residential district (R-2) uses* 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following are allowed in the R-2 zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  Two-family (duplex) dwellings. 
(2)  All R-1 permitted uses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  All R-1 accessory uses. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  Professional office and home occupations. 
Two-family homes are allowed only along the north side of NW 129th Street between NW 102nd and 104th Avenues. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-40. - Single-family zero-lot-line residential district (R-1Z) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following are allowed in the R-1Z zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  Single-family zero-lot-line dwellings (site built or manufactured). 
(2)  All R-1 permitted uses (R-1Z prohibits R-2). 
(3)  Detached single-family cluster dwellings. 
(4)  Public service or utility uses. 
(5)  Adult living facility. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  All R-2 accessory uses. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  Houses of worship. 
(2)  Educational facilities (charter or private). 
(3)  Professional office and home occupations. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-41. - Detached single-family patio district (R-1P) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following are allowed in the R-1P zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  Detached single-family patio dwellings. 
(2)  All R-1Z permitted uses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  All R-1Z accessory uses. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  All R-1Z special exceptions uses. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-42. - Townhouse residential zoning district (R-TH) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following are allowed in the R-TH zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  Townhouse dwellings. 
(2)  All R-1P permitted uses. 
(3)  R-2 use. 
(4)  Outdoor recreational facilities limited to residents or guests. 
(5)  Public service/utility uses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  None allowed. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  Houses of worship. 
(2)  Nonprofit cultural centers. 
(3)  Educational facilities (charter or private). 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-43. - Multi-family residential district (R-M1) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following are allowed in the R-M1 zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  Multi-family dwellings. 
(2)  All R-TH permitted uses. 
(3)  Public service/utility uses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  None. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  All R-TH special exception uses. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-44. - Multi-family residential district (R-M2) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following are allowed in the R-M2 zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  Multi-family dwellings. 
(2)  All R-M1 permitted uses. 
(3)  Public service/utility uses. 
(4)  Child day care centers (for residents only). 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  None. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  All R-M1 special exception uses. 
(2)  Private clubs. 
(3)  Professional offices. 
(4)  Medical and dental offices. 
(5)  Assisted living facilities. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-45. - Neighborhood business district (B-1) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following, or similar uses, are allowed in the B-1 zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  Antique shops. 
(2)  Apparel and jewelry stores selling new and/or used merchandise. 
(3)  Art good stores, artist studios and photograph shops and galleries. 
(4)  Banks, excluding drive-in teller service. 
(5)  Beauty parlors and barber shops. 
(6)  Bakeries, retail only (baking permitted on premises). 
(7)  Non-motorized bicycle sales, rentals and repairs. 
(8)  Computer, video, video game and DVD stores. 
(9)  Confectionery, ice cream stores, and dairy stores. 
(10)  Drug stores. 
(11)  Florists. 
(12)  Grocery stores, and other specialty food stores. 
(13)  Hardware stores of no more than 4,000 square feet of floor area. 
(14)  Interior design shops, office and display only. 
(15)  Leather goods and luggage shops. 
(16)  Mail order office. 
(17)  Museum. 
(18)  Newsstand. 
(19)  Offices. 
(20)  Optical stores. 
(21)  Paint and wallpaper stores. 
(22)  Pottery shops. 
(23)  Restaurants and coffee houses or dining room where kitchen is screened or located all together within an enclosed building or room and with ample provisions for carrying away or dissipating fumes, odors, smoke or noise and where premises are so arranged and the business is so conducted as not to be offensive or obnoxious to occupants of adjoining premises or to passersby. 
(24)  Self-service post office, which contains mechanical or computer equipment designed to provide limited postal service for walk-up trade. 
(25)  Shoe stores and shoe repair shops. 
(26)  Sporting goods stores. 
(27)  Tailor shops, provided such establishments contain not more than 4,000 square feet of floor area. 
(28)  Tobacco shops. 
(29)  Variety stores provided such establishments contain not more than 4,000 square feet of floor area. 
(30)  Park and open space and water (POS), community facilities (CF) and right-of-way (RW). 
(31)  Houses of worship. 
(32)  Gas stations without repair facility and without design for service to trucks. 
(33)  Fitness and health clubs. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  None allowed. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  Educational facilities (charter or private). 
(2)  Child day care centers.* 
(3)  Conservatories and music and dance schools. 
(4)  Restaurants with bars as an incidental use. 
(5)  Banks and financial institutions with drive-through teller facility. 
(6)  Fast food establishments with drive-through service facility. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2014-08, §§ 1, 2, 9-9-14)  
Sec. 78-46. - General business district (B-2) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following, or similar uses, are allowed in the B-2 zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  All B-1 permitted and special exception uses permitted in the B-1 district. 
(2)  Retail stores. 
(3)  Banking and financial establishments. 
(4)  Entertainment (theater, arcades, recreation centers). 
(5)  Hotel and motel. 
(6)  Offices. 
(7)  Grocery stores. 
(8)  Restaurants. 
(9)  Commercial or trade schools. 
(10)  Fraternal lodges. 
(11)  Funeral homes. 
(12)  Garden and building supply, plant nurseries. 
(13)  Fitness and health clubs. 
(14)  Veterinary clinics, kennels prohibited. 
(15)  Public service/utility uses. 
(16)  Automobile parking garages, not over three stories in height. 
(17)  Hospitals (other than animal hospitals). 
(18)  Liquor package stores. 
(19)  Major department stores. 
(20)  Office parks. 
(21)  Regional shopping centers. 
(22)  Rehabilitation centers, clinics. 
(23)  POS, CF and RW uses. 
(24)  Houses of worship. 
(25)  Fast food establishments. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  None allowed. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  Educational facilities (charter or private schools). 
(2)  Nursing homes. 
(3)  Child day care centers. 
(5)  Auto sales (along NW 103 Street and Okeechobee Frontage Road only). 
(6)  Gas stations — no repairs (along NW 103 Street and Okeechobee Frontage Road only). 
(7)  Nightclubs, pubs and bars. 
(8)  Restaurants with bars as an incidental use. 
(9)  Car wash. 
(10)  Cigar store and smoking lounge. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2009-08, § 1, 9-1-09; Ord. No. 2015-18, § 1, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 78-47. - Commercial business district (B-3) uses. 
Certain uses in this zoning district, as denoted by a double asterisk (**), are not allowed in the Northwest District south of NW 138th Street. 
(1)  Permitted uses. The following, or other similar uses, are allowed in the B-3 zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
a.  All uses permitted in the B-1 and B-2 districts. 
b.  Warehouse/self- or mini-storage. 
c.  Wholesale commercial. 
d.  Vehicle and heavy equipment sales, rental, service and repair (subject to specific site and size requirements)*. 
e.  Fast food establishments (drive thru). 
f.  Farm and construction equipment sales, service and repair*.** 
g.  Veterinary clinics and kennels. 
h.  Outdoor recreation centers. 
i.  Automobile and truck services and facilities of not less than 20,000 square feet including*: 
1.  Open lot car and truck sales new and or used, including as ancillary uses, automobile repairs, body and top work and painting.** 
j.  Bakeries, retail and wholesale not including distribution plants. 
k.  Bottling of beverages not including distribution plants. 
l.  Cabinet working and carpentry shops*.** 
m.  Cold storage warehouse and pre-cooling plants. 
n.  Contractor's office and storage yards.** 
o.  Dry cleaning. 
p.  Sales and service of gas, oil, steam engines.* 
q.  Feed, hay and other livestock supplies and fertilizer stores.** 
r.  Gun shops. 
s.  Leather good manufacturing, excluding tanning.** 
t.  Locksmith shops, sharpening and grinding shops. 
u.  Lumber yards. 
v.  Secondhand stores for the disposal of furniture, fixtures, and tools. 
w.  Television and broadcast stations, including studio, transmitting station and tower power plants and other incidentals and unusual uses related to the operation of such a station. 
x.  Truck storage, only within an enclosed building or an area enclosed by a CBS wall.** 
y.  Upholstery and furniture repairs.* 
z.  Wholesale salesroom and storage rooms.* 
aa.  Warehouse for sale of merchandise to membership or home improvement center.* 
bb.  Public service/utility uses. 
cc.  POS, CF and RW uses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  None allowed. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  Restaurants with bars as an incidental use. 
(2)  Towers and masts. 
(3)  Pawnbrokers. 
(4)  Car wash.* 
(5)  Cigar store and smoking lounge. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2010-23, § 1, 11-2-10; Ord. No. 2015-18, § 2, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 78-48. - Light industrial district (IN-1) uses. 
The IN-1 district is intended to provide manufacturing, warehouse, and office facilities for the repair, assembly, packaging, storage and wholesale distribution of products, and hotels, motels, and convention centers. All uses allowed in the B-3 district are permitted along the IN-1 district arterial roadways. Certain B-1 and B-2 uses shall be allowed if the chief zoning official determines that a proposed use is sufficiently similar to a specifically permitted use. 
Certain uses in this zoning district, as denoted by a double asterisk (**), are not allowed in the Northwest District south of NW 138th Street. 
(1)  Permitted uses. The following are allowed in the IN-1 zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
a.  Residential uses as a watchman's or caretaker's quarters in connection with an existing industrial use located on the premises concerned. 
b.  Animal hospitals within soundproofed, air conditioned buildings. 
c.  Armories, arsenals.** 
d.  Auditoriums. 
e.  Auto painting, and body shop (min. floor area 1,000 sq. ft)* .** 
f.  Automobile gas and/or service stations are permitted only on major access roads, including major roadways (three or more lanes) and frontage roadways serving limited access expressways.* 
g.  Automobile and truck sales for new and/or used vehicles including as ancillary uses automobile and truck rentals, wholesale distribution and automobile repairs (min. floor area 3,000 sq. ft.)* .** 
h.  Automotive repairs (min. floor area 1,000 sq. ft.)* .** 
i.  Automobile and truck rentals* .** 
j.  Bakeries-wholesale only with incidental retail uses. 
k.  Banks. 
l.  Blacksmith, gas, steam fitting shops. 
m.  Boat or yacht manufacturing repairing or overhauling.** 
n.  Brewery and bottling plants. 
o.  Cabinet working and carpentry shops.** 
p.  Canning factories. 
q.  Caterers. 
r.  Cold storage warehouse and pre-cooling plants. 
s.  Concrete, clay or ceramic products, hand manufacture or involving only small mixer where all such manufacturing and equipment is within an approved building and storage and drying areas are enclosed as provided in this chapter.** 
t.  Contractors' offices and yards.** 
u.  Dry cleaning and dyeing plants.** 
v.  Sales and services of gas, oil, steam engines.* ** 
w.  Fertilizer storage.** 
x.  Fruit packing and fruit preserving. 
y.  Furniture manufacturing. 
z.  Furniture refinishing. 
aa.  Glass installations. 
bb.  Grinding shops. 
cc.  Hotel and motel.* 
dd.  Ice manufacturing. 
ee.  Laboratories, material testing. 
ff.  Leather goods manufacturing, excluding tanning. 
gg.  Livery stables, for riding clubs, or a stable for sheltering horses.** 
hh.  Locksmith. 
ii.  Lumberyards. 
jj.  Machine shops. 
kk.  Marine warehouse. 
ll.  Mattress manufacturing and renovating.** 
mm.  Milk or ice distributing station from which extensive truck of wagon deliveries are customarily made.** 
nn.  Millwork shops. 
oo.  Motion picture production studios. 
pp.  Offices. 
qq.  Off-street parking and loading. 
rr.  Ornamental metal workshops. 
ss.  Oxygen storage and filling of cylinders. 
tt.  Passenger and freight stations and terminals: trucks, and buses.** 
uu.  Pharmaceutical storage.* 
vv.  Power or steam laundries.** 
ww.  Printing shops. 
xx.  Radio and television transmitting stations and studios. 
yy.  Restaurants and cafeterias. 
zz.  Restaurants with bar as an incidental use. 
aaa.  Salesrooms and storage showroom-wholesale. 
bbb.  School-technical trade schools, such as, but limited to aviation, electronic and mechanics. Also physical training schools, such as, to gymnastics and karate. 
ccc.  Sign painting shops. 
ddd.  Steel fabrication.** 
eee.  Storage warehouse for food, fodder, etc. 
fff.  Taxidermy. Only within a fully enclosed, air-conditioned building.** 
ggg.  Telecommunications hubs.* 
hhh.  Warehouse for sale of merchandise to membership or home improvement center.* 
iii.  Welding shops.** 
jjj.  Welding supplies.** 
kkk.  Wood and coal yards.** 
lll.  Certain B-1 uses shall be permitted if complimentary to the IN-1 district. 
mmm.  POS, CF and RW uses. 
(2)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
a.  Accessory uses for hotel and motel establishments (within same building only): 
1.  Business or commercial establishments of the B-1 type, bars and cabarets. 
2.  Hotels and motels with 150 or more guest rooms may have liquor package service on the premises for the accommodation and use of their guests only. 
(3)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
a.  Private clubs.* 
b.  Houses of worship.* 
c.  Child day care centers.* 
d.  Cigar store and smoking lounge. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2015-18, § 3, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 78-49. - Heavy industrial district (IN-2) uses. 
The IN-2 heavy industrial district is intended to provide for extensive, outdoor types of heavy manufacturing and bulk storage facilities in addition to the uses specified in IN-1 which are also permitted in this district. 
(1)  Permitted uses. The following are allowed in the IN-2 zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
a.  Every use and special exception use permitted in IN-1 district except private educational facilities which are prohibited in the IN-2 district. 
b.  Asphalt drum mixing plants, which produce less than 150 tons per hour in self, contained drum mixers. 
c.  Rock and sand yards. 
d.  Cement and clay products, such as concrete blocks, pipe, etc. 
e.  Soap manufacturing, vegetable by-products only. 
f.  Railroad shops. 
g.  Collection, recycling and processing facilities.* 
h.  POS, CF and RW uses. 
(2)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
a.  None allowed. 
(3)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to conditions: 
a.  None allowed 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-50. - Controlled industrial district (IN-C) uses. 
The IN-C ("controlled industrial district") is intended to provide a protective zone for campus-like environments that will encourage the development of non-polluting light industry and compatible uses which support the economic base of the city. The development standards in this district are intended to provide a healthful operating environment for light industry and compatible uses, for the protection of light industry and compatible uses from the encroachment of other uses adverse to the operation of such district, to protect business within the district from the adverse effect of incompatible uses, and to reduce to a minimum the impact of the district on surrounding non-commercial land use. The use within this district shall be consistent with, but may be more restrictive than; the industrial land use category of permitted uses. 
(1)  Permitted uses. The following are allowed in the IN-C zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
a.  Controlled industrial uses shall include manufacture, fabricating, processing, packaging or treatment of goods and shall be limited to permitted activities involving the following types of products, or those which are similar: 
1.  Aircraft components. 
2.  Blueprints. 
3.  Ceramic products. 
4.  Clocks and watches. 
5.  Clothing. 
6.  Crating, packing, distribution, shipping, and bottling. 
7.  Electrical appliances. 
8.  Food products, except fish and meat products or similar substances commonly recognized as creating offensive conditions in the handling thereof. 
9.  Heating equipment. 
10.  Machinery and machine tools. 
11.  Musical instruments. 
12.  Optical devices. 
13.  Pharmaceuticals.* 
14.  Plastics. 
15.  Publishing and bookbinding. 
16.  Silk-screens. 
17.  Sporting goods. 
18.  Toys. 
19.  Moving, storage and van lines. 
20.  Construction and building materials. 
21.  Freight consolidators. 
22.  Warehouse and storage buildings. 
b.  Educational, scientific, industrial and manufacturing research and development such as: 
1.  Automobile equipment. 
2.  Artificial intelligence. 
3.  Bio-chemical. 
4.  Chemical. 
5.  Coils. 
6.  Communications. 
7.  Computer software development. 
8.  Data processing. 
9.  Film and photography. 
10.  Graphics. 
11.  Medical or dental technology. 
12.  Metallurgy. 
13.  Metering instruments. 
14.  Navigation. 
15.  Pharmaceutical.* 
16.  Semi-conductor 
17.  Testing equipment and laboratory. 
18.  Tubes. 
19.  X-rays. 
c.  Light manufacturing and assembling of products. 
d.  Offices, banks and commercial uses of a medical or professional nature. 
e.  Communication, broadcast, and production facilities. 
f.  The following uses shall be limited to ten percent of the total gross square footage of building area permitted within the overall IN-C: 
1.  Public and private utilities essential to serve principle uses in the District, specifically excluding electric transmission facilities and substations. 
2.  Child day care centers.* 
3.  Retail uses as accessory uses within buildings devoted to a permitted use. 
4.  Restaurants and cafeterias. 
5.  Retail uses. 
g.  POS, CF and RW uses. 
(2)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
a.  Permitted incidental and accessory uses shall include offices, rooms for the display and sale of items manufactured or assembled on premises, garages for storage and maintenance of company motor vehicles and for storage of gasoline and lubricating oils needed for operation of these vehicles and for the maintenance of machinery and equipment; maintenance and utility shops for the upkeep and repair of building and structures on the site; central heating or air conditioning, and power plants for furnishing heat and energy to buildings or structures on the site.* 
(3)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
a.  Health Club and physical fitness center. 
b.  Hotel and motel.* 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-51. - Community facilities district (CF) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following, or similar uses, are allowed in the CF zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  Government administration buildings/city hall. 
(2)  Police and fire and rescue stations. 
(3)  Public service facilities: library, post office, recycling, collection and processing facilities. 
(4)  Public or nonprofit educational or cultural facilities. 
(5)  POS and RW uses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  None allowed. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  None allowed. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-52. - Parks and open space and water district (POS) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following, or similar uses, are allowed in the POS zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  Public parks and open space. 
(2)  Private recreational facilities. 
(3)  Pools. 
(4)  Cultural facilities. 
(5)  Passive scenic areas and pocket parks. 
(6)  Boat ramps, docks and piers. 
(7)  CF and RW uses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  Restrooms. 
(2)  Meeting/recreation rooms. 
(3)  Equipment storage areas. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  None allowed. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-53. - Right-of-way district (RW) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following, or similar uses, are allowed in the RW zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited: 
(1)  A street, crosswalk, sidewalks, street signage, electric transmission line, lighting, bus shelters, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, swale, median, landscaping or other utilities. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  None allowed. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36. 
(1)  None allowed. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-54. - Planned unit development district (PUD) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following are allowed in the PUD zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited. Planned unit developments are unified developments built according to specific and detailed plans which allow a mix of uses but which are substantially related, compatible or complementary: 
(1)  Uses substantially related, compatible or complementary in all zoning districts, except E-1, R-1, R-2, B-3, IN-1, IN-2 and IN-C. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  As allowed by the referenced zoning districts. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  Houses of worship.* 
(2)  Nonprofit cultural centers. 
(3)  Educational facilities (charter or private).* 
(4)  Nursing homes.* 
(5)  Child day care centers.* 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-55. - Mixed use residential commercial (MU) and mixed use entertainment district (MU-E) uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following are allowed in the MU zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited. Mixed Use developments are unified developments, allowing a vertical mix of uses, built according to specific and detailed plans which allow a mix of uses but which are substantially related, compatible or complementary: 
(1)  Townhouses (R-TH). 
(2)  Multi-family dwellings (RM-2 only). 
(3)  All B-1 permitted uses, except hardware stores and houses of worship. 
(4)  Medical and dental offices. 
(5)  The following B-2 permitted uses: 
a.  Financial establishments; 
b.  Grocery stores; 
c.  Fitness and health clubs; and 
d.  Liquor package stores. 
(6)  Child day care centers.* 
(7)  Public service/utility uses. 
(8)  POS, CF and RW uses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  Automobile parking garages, not over three stories in height. 
(c)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  Conservatories and music and dance schools. 
(2)  Nonprofit cultural centers. 
(3)  Restaurants with bars as an incidental use. 
(d)  Permitted uses—MU-E. The following are allowed in the MU-E zoning districts, while all other uses are conditional or prohibited. 
(1)  Specific entertainment, restaurant or retail uses that are deemed appropriate by the chief zoning official. 
(e)  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses and structures are allowed in this zoning district: 
(1)  Automobile parking garages, not over three stories in height. 
(f)  Special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed subject to requirements as set forth in section 78-36: 
(1)  None allowed. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-56. - Elderly housing overlay (EHO) district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  Purpose. 
a.  To encourage the development of elderly housing that is compatible and complementary to its neighborhood context, is located near essential services and amenities required by seniors, and allows for or encourages neighborhood walkability. 
b.  To facilitate the development of elderly housing projects which are superior in functional design, quality of construction, appearance, and operational standards. 
(2)  Intent. This district is designed to provide for residential uses that are appropriate for the development of seniors, recognizing their unique lifestyles and needs, by allowing higher densities, a mix of uses, and requiring in return, higher design and construction standards, as well as the provision of specific site and building amenities. It is the intent of this zone to carry out the policies and objectives of all elements of the comprehensive plan and to meet the standards necessary to satisfy the requirements for public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  Qualifications for eligibility. 
(1)  The elderly housing overlay (EHO) zone may be applied to any lot or group of contiguous lots having at least one acre. 
(2)  The underlying zoning must be a high residential district. 
(3)  The surrounding land uses, both current and projected, must be compatible with the living environment required by seniors and be free from potential health and safety issues. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses include those listed as permitted and accessory in the underlying zone district. Specific uses allowed within the EHO zone include: 
(1)  b.  Congregate living facilities. 
c.  Public service/utility uses. 
(2)  Accessory uses. 
a.  Associated convenience store retail, pharmacy, recreation, barber shop, beauty salon, cafeteria, food service and all other uses facilitating the quality of life of an elderly population. 
b.  Sale/rental offices. 
(c.1)  Geographic area. The boundaries of the multifamily residential and congregate living facilities for the EHO district comprise three areas: 
(1)  Area 1. All properties abutting the south side of NW 103 Street, between NW 77 Avenue and NW 87 Avenue. 
(2)  Area 2. All properties abutting the north of West Okeechobee Road (Frontage Road), between NW 77 Avenue and NW 103 Street. 
(3)  Area 3. All properties abutting the north of West Okeechobee Road (Frontage Road), between NW 103 Street and NW 92 Avenue. 
(d)  Age requirements. At the time of purchase or rental the head of the household must be 62 or older, as per F.S. § 420.502(15). 
(e)  Development criteria. 
(1)  [Maximum allowable density.] The maximum allowable density in an EHO project area is 75 dwelling units to the net acre. 
(2)  Site character. 
a.  When an EHO project adjoining residential and commercial uses can mutually benefit from connection rather than separation, appropriate connective elements (e.g., walkways) should be provided. 
b.  Existing amenities (e.g., views, mature trees, lakes, etc.) that are unique to the site should be preserved and incorporated into the project's design whenever possible. 
(3)  Site access. Developments with more than 100 parking stalls that are located on arterial roads should coordinate access points with median openings and existing driveways on the opposite side of the roadway. Such developments may also be required to provide deceleration lanes adjacent to their major entry. 
(4)  Building setbacks. 
- Front: 30 feet. 
- Side: 15 feet and side street 25 feet. 
- Rear: 25 feet. 
(5)  Building design layout. 
a.  The minimum dwelling size for each unit shall be as follows: 
- Studios: 475 square feet. 
- One-bedroom: 525 square feet. 
- Two-bedroom: 700 square feet. 
b.  Multiple buildings in a single project should provide a functional relationship with one another to achieve a sense of place by use of the following techniques: 
1.  Cluster buildings around open plaza areas or courtyards. 
2.  Provide open plaza areas and courtyards with landscaping and other pedestrian amenities. 
3.  Provide convenient pedestrian circulation between buildings, and open parking areas. 
4.  Link buildings together visually using trellis structures, arcades, and enhanced paving. 
5.  Where feasible, locate buildings near public streets, thus creating a strong presence thereon. 
6.  If applicable, link development with adjacent compatible uses, such as shopping areas through the use of landscaped walkways. 
(6)  Support facilities. Support structures (e.g., laundry facilities, recreation buildings, and sales/lease offices) should be consistent with the architectural design of the overall complex. 
(7)  Solid waste receptacles. Trash bins should be fully enclosed with a masonry enclosure, either simulated wood or decorative metal gates and a trellis roof. The enclosure shall be finished with colors and materials that are consistent with the rest of the structures. Enclosures should be screened with landscaping on their most visible sides. 
(8)  Parking and circulation. 
a.  Project entries. Project entries should provide the resident and visitor with an overview to the project through either an easy visual assessment (in smaller projects) or by providing signage. Special attention should be given to hardscape and landscape treatments to enhance the overall aesthetic image of the project. 
b.  The principal vehicular access should be through an entry drive rather than a parking aisle. Colored, textured paving treatment at entry drives together with lush landscaping is strongly encouraged. 
c.  If parking is not attached to the residential structures, covered carports are the desired alternative. 
d.  Parking requirements for EHO projects shall provide a minimum of one and one-half parking spaces for every one-bedroom unit; one and one-half parking spaces for two-bedroom units for up to 25 percent of the amount of one-bedroom units, after that, half a parking space per unit plus 0.1 per dwelling unit for guest or visitor plus one per 250 square feet of commercial and/or office area, plus designated parking for buses or vans. Handicap parking spaces to be provided as increase of +1 for a total of spaces under ten, and +ten percent for a total of spaces above ten of ADA requirements. 
Dimensions [for] parking spaces for buses must be 12 feet by 55 feet with appropriate aisle for access. 
e.  Parking spaces required for particular uses shall be located on the same lot where the use creating the parking requirement is located. 
(9)  Pedestrian access. 
a.  Drop-off points should be provided at major building entries and plaza areas for all projects with more than 25,000 square feet of building floor area. 
b.  Stamped or painted concrete walkways should be provided in areas where it is necessary for pedestrians to cross drive or parking aisles. 
c.  All projects should provide a clear connection between the on-site pedestrian circulation system and the off-site public sidewalk. 
(10)  Maintenance. All parking areas, walkways, recreation facilities, storage areas, landscaped areas, open space, screening areas, sewer, drainage facilities and other improvements not dedicated to public use shall be maintained by the property owners. Provisions to the satisfaction of the city shall be made for the preservation and maintenance of all such improvements prior to the issuance of building permits. 
_____ 
Maximum density (net) 	75 dwelling units/acre 
Minimum lot area (net) 	1 acre 
Minimum lot width 	150 ft. 
Minimum lot depth 	200 ft. 
Minimum dwelling size 	475 sq. ft. 
Minimum setbacks 	
Front 	30 ft. 
Side 	15 ft. 
Side street 	25 ft. 
Rear 	25 ft. 
Maximum building lot coverage (percent) 	40% 
Accessory building/associated convenience retail 	Allowed 
Maximum impervious 	80% 
Minimum open space/landscape 	30% 
Minimum pervious 	20% 
Maximum building height (stories/feet) 	6 stories/75 ft. to parapet 
Minimum size of development 	1 acre 
 
(Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 8-7-18; Ord. No. 2019-27, § 1, 12-3-19) 
_____ 
Secs. 78-57—78-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 78-60. - Purpose. 
This article sets forth the application review submittal requirements and procedures for obtaining land use changes, site plans, plats, special exceptions, variances, vested rights, re-zonings, any other development orders as may be required and certain types of permits. This article also specifies the procedures for appealing decisions and seeking legislative action. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-61. - Generally. 
Whenever an applicant desires a change in land use or zoning, plat or site plan approval, special exception, variance, vested rights determination or any other development order as provided in this chapter the applicant shall do so to the zoning department in a form as prescribed by the city. Included with the application shall be the appropriate fee as set forth in a separate ordinance to cover administrative costs and costs associated with notices for public hearing. 
The written application shall be signed by the owner or owner's designee and shall be accompanied by any necessary information or documentation supporting the request and which shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state law. 
An application shall not be complete until the above are accurately submitted and deemed so by the chief zoning official. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-62. - Record of quasi-judicial proceedings. 
The record of quasi-judicial proceedings for development actions enumerated in this chapter shall include: any applications for zoning, variance, special exceptions, plats, site plans and vested rights or other development orders; relevant comprehensive plan or zoning text; disclosures; affidavits; maps, plans, surveys, legal descriptions, sketches, elevations, photographs; oral and written testimonies or objections; previous decisions rendered by a department, committee or board; or any other information as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-63. - Withdrawal of development applications. 
An application for development review may be withdrawn at any time, subject to fee being nonrefundable. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-64. - Authorization by development permit required prior to undertaking development activity. 
(a)  Generally. No development activity may be undertaken unless the activity is authorized by a development permit. 
(b)  Prerequisites to issuance of development permit. A development permit may not be issued unless the proposed development activity: 
(1)  Is authorized by a final development order issued pursuant to this chapter; and 
(2)  Conforms to the Miami-Dade County Public Works Manual, standard details, the Miami-Dade County Water and Sewer Authority Department manual of standards and specifications, and other county, state and federal regulations as may be required and which are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Exceptions to requirement of a final development order. A development permit may be issued for the following development activities in the absence of a final development order issued pursuant to this chapter. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the development activity shall conform to this chapter. 
(1)  The construction or alteration of a one- or two-family dwelling on a lot in a valid recorded subdivision approved prior to the adoption of this chapter. Compliance with certain development standards in this chapter is not required if in conflict with the previously approved plat. 
(2)  The alteration of an existing building or structure so long as no change is made to its gross floor area, its use, or the amount of impervious surface on the site, and conforms to the standards given in Article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-65. - Modifications to final development orders. 
After a final development order has been issued under this chapter, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter, or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of the permit without first obtaining a modification to the development order. A modification may be applied for in the same manner as the original, subject to fees as enumerated in the zoning department fee schedule. A written record of the modification shall be made a part of the original final development order and maintained in the files of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-66. - Substantial compliance determinations. 
The chief zoning official is authorized to consider and make substantial compliance determinations which are minor modifications to previously approved site plans or signage. 
(1)  The chief zoning official may approve an application to modify a site plan where it is demonstrated that the proposed modification will result in substantial compliance with the previous zoning action regarding the site plan, as demonstrated by all of the following: 
a.  Development density and intensity have not materially changed, in that: 
1.  The number of buildings is not increased by more than ten percent; 
2.  The number of stories is the same or fewer; 
3.  The height of the building(s) is the same or less; 
4.  The number of units is the same or fewer; 
5.  The lot coverage and floor area ratio are the same or less; 
6.  The number of bedrooms and corresponding parking spaces are increased or decreased by as much as ten percent, based on the entire plan, provided the plan complies with all other requirements of this subsection and of this chapter; and 
7.  Density or intensity (floor area ratio) may be transferred from one building to another or from one stage of development to another, provided that the total floor area ratio is not changed. 
b.  Design has not materially changed, in that: 
1.  The roadway patterns, including ingress-egress points, are in the same general location as shown on the original plans, and are no closer to the rear or interior side property lines than shown on the original plans; 
2.  The parking area is in the same general location and configuration; 
3.  The building setbacks are the same or greater distance from perimeter property lines, except that the building setbacks for detached single family development, zero lot line and townhouse developments may also be decreased, provided that such decrease is limited such that the resulting setback distance will be the greater of either the underlying zoning district regulations, or any condition or restrictive covenant regulating the setback for which a substantial compliance determination is sought; 
4.  The landscaped open space is in the same general location, is of the same or greater amount, and is configured in a manner that does not diminish a previously intended buffering effect; 
5.  The proposed perimeter walls and/or fences are in the same general location and of a comparable type and design as previously approved; 
6.  Elevations and renderings of buildings have substantially similar architectural expressions as those shown on the approved plans; 
7.  Recreational facilities, if shown on plans approved by a prior action, either remain the same or are converted from one recreational use to another; 
8.  If recreational facilities were not shown in the approved plans, they may be added, provided there is no increase in lot coverage or decrease in required open space and such facilities are located internally within the proposed development; 
9.  If a variance for signage has been granted, the proposed sign(s) are no greater in size and are placed in the same general location on the site as approved by the previous action. An entrance sign location may be moved the same proportional distance as a relocated entrance drive; 
10.  The proposed changes do not have the effect of creating any noncompliance or nonconformity with the strict application of the zoning code that were not previously approved at public hearing, or of expanding the scope of existing variances, alternative site development options, or other approvals pursuant to alternative development standards such that they would differ to a greater degree from the strict application of the land development regulations; 
11.  Additional out parcels may be added where: 
i.  There is no increase in the project's total floor area ratio or lot coverage; 
ii.  There is no reduction in the total amount of landscaped open space; and 
iii.  Addition of the out parcel does not result in noncompliance with any other provision of this subsection on any other portion of the subject property. 
12.  Reductions in the number of parking spaces on the site are permitted if sufficient parking spaces are provided to satisfy the requirements of this chapter. 
c.  The slope of any lake for which a modification is requested complies all applicable provisions of the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida. 
(2)  At the discretion of the chief zoning official, a substantial compliance application may be reviewed by the technical review committee for said determination. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-67. - Commencement of development. 
If development is not commenced within six months from the date of final approval of the final development order, the approval shall become null and void and the site may not be developed in accordance with the plan. If development is permitted in phases a phasing plan shall be required and subsequent phases shall commence within 18 months after the completion of the previous phase. 
If subsequent phases are not commenced within the 18-month period, the final development order approval shall be null and void and reapplication to the city shall be required for the remaining phases. Phases may be developed out of sequence if good cause is shown and not be to the detriment of the preceding phase(s). 
For good cause shown, application, in a form set by the city and subject to a fee, may be made prior to the expiration of the six- or 18-month periods for an extension time for the final development order. 
With the commencement of construction site improvements including, but not be limited to: road and drainage improvements, excavation, grading and leveling, installation of utilities, and other infrastructure shall be developed concurrently. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-68. - Pre-application review. 
In order to expedite the review process and avoid conflict, waste and expense a pre-application review may be required, at the discretion of the zoning department or at the request of the applicant, prior to the submission of the development order application. Such reviews will be performed by city staff and will require information on the proposed development application such as: 
(1)  Land use designations and zoning district. 
(2)  Type of development proposal. 
(3)  Density/intensity of use. 
(4)  Site plan and data. 
(5)  Survey. 
(6)  Subdivision plat. 
(7)  Information on other required permits. 
(8)  Other information in order to explain proposal. 
Pre-application review does not constitute a formal action by the city and shall not be construed as a representation or implication that the proposal will be ultimately approved or rejected in any form. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-69. - Requirements and procedures for Comprehensive Plan amendments. 
Comprehensive plan amendments shall be considered only on a semi-annual basis in accordance with the following procedural calendar and regulations: 
(1)  Property owners or their authorized representatives, who possess written authorization, shall be the only eligible applicants for Comprehensive Plan amendments other than the city itself. 
(2)  During the first weeks of January and July of each year, the city shall publish a notice of intent to accept applications for amendments to the Comprehensive Plan. 
(3)  Applications shall be received by the city during the months of February and August in a form set by the city and made available to the applicants at the time of the city's publication of its notice to accept applications. 
At the discretion of the zoning department, city-initiated amendments may be held twice, at any time, during the year pursuant to F.S. ch. 163. 
(4)  The zoning department shall review all submitted applications for Comprehensive Plan amendments during the months of March and April and September and October and shall prepare a comprehensive written recommendation forwarded to the TRC with respect to each application, including any initiated by the city itself. 
(5)  During the months of April and October, the planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing to consider applications for amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and shall, upon conclusion of the public hearing, make a recommendation to the city council with respect to each application. 
(6)  During the months of May and November, the city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the recommendations of the planning and zoning board with respect to applications for amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and shall, upon conclusion of the public hearing, adopt an ordinance expressing an intent to adopt those proposed amendments to the Comprehensive Plan that it considers to be in the best interest of the residents, property owners and the citizens of the city. 
(7)  Upon adoption of the council ordinance, the proposed amendments to the Comprehensive Plan shall be forwarded to the appropriate county, regional and state agencies for review and comment and shall thereafter be adopted in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 163.3184. 
(8)  Pursuant to the requirements of Article II, a sign notifying the public of the intent to seek a Comprehensive Plan amendment shall be posted on the property. 
(9)  Pursuant to the requirements of Article II, a radius map and property ownership list shall be prepared and provided to the city, at the owner's expense. 
(10)  Pursuant to the requirements of Article II, property owners within a 1,500-foot radius of the property for which a Comprehensive Plan amendment is sought shall be notified of such amendment application, by mail, in addition to any statutorily required notice. The applicant shall bear the costs of notification to all the property owners within the 1,500-foot radius. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-70. - Requirements and procedures for changes to land development regulations. 
Changes to the city's land development regulations shall be considered only in accordance with the following procedures, regulations and requirements: 
(1)  The city shall be the only eligible applicant for changes to these land development regulations. Property owners, their authorized representatives, or other interested parties may propose changes which will be in the best interest of the residents, visitors and businesses of the city. 
(2)  The application shall be prepared by the zoning department accompanied by any necessary information or documentation supporting the request and shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state law. 
Concurrently, a review shall be completed in order to affirm any changes to these land development regulations shall be consistent with the city's Comprehensive Plan and not in conflict with other county, regional, state or federal regulations. 
(3)  The planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing to consider applications for changes to the land development regulations and shall, upon conclusion of the public hearing, make a recommendation to the city council with respect to each application. 
(4)  The city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the recommendations of the planning and zoning board with respect to applications for changes to the land development regulations and shall, upon conclusion of the public hearing, adopt an ordinance expressing an intent to adopt those changes to the land development regulations that it considers to be in the best interest of the residents, property owners and the citizens of the city. 
(5)  Pursuant to the requirements of Article II, whenever a change to the land development regulations is sought there shall be public notice. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-71. - Requirements and procedures for re-zoning of property. 
Rezoning of property located within the city shall be considered only in accordance with the following procedures, regulations and requirements: 
(1)  Property owners or their authorized representatives, who possess written authorization, shall be the only eligible applicants for rezoning of property other than the city itself. 
(2)  Applications shall be received by the city in a form set by the city accompanied by any necessary information or documentation supporting the request and shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state law. Information supporting said request shall include: 
a.  Existing land use designation(s). 
b.  Existing and proposed zoning districts. 
c.  Type of development proposal. 
d.  Density/intensity of use. 
e.  Survey of property. 
f.  Subdivision plat, if platted. 
g.  Information on other required permits. 
h.  Other information in order to explain proposal. 
(3)  The zoning department shall review all submitted applications for completeness for rezoning of property and schedule said application before the technical review committee. 
(4)  The technical review committee (TRC) shall meet to consider applications for rezoning of property and shall make an initial determination of conformance with applicable regulations. Upon conclusion of the review, the TRC shall make a recommendation to the planning and zoning board and city council. 
(5)  The planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing to consider applications for rezoning of property and shall, upon conclusion of the public hearing, make a recommendation to the city council with respect to each application. 
(6)  The city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the recommendations of the TRC and planning and zoning board with respect to applications for rezoning of property and shall, upon conclusion of the public hearing, adopt an ordinance approving the rezoning of property. The city council shall consider the approval to be in the best interest of the residents, property owners and the citizens of the city. 
(7)  Pursuant to the requirements of Article II, a sign notifying the public of the intent to seek a rezoning shall be posted on the property. 
(8)  Pursuant to the requirements of Article II, a radius map and property ownership list shall be prepared and provided to the city, at the owner's expense. 
(9)  Pursuant to the requirements of Article II, property owners within a 1,500-foot radius of the property for which a rezoning is sought shall be notified of such application, by mail, in addition to any statutorily required public notice. The applicant shall bear the costs of notification to all the property owners within the 1,500-foot radius. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-72. - Requirements and procedures for subdivision plats. 
(a)  Approval before recording. No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the office of the clerk of the circuit court until it shall have been approved in the manner prescribed herein. In the event any such unapproved plat is recorded it shall be stricken from the record upon application of the city council. 
(b)  Revising plat after approval. 
(1)  Any changes, erasures, modifications or revisions to an approved plat prior to recordation may only be made by the technical review committee to correct scriveners errors, reflect accurate legal descriptions and locate right-of-way dedications, drainage ways and easements. 
(2)  No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions to an approved plat prior to recordation shall be made unless resubmitted for new approval provided, however, that the city council may, after public hearing and based only upon a recommendation of technical review committee, change, modify or revise dedicated road rights-of-way or drainage easements. 
(c)  Platting procedure. 
(1)  Preliminary conference. The subdivider or his engineer, or land surveyor, prior to the preparation of the tentative plat, may informally seek the advice of the zoning department and/or public works department in order to become familiar with the subdivision requirements and with the provisions of the master plan affecting the territory in which the proposed subdivision is located. 
(2)  Waiver of plat. A waiver of plat may only be approved pursuant to section 28-4, Plats and platting—Recording; exceptions, and section 28-4.1, Same—Procedure for waiver of plat, Code of Miami-Dade County, as may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  Tentative plat. The tentative plat shall show on a map all of the facts and data required by the various departments to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in the subdivision is satisfactory from the standpoint of public interest. 
a.  The following information shall be part of the tentative plat unless waived by the appropriate authority. 
1.  Proposed subdivision name and identifying title and the name of the city, if any, in which the subdivision is located, and the section, township and range. 
2.  Location of property lines, existing easements, buildings, watercourses, elevations, permits and other essential features. 
3.  The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent. 
4.  The location of any existing sewers and water mains, or any underground or overhead utilities, culverts and drains on the property to be subdivided. 
5.  Location, names and present widths of existing and proposed streets, highways, alleys, parks and other open public spaces and similar facts regarding property immediately adjacent. 
6.  The width and location of any street or other public ways or places shown upon the official map or the master plan, within the area to be subdivided, and the width and locations of all streets or other public ways proposed by the developer. 
7.  Date of field survey, north point and graphic scale. 
8.  Legal description and plan of proposed layout made and certified by a Florida-licensed land surveyor. 
9.  The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and in the case of odd or irregularly shaped lots, suggested location of building setback lines. 
10.  Where the tentative plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's entire holding, a master tentative plat of the prospective future street system of the unsubdivided part will be required, and the street system of the unsubmitted part will be considered in the light of adjustments and connection with the street system of the plat submitted. 
11.  A plat application signed by the owner and notarized on the form prescribed by the city. 
12.  The numbering of all lots, blocks and the lettering of all tracts shall be shown on the tentative plat. All lots or tracts shall be numbered or lettered progressively. All blocks shall be progressively numbered except that blocks in numbered additions bearing the same name shall be numbered consecutively throughout the several additions. 
13.  A location map at the scale of one inch equals 300 feet showing existing and proposed rights-of-way. 
b.  The following information shall be submitted in addition to the tentative plat if requested by the city. 
1.  The names of owners of record of immediately adjacent property. 
2.  Any changes in the use, height, area and density districts or other regulations under this or other chapters of the Code of the City of Hialeah Gardens, zoning, applicable to the area to be subdivided, and any boundaries of such districts, affecting the tracts; all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedications. 
3.  Typical cross-section of the proposed grading and roadways or sidewalks and topographic conditions. 
4.  Location of closest available subdivision or public water supply system. 
5.  Location of closest available subdivision or public sewage disposal system. 
6.  Provisions for collecting and discharging surface drainage. 
7.  Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be required. 
8.  Boundary survey. 
9.  If required by these regulations or if proposed by the subdivider, the proposed location of any type of sidewalks, street lighting standards and species of street trees, the location of curbs, gutters, water mains, sanitary sewers and storm drains and the sizes and types thereof, the character, width and depth of pavement and sub-base, and the location of manholes and basins and underground conduits. 
10.  The boundaries of proposed permanent utility easements over or under private property. Such easements shall provide satisfactory access to an existing public highway or other public open space shown upon the layout. Permanent drainage easements shall also be shown. 
11.  All dimensions affecting public rights-of-way and proposed dedication of the public rights-of-way shall be established by a registered surveyor and shown on the grading and drainage plan accompanying approved and valid tentative plats when said plan is submitted for approval, with the same degree of accuracy as, and identical to, the corresponding dimensions shown on the final plat. 
12.  A copy of owners' deed or a current opinion of title from any attorney authorized to practice law in the State. 
(4)  Filing copies of tentative plat and plat application. The subdivider shall file seven copies of the tentative plat with the zoning department, together with the plat application. All tentative plats filed shall be reviewed for approval at a regular meeting of the technical review committee, and the tentative plats should be filed according to the city's meeting schedule for the meeting at which approval is sought. 
(5)  Checking and investigating. The subdivider shall pay such fees as may be prescribed by ordinance for checking the tentative plat and investigating such matters concerning it as may be required by law and this chapter. 
(6)  Approval of tentative plat. Plats shall be distributed by the zoning department to the Department of Florida Health and to such other departments as may be necessary. Tentative approval shall confer upon the subdivider the right for a nine-month period from the date of approval that the terms and conditions under which the tentative approval was granted will not be changed if the final plat is in accordance with the tentative approval. 
(7)  Hold harmless. If an applicant requests site plan review concurrent with an application for tentative plat the applicant shall hold the city harmless if the tentative plat is denied or required to be substantially modified. 
(8)  Final plat requirements generally. All plats, replats, or petitions for waiver of plat shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  The provisions of Chapter 28 of the Miami-Dade County Code, the provisions of this chapter and F.S. ch. 177. 
b.  The conformance to the tentative plat as determined by the technical review committee. The final plat shall have incorporated all changes or modifications as required to make the tentative plat conform to the requirements of this chapter. Otherwise, it shall conform to the tentative plat, and it may constitute only that portion of the approved tentative plat which the developer proposed to record and develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms with all requirements of this chapter. 
c.  That no building permit shall be issued for any structure on a lot within the city unless the lot is a lot within a plat which has been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed by law, unless the recording of the plat is not required, waived, or excepted by this chapter. All applications for plat, replat or waiver of plat shall be submitted to the mayor and the chief zoning official or building official on such forms and with attachments, exhibits, and information required by the city and the county. The mayor and the chief zoning official or building official shall determine the following: 
1.  Whether or not the proposed plat, replat or waiver of plat conflicts in any respect with the Comprehensive Plan of the city. 
2.  If all documents required by law and this chapter are attached to the application. 
3.  Whether the application is accompanied by a deposit of costs of no less than an amount on file in the city clerk's office, payable to the city to defray the cost of the city incurred in reviewing the application for plat, replat or waiver of plat and investigating all representations prior to final approval, including survey and legal expenses. All amounts in addition to such sum shall be paid to the city prior to recording of the plat, replat or waiver of plat. The applicant shall pay all charges or fees required by the County. 
d.  That the mayor and the chief zoning official or building official shall determine if the proposed plat, replat or waiver of plat: 
1.  Meets the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and ordinances of the city. 
2.  Requires infrastructure improvements for any development and that a performance bond be posted guaranteeing satisfactory completion of the project within three years. The amount of such bond shall equal 110 percent of the cost of improvements, of which 100 percent of the bond shall be released upon completion of the improvements and ten percent retained for one year for maintenance or correction of defects by the developer. 
3.  Requires dedications or reservations. 
e.  The mayor or chief zoning official shall certify whether or not the public health, safety, and welfare are served by the proposed plat, replat or waiver of plat. If the mayor or chief zoning official fails or refuses to accept or certify the proposed plat, replat or waiver of plat, the applicant may appeal the decision of the mayor or chief zoning official to the city council, whose decision shall be final. 
f.  Upon approval by the city council, the applicant shall submit the proposed plat, replat or waiver of plat to the plat division of Miami-Dade County in accordance with law. Upon approval by the county plat division, the plat, replat or waiver of plat shall be recorded in the records of the office of the clerk of the circuit court. 
(9)  Preparation. The final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor or civil engineer registered in the state. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn, to a sheet size of 18 inches by 28 inches or 30 inches by 36 inches and to a scale of sufficient size to be legible. The final plat, insofar as preparation is concerned, shall comply with all applicable regulations and state laws dealing with the preparation of plats. 
(10)  Contents. The final plat shall contain the following: 
a.  Name or title of the subdivision. 
b.  Deed description on map or plat. There shall be written or printed upon the plat a full and detailed description of the land embraced in the map or plat showing the township and range in which such lands are situated and section and parts of sections platted and location sketch showing the plat's location in reference to the closest centers of each section embraced within the plat. The description must be so complete that from it, without reference to the plat, the starting point can be determined and the outlines run. If a subdivision or a part of a previously recorded plat is made, the previous lots and blocks to be resubdivided shall be given. If the plat is a resubdivision of the whole of a previously recorded plat, the fact shall be so stated. Vacation of previously platted lands must be accomplished in the manner provided by law. 
c.  Names of adjacent subdivisions. 
d.  Names or numbers and width of streets immediately adjoining the plat. 
e.  All plat boundaries. 
f.  Bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines, section corners or other recognized permanent monuments, which shall be accurately described in the plat. 
g.  Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and bearing. 
h.  Accurate location of all monuments. 
i.  Length of all arcs, radii, internal angles, points of curvature and tangent bearings. 
j.  When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles less than 87 degrees or more than 93 degrees, the width of the lot at the front building setback line shall be shown. 
k.  The name or numbering and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way shown on plat. 
l.  The numbering of all lots and blocks shown on the plat. All lots shall be numbered either by progressive numbers or in blocks progressively numbered, except that blocks in numbered additions bearing the same name shall be numbered consecutively throughout the several additions. Excepted parcels must be marked "not part of this plat." 
m.  Plat restrictions to restrict type and use of water supply; type and use of sanitary facilities; use and benefits of water areas and other open spaces and odd-shaped and substandard parcels; resubdivision of parcels as "platted," and restrictions of similar nature. 
n.  All areas reserved or dedicated for public purposes. No strip or parcel of land shall be reserved by the owner unless it is sufficient in size and area to be of some practical use or service. 
o.  The dimensions of all lots and angles of bearings. 
p.  Minimum building setback lines where required by this Chapter. 
q.  Location, dimension and purpose of any easements. 
r.  Certification by a registered surveyor or civil engineer to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him, and that all monuments shown thereon actually exist, and that their location is correctly shown. 
s.  An acknowledgment by the owner of his adoption of the plat and of the dedication of streets, parks, and other public areas, and the consent of any mortgage holders to such adoption and dedication. If existing right-of-way is to be closed, purpose of closing must be stated on the plat. 
t.  The signature and seal of the city. Provided, however, that where property is being replatted, the signatures of the city shall be affixed or denied pursuant to the procedures established in F.S. § 177.101, unless the vacation of prior plats has previously been validly accomplished. 
(11)  Other data. In addition to the information required in subsections (7) through (9) of this section, the following shall accompany the final plat: 
a.  Restrictive covenants desired by the developer, so long as they do not violate existing ordinances. Restrictive covenants shall be required covering the same restrictions included under subsection (9) of this section; restrictions controlling building lines, establishment and maintenance of buffer zones, and restrictions of similar nature. 
b.  Current opinion of title from any attorney authorized to practice law in the state. 
c.  Certification from the city and county that all taxes and assessments have been paid on the land within the proposed subdivision or receipted tax bills. 
d.  If a land use change is involved, certification from the city shall be furnished indicating that the change requested has been adopted and is in effect, and that the size of lots and other features shown on the plat conform to all district requirements. Signing of the final plat by the mayor and chief zoning official or building official shall constitute such certification. 
e.  No plat shall be entitled for recording in the city clerk's office until the plat is signed by the mayor. 
f.  Clerk's fees for recording the plat. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-73. - Requirements and procedures for site plan review. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the site plan review is to encourage logic, imagination, innovation, and variety in the design process and to ensure the congruity of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area. The technical review committee and the planning and zoning board shall review plans for compliance with the land use regulations and development s standards of this chapter for compliance with the site plan review criteria. The recommendations of the technical review committee and planning and zoning board shall be transmitted to the city council for its consideration. 
(b)  Review procedure for developments. 
(1)  Application. Applications for site plan review shall require the submission of a site development plan (site plan) in accordance with the provisions of this article. No certificate(s) of occupancy shall be issued for any building or buildings unless all facilities included in the approved site plan have been provided. 
(2)  Consultants' review. The city may, if in its opinion it is deemed necessary, retain consultants to assist in the review of an application for site plan review. The cost of retaining the consultants shall be borne by the applicant in the manner set forth within a separate ordinance concerning permit fees. 
(3)  Submission procedure. An application for a site plan review shall be made to the zoning department prior to an application for a building permit and will only be accepted if all other ordinances and provisions of the city where a public hearing is required have been complied with. Except as may otherwise be required by law or administrative procedures, all required county, regional, state, or federal agency approvals shall be obtained prior to the submission of an application for site plan review. 
Upon receipt of seven copies each of the site plan and application the chief zoning official shall have ten working days to determine its appropriateness and completeness and accept or reject the application. 
Within 30 days after acceptance the technical review committee shall review and comment on the site plan application and recommend to the planning and zoning board and city council approval as submitted; recommend with changes or special conditions; or disapproval. The written recommendations of the committee and board shall be transmitted to the council and a public hearing, pursuant to Article II of this chapter, shall be conducted before the council, which shall deny, approve, or approve the site plan subject to certain conditions. 
(c)  Findings. The city council in granting or denying site plan approval by written ordinance shall include not only conclusions but also findings of fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for the grant, with or without changes or special conditions, or for the disapproval. The ordinance shall set forth with particularity in what respects the plan would or would not be in the public interest including, but not limited to, findings of fact and conclusions on the following: 
(1)  In what respect the plan is or is not consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the purpose and intent of the use district in which it is located. 
(2)  In what respect the plan is or is not in conformance with development and design standards, Article V of this chapter, or other articles or provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Submission requirements. Any application for site plan approval shall include the following information: 
(1)  The location and size of the site, including its legal description and a current certified survey. 
(2)  The recorded ownership interests including liens and encumbrances and the nature of the developer's interest if the developer is not the owner. 
(3)  The relationship of the site to existing development in the area including streets, utilities, residential and commercial development, and physical features of the land including pertinent ecological structures. 
(4)  The density or intensity of land use to be allocated, all parts of the site to be developed, together with tabulations by acreage and percentage thereof. 
(5)  The location, size, and character of any common open space and the form of organization proposed to own and maintain any common open space. 
(6)  The use and the number of stories and approximate height, bulk, and location of all buildings and other structures. 
(7)  The requirements as set forth in this chapter and other chapters, including the necessary documentation for providing required improvements such as streets, water supply, storm drainage, parking, landscaping, and sewage collection as well as the provisions for all other appropriate public and private services such as police or security protection, fire protection, and refuse collection. 
(8)  The substance of covenants, grants of easements, or other restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings, and structures including proposed easements or grants for public utilities. 
(9)  In the case of plans which call for development over a period of years, a phasing schedule showing the approximate times within which applications for building permits are intended to be filed. 
(10)  Any additional data, plans, or specifications which the applicant believes is pertinent and will assist in clarifying his application. 
(11)  A demonstration that the proposed development does not degrade adopted levels of service in the city (see Chapter 66). 
(12)  And any additional information required on the development review application. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-74. - Requirements and procedures for variances and administrative variances. 
(a)  Generally. A variance is a relaxation of the technical requirements of this chapter where such action will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, and where a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary or undue hardship. Variance requests shall be limited to setbacks, lot coverage, building spacing requirements and parking (which cannot be varied administratively), height in the industrial districts only, and no variance that would increase flood damage on other property shall be granted unless flowage easements have been obtained from the owners of affected properties. 
The city may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance or administrative variance is required shall be begun, or completed, or both. Should no building permit be issued concerning the property which is the subject of the variance, then the variance issued concerning the property shall expire one year from the date the variance was approved. For good cause shown, application, in a form set by the city, may be made prior to the expiration of the one-year period for an extension of the variance. The application shall be made before the planning and zoning board, which shall make recommendations to the city council. The city council's decision shall be final and binding. 
(b)  Variance. The city may grant a variance from the strict application of the above provisions of these land development regulations only if considered in accordance with the following procedures, regulations and requirements: 
(1)  Property owners or their authorized representatives, who possess written authorization, shall be the only eligible applicants for variances other than the city itself. Any person desiring to undertake development activity not in conformance with these land development regulations may apply for a variance in conjunction with the application for development review. 
(2)  Applications shall be received by the city in a form prescribed by the city accompanied by any necessary information or documentation supporting the request and shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state law. Information supporting said request shall include: 
a.  Existing land use designation(s). 
b.  Existing zoning districts. 
c.  Type of development proposal. 
d.  Density/intensity of use. 
e.  Survey of property. 
f.  Subdivision plat, if platted. 
g.  Variance requested. 
h.  Reason and justification for variance. 
i.  Information on other required permits, if any. 
j.  Other information in order to explain proposal. 
(3)  The zoning department shall review all submitted applications for completeness and schedule said application before the technical review committee. 
(4)  The technical review committee (TRC) shall meet to consider applications for variances and shall make an initial determination of conformance with applicable regulations. Upon conclusion of the review, the TRC shall make a recommendation to the planning and zoning board and city council. 
(5)  The planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing to consider applications for variances and shall, upon conclusion of the public hearing, make a recommendation to the city council with respect to each application. 
(6)  The city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the recommendations of the TRC and planning and zoning board with respect to applications for variances and shall, upon conclusion of the public hearing, determine where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these land use regulations will result in unnecessary and undue hardship. In order to authorize any variance from the terms of these land use regulations, the city council must and shall find the following: 
a.  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not generally applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
b.  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant and/or the property owner. 
c.  Literal interpretation of the provisions of these land use regulations would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of these land use regulations and would work unnecessary and undue hardship, but not economic hardship, on the applicant. 
d.  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of land, structure, or building. 
e.  The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of these land use regulations, and the variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
f.  Granting the variance requested will not be detrimental to adjacent property or adversely affect the public welfare. 
g.  No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the authorization of a variance. 
(7)  Pursuant to the requirements of Article II of this chapter, a sign notifying the public of the intent to seek a variance shall be posted on the property. 
(8)  Pursuant to the requirements of Article II of this chapter, a radius map and property ownership list shall be prepared and provided to the city, at the owner's expense. 
(9)  Pursuant to the requirements of Article II of this chapter, property owners within a 1,500-foot radius of the property for which a variance is sought shall be notified of such application, by mail, in addition to any statutorily required public notice. The applicant shall bear the costs of notification to all the property owners within the 1,500-foot radius. 
(c)  Administrative variance. Within the residential districts, the chief zoning official may, by administrative decision, grant an administrative variance from the strict application of these land development regulations but only in accordance with the following procedures, regulations and requirements: 
(1)  Property owners or their authorized representatives, who possess written authorization, shall be the only eligible applicants for variances other than the city itself. Any person desiring to undertake development activity not in conformance with these land development regulations may apply for a variance in conjunction with the application for development review. 
(2)  Applications shall be received by the city in a form set by the city accompanied by any necessary information or documentation supporting the request and shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state law. Information supporting said request shall include: 
a.  Existing land use designation(s). 
b.  Existing zoning districts. 
c.  Type of development proposal. 
d.  Density/intensity of use. 
e.  Survey of property. 
f.  Subdivision plat, if platted. 
g.  Variance requested. 
h.  Reason and justification for variance. 
i.  Information on other required permits, if any. 
j.  Other information in order to explain proposal. 
k.  Signatures of the surrounding property owners. 
(3)  The zoning department shall review all submitted applications for completeness for said administrative variances and determine that: 
a.  That the setback proposed is reduced not more than 20 percent of that required. 
b.  That the lot coverage is not increased by more than ten percent of that allowed. 
c.  That the spacing between structures is not less than five feet. 
(4)  The chief zoning official will review the information and render a decision either approving, approving with modifications or conditions or denying the request. 
(5)  In granting the adjustment, the chief zoning official must find: 
a.  That the adjustment will be in harmony with the general appearance and character of the community. 
b.  That the adjustment will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
c.  That the proposed structure or addition for which the administrative variance is being requested is designed and arranged on the site in a manner that minimizes aural and visual impact on the adjacent residences while affording the applicant a reasonable use of the land. 
(6)  A copy of said decision shall be kept on file with the city clerk and will become effective 15 days after the chief zoning official's decision, unless an appeal is filed. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2017-25, § 2, 10-3-17)  
Sec. 78-75. - Requirements and procedures for special exception uses. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a special exception is to allow uses not permitted by right but which may provide for an individual or community-serving need and which, subject to conditions as set forth in section 78-36, would not impact the integrity of the zoning district. The technical review committee and the planning and zoning board shall review plans for compliance with the land development regulations and development standards of this chapter. The recommendations of the planning and zoning board shall be transmitted to the city council for its consideration. 
(b)  Review procedure for developments. 
(1)  Application. Applications for special exception uses shall require the submission of a site plan in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No certificate(s) of occupancy shall be issued for any use unless said use has been approved. 
(2)  Submission procedure. An application for a special exception use shall be made to the zoning department prior to an application for a building permit and will only be accepted if all other ordinances and provisions of the city where a public hearing is required have been complied with. Except as may otherwise be required by law or administrative procedures, all required county, regional, state, or federal agency approvals shall be obtained prior to the submission of an application for a special exception use. 
Upon receipt of seven copies of the application the zoning department shall have ten working days to determine its appropriateness and completeness and accept or reject the application. 
Within 30 days after acceptance the technical review committee shall review and comment on the application and recommend to the planning and zoning board approval as submitted; recommend with changes or special conditions; or disapproval. After review by the planning and zoning board, the written recommendations of the board shall be transmitted to the council and a public hearing, pursuant to Article II, shall be conducted before the council, who shall deny, approve, or approve the special exception use subject to certain conditions. 
(c)  Findings. The city council in granting or denial of site plan approval by written ordinance shall include not only conclusions but also findings of fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for the grant, with or without changes or special conditions, or for the disapproval. 
Violation of the conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
The city council may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the special exception is required shall be begun, or completed, or both. 
(d)  Submission requirements. Any application for special exception use shall include the following information, if applicable: 
(1)  The location and size of the site, including its legal description and a current certified survey. 
(2)  The recorded ownership interests including liens and encumbrances and the nature of the developer's interest if the developer is not the owner. 
(3)  The relationship of the site to existing development in the area including streets, utilities, residential and commercial development, and physical features of the land including pertinent ecological structures. 
(4)  The density or intensity of land use to be allocated, all parts of the site to be developed, together with tabulations by acreage and percentage thereof. 
(5)  The location, size, and character of any open space, common or otherwise. 
(6)  The use and the number of stories and height, bulk, and location of all buildings and other structures. 
(7)  The requirements as set forth in this chapter and other chapters, including the necessary documentation for providing required improvements such as streets, water supply, storm drainage, parking, landscaping, and sewage collection as well as the provisions for all other appropriate public and private services such as police or security protection, fire protection, and refuse collection. 
(8)  The substance of covenants, grants of easements, or other restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings, and structures including proposed easements or grants for public utilities. 
(10)  Any additional data, plans, or specifications which the applicant believes is pertinent and will assist in clarifying his application. 
(11)  A demonstration that the proposed special exception use does not degrade adopted levels of service in the city (see Chapter 66). 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-76. - Requirements and procedures for vested rights. 
(a)  Purpose. Any property owner whose property is rezoned or whose use of property is restricted as a result of a zoning action undertaken by the city, and who claims a vested right to develop or use his property contrary to this chapter, may submit an application for a determination of vested rights to the building department within one year after the later of: 
(1)  The effective date that the official ordinance or zoning action by the city is taken; or 
(2)  The date of final judicial action. 
(b)  Standard. Reliance solely on the prior zoning of the property absent a duly filed application and receipt of permits shall not constitute a basis for a determination of vested rights. 
(c)  Application. Any property owner filing for a determination of vested rights with the zoning department shall do so on a form approved by the city hereby known as "Application for Vested Rights". 
In addition to the application form, the applicant shall attach copies of any applicable development permits, development orders and/or any other documents which support or negate the claim of vested rights. The mere existence of zoning prior to the effective date of the zoning action in question shall not automatically vest rights. 
(d)  Notice procedures for vested rights. Notice procedures for vested rights shall be detailed in this chapter under Article II. 
(e)  Review procedures for vested rights. 
(1)  The zoning department shall review the application and attachments as to form and sufficiency and shall within 15 days of receipt thereof determine and notify the applicant whether the application information is in compliance with this section. Within 15 days after acknowledging receipt of a sufficient application, the zoning department shall place the application on the agenda of the next scheduled planning and zoning board meeting. 
(2)  The planning and zoning board shall substantively review the application and shall consider all written documents, statements, and information submitted by the applicant or gathered and made part of the record by the zoning department during the examination of the application. The planning and zoning board may solicit and shall accept submission of relevant information from any other departments and agencies of the city or from third parties who may possess factual information relevant to the application. The planning and zoning board shall then make recommendations to the city council and place the application on the agenda of the next scheduled city council meeting. 
(3)  The city council shall review the application and consider the recommendations of the planning and zoning board and any other information which it deems necessary and advisable, and shall issue a final determination as to the vested rights claim. 
(f)  Effect of vested rights determination. A determination by the city council that a property owner is entitled to a vested right shall entitle development or use in accordance with such determination. However, a vested rights determination shall not limit the applicability of other provisions of this chapter, nor shall it entitle the applicant to the issuance of any development permit not specified in the final vested rights determination. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-77. - Requirements and procedures for appeals. 
(a)  Appeals to city council. Appeals, of any zoning department decision may be taken by any person aggrieved, pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Staying of work on premises. If an appeal to the city council is filed no building permit shall be issued until the city council's decision becomes final. Unless, to do so would cause imminent peril to life or property. 
(2)  Procedure. Any person appealing any zoning department decision shall make the appeal within 30 days after the order, requirement, decision, or determination has been rendered in writing to the city council. The applicant shall file one original and eight copies of the application for an appeal along with supporting data with the city clerk. Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall review the application for completeness and include all documents, plans, papers, or other materials constituting the record on which the action appealed was taken and transmit this to the city council. 
(3)  Hearing of appeal. Pursuant to Article II of this chapter, before rendering a decision on an appeal, the city council shall hold a public hearing. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(b)  Meetings of city council. Meetings of the city council for appeals shall be in accordance with the rules of procedure for regular city council meetings. 
(c)  Fee for appeals before the city council. A fee shall be paid by any applicant seeking an appeal. Said fee schedule shall be kept on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Secs. 78-78—78-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 78-80. - Purpose 
The purpose of this article is to provide development and design standards applicable to all development activity within the city. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-81. - Responsibility for improvements. 
All improvements required by this article shall be designed, installed, and paid for by the developer. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-82. - Principles of development design. 
The provisions of this article are intended to ensure functional and attractive development. All development shall be designed to provide adequate living space, open space and pervious area for drainage; to provide adequate access to lots and sites; and to avoid adverse effects of shadow, glare, noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-83. - Lot, yard and bulk requirements. 
(a)  Lot, yard and bulk requirements. The lot and setback areas, lot coverage and maximum building heights shall apply as enumerated in the individual zoning district sections of this article. 
(b)  General lot regulations. 
(1)  A single-family structure may be constructed on any nonconforming lot in any single-family residential district if the lot is less than the minimum area required for building lots in the residential district in which it is located, provided the following conditions exist or are met: 
a.  No structure shall be constructed on any nonconforming lot if the owner of the lot owns any adjoining vacant land which would create a conforming lot if the vacant land were combined with the lot deficient in area. 
b.  No structure shall be constructed on a nonconforming lot unless it shall have a minimum side yard of ten percent of front yard lot width, seven and one-half feet minimum, or a minimum side yard of 15 feet where adjacent to any street. 
c.  No structure shall be constructed on a nonconforming lot unless it shall have front and rear yards conforming to the minimums required for the residential district in which the lot is located. 
(2)  The minimum lot width of any lot shall be measured along the minimum building setback line as required for the district in which it is located. 
(3)  The minimum lot depth of any lot shall be measured by a straight line from the midpoint of the front lot line and perpendicular thereto, to its intersection with the rear lot line. 
(4)  Every lot in every district shall have the required frontage on a public or approved private street. 
(5)  No person shall strip, excavate, or otherwise remove soil, sand, shale, or gravel for sale or use and thereby create a borrow pit except in connection with the construction or alteration of a building permitted by the issuance of a building permit on the premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto. 
(6)  At all street intersections no obstruction to vision, other than an existing building, post, column, or tree, exceeding 30 inches in height above the established grade of the street at the property line shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the triangle formed by the street lot lines of the lot and a line drawn between the points along the street lot lines 30 feet distant from their point of intersection. 
(7)  The area or dimension of any lot, yard, parking area, or other space shall not be reduced to less than the minimum required by this chapter. If already less than the minimum required by this chapter, the area or dimension may be continued but shall not be further reduced. 
(c)  Minimum lot area requirements. All development shall have a total land area sufficient to meet all development standards in this chapter. 
(d)  Maximum building lot coverage. Land coverage by principal and accessory buildings or structures on each lot shall not be greater than is permitted in the zoning district. 
(e)  Building setback requirements. 
(1)  Minimum front, side, side street and rear yard setbacks. Setbacks shall be as permitted in the applicable zoning district. 
a.  Corner lots shall have a side yard equal in width to the minimum front yard setback of any adjoining lot fronting on the side street. The minimum shall not in any case be less than 15 feet on the street side. 
b.  Where a residential district abuts a nonresidential district, there shall be a setback provided in the nonresidential district that is equal in depth to that required in the residential district for not less than 100 feet. If the parcel is less than 100 feet in width the entire parcel shall meet the abutting residential lot depth. 
(2)  Minimum setbacks between buildings. If required by the zoning district, the minimum distance between adjacent buildings shall be ten feet, excluding roof overhang (eave). 
(3)  Minimum setbacks for buildings exceeding 25 feet in height. When a building exceeds 25 feet in height, the minimum distance from an adjacent building or property line shall be increased by two feet for each story above two. 
(f)  Height regulations. 
(1)  No building or structure shall have a greater number of stories, nor have an aggregate height of a greater number of feet than is permitted in the district in which the building is located. 
(2)  Chimneys, cooling towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire towers, gas tanks, steeples, water towers, ornamental towers or spires, communications, radio or television towers, or necessary mechanical appurtenances, may be erected in accordance with applicable ordinances of the city. No tower, other than a church spire or tower, or a public building, shall exceed the height regulations by more than 40 percent. No tower shall be used as a place of habitation or for tenant purposes. No sign, nameplate, display, or advertising device of any kind whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or attached to any chimney, tower, tank, or other structure which extends above the height limitations. 
(g)  Specific requirements for the north district. All proposed development in areas of the north district that will not be served by central water and central sewer shall have the following minimum lot areas: 
Type of development 	Sewer/water system 	Lot area 
Residential 	Septic tanks Individual wells 	1.25 acre per unit 
Residential 	Aerobic septic Individual wells 	1.25 acre per unit 
Residential 	Septic tanks Central water 	One-half acre per unit 
Nonresidential 	Septic tanks Individual wells 	One acre 
 
_____
Pursuant to section 32-78 of the Code of Miami-Dade County, Florida, "Connection to public water supply and public sewer disposal in abutting streets and easements required", any property which abuts a water or sewer main shall be connected to the said water and/or sewer main in such manner as to meet the requirements of the Florida Building Code and the Miami-Dade County Public Works Manual. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-84. - Required residential roof materials. 
This section shall pertain to all residential districts. 
(1)  Pitched roofs shall be tile or metal with "s" shape or similar design to resemble tile. 
(2)  A roof shall be considered pitched if it has a slope greater than 2½ inches in 12 inches. 
(3)  A roof shall be excepted from the provisions of this section if: 
a.  The slope is equal or less than 2½ inches in 12 inches. 
b.  On existing homes as of June 1988. 
c.  On additions or auxiliary buildings to existing homes with existing pitched roofs covered with materials which were approved at the time of original construction. 
(4)  Metal with factory finish and that has received a "Notice of Acceptance" from Miami-Dade County and that is labeled "Miami-Dade County Product Control Approved" may be used as alternative roofing material for all residential districts, subject to review and approval of the planning and zoning department in accordance with the following: 
a.  The color of the roof shall be similar to clay tiles in the city or as determined by the planning and zoning department. 
b.  The details, color, and manner of installation shall be consistent with the architectural design, style and composition of the residential structure. 
c.  The use of a metal roof is architecturally compatible with the established scale, context, and character of the surrounding area. 
d.  Any substantial change from existing materials in place shall require the approval of the city staff for aesthetics and harmony with other buildings in the proximity thereof. 
e.  Metal roof is permitted if the slope is greater than two and one-half inches in 12 inches with "s" shape or similar design to resemble tile. 
(5)  Flat roofs are permitted on additions to existing pitched roof structures providing: 
a.  The structure is located in the rear of the building and shall be situated so that it is between the prolongations of the sidelines thereof. 
b.  Metal or fabric roofs are permitted to cover porches, patios, in residential districts, providing: 
1.  The area covered by the metal or fabric roof shall not exceed the permitted impervious area. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1, 8-21-18)  
Sec. 78-85. - Impervious surface coverage. 
(a)  Generally. Impervious surface on a development site shall not exceed the ratios provided in each zoning district. The establishment of an impervious surface ratio provides a control of the intensity of development of land, by controlling the amount of the land which may be covered by any type of impervious surface. 
(b)  Ratio calculation. The impervious surface ratio is calculated by dividing the total impervious surface by the gross site area. Water bodies are considered impervious. 
(c)  Treatment of cluster development. Because the impervious surface ratio is calculated for the gross site, cluster development or other site design alternatives may result in individual lots within a development project exceeding the impervious surface ratio, while other lots may be devoted entirely to open space. The planning and zoning board may require, as a condition of approval, deed restrictions or covenants that guarantee the maintenance of such open space in perpetuity. 
(d)  Alternative paving materials. If porous paving materials (such as grasscrete, gravel or other like materials) are used in accordance with the Florida Building Code, then only 20 percent of the area covered with porous paving materials shall be counted as impervious surface. 
(e)  Pavers. If pavers are used in accordance with the Florida Building Code, then only 35 percent of the area covered with pavers shall be counted as impervious surface. 
(f)  Impervious surface ratios. The maximum impervious surface ratio is given for each zoning district in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-86. - Buffer and screening requirements. 
(a)  Where any nonresidential use directly abuts a residential use district, or where a multifamily residential use abuts a lower density residential use district, or where any land use abuts a mobile home/trailer park use district, it shall be screened from the adjoining residential use or mobile home park in both of the following ways: 
(1)  By a finished block wall, stucco on block, painted, six feet in height, as measured from the final grade adjacent to the property wherein the wall is being constructed. The wall shall be located completely within the limits of the nonresidential lot, and shall have equal architectural treatment on both sides. A maintenance easement shall be provided. 
(2)  By landscaping, a solid hedge at least six feet in height within the limits of the eight-foot greenbelt zone and trees at least eight feet in height and ten feet on center (See Article VII, Landscaping Requirements). 
Following the expiration of the guaranteed period for upkeep, each individual property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of their individual side of wall or landscaping. 
(b)  Where any service station requires screening, it shall be screened by a fence or wall at least four feet but not more than eight feet in height of at least 60 percent opacity. The fence or wall shall be located completely within the limits of the nonresidential lot and shall have equal architectural treatment on both sides. 
(c)  As required, plans and design for the installation of required buffers, greenbelts and screens shall be reviewed prior to the issuance of a building permit for such uses as required by this chapter. 
(d)  Any required buffers, greenbelts or screening shall be maintained in good order to achieve the objectives of this section. Failure to do so shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-87. - Stormwater management. 
(a)  Relationship to other stormwater management requirements. In addition to meeting the requirements of this chapter, the design and performance of all stormwater management systems shall comply with applicable state regulations (Chapter 17-25, Florida Administrative Code) or as applicable, Chapter 24, Code of Miami-Dade County. In all cases the strictest of the applicable standards shall apply. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following development activities are exempt from the stormwater management requirements of this section, except that steps to control erosion and sedimentation must be taken for all development. 
(1)  The construction of a single-family or two-family (duplex) residential dwelling unit and accessory structures on a single parcel of land. 
(2)  Any development within a subdivision if each of the following conditions have been met: 
a.  Stormwater management provisions for the subdivision were previously approved and remain valid as part of a final plat or development plan; and 
b.  The development is conducted in accordance with the stormwater management provisions submitted with the final plat or development plan. 
(c)  In zero lot line developments, a perpetual four-foot-wide maintenance easement shall be provided on the rear and side of the property as well as the lot adjacent to the zero lot line, which, with the exception of walls or fences, shall be kept clear of structures or concrete surfaces. Runoff water shall be retained on the site. There shall also be an easement of two feet on the front side property line along the zero lot line of the property to serve as additional drainage for the property. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-88. - Utilities. 
(a)  Requirements for all developments. 
(1)  Generally. The following basic utilities are required for all developments subject to the criteria set forth in this section. 
(2)  Electricity. Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision shall have available to it a source of electric power adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and every lot within such subdivision. 
(3)  Water and sewer. Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision shall have central potable water and wastewater hookups whenever required by the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  Telephone. Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision shall have available to it a telephone service cable adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and every lot within such subdivision. 
(5)  Illumination. All streets, driveways, sidewalks, bikeways, parking lots and other common areas and facilities in developments of three lots or more shall provide illumination, except that the development technical review committee may waive the requirements for streetlights if the benefits derived are not consistent with the costs thereof. 
(6)  Fire hydrants. All developments served by a central water system shall include a system of fire hydrants. 
(7)  Cable TV installations. Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision shall have available to it a television cable service adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and every lot within such subdivision. 
(b)  Design standards. 
(1)  Compliance with the Florida Building Code. All utilities required by these land use regulations shall meet or exceed the minimum standards contained in the Florida Building Code and the level of service (LOS) standards given in the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Placement of utilities underground. 
a.  All electric, telephone, cable television, and other communication lines (exclusive of transformers or enclosures containing electrical equipment including, but not limited to, switches, meters, or capacitors which may be pad mounted), and gas distribution lines shall be placed underground within easements or dedicated public rights-of-way. 
b.  Screening of any utility apparatus placed aboveground shall be required. 
(c)  Utility easements. When a developer installs or causes the installation of water, sewer, electrical power, telephone, or cable television facilities and intends that such facilities shall be owned, operated, or maintained by a public utility or any entity other than the developer, the developer shall transfer to such utility or entity the necessary ownership or easement rights to enable the utility or entity to operate and maintain such facilities. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 54.  
Sec. 78-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES 
 
Sec. 78-90. - General standards and requirements. 
(a)  Accessory structures. Any number of different accessory structures may be located on a parcel, provided that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  A legally permitted main use building shall be on the parcel. 
(2)  All accessory structures shall comply with standards pertaining to the principal use, unless exempted or superseded elsewhere in these land use regulations. 
(3)  Accessory structures shall comply with front yard requirements for the principal structure to which they are accessory and shall not be closer to any side or rear property line than five feet, except that in zero lot line developments the minimum setback may be four feet. 
(4)  Accessory buildings and structures shall observe setback requirements as otherwise provided in these land use regulations, plus only mesh screen material shall be allowed on an enclosure, except that commercially manufactured utility storage sheds may be enclosed with aluminum or metal material. 
(5)  Accessory structures shall not be located in a required buffer, landscape area. 
(6)  Accessory structures shall be included in all calculations of impervious surface and stormwater runoff. 
(7)  Accessory structures shall be shown on any concept development plan with full supporting documentation as required by these land use regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-91. - Satellite dish antennas. 
(a)  Standards. All satellite dish antenna installations shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The satellite dish antenna shall require a building permit to be issued prior to installation shall be maintained in compliance with all applicable building and electrical codes. 
(2)  The satellite dish antenna installation and any part thereof shall maintain vertical and horizontal clearances from any electric lines and shall conform to the National Electrical Safety Code. 
(3)  The satellite dish antenna installation shall meet all FCC and manufacturers' specifications, rules and requirements. 
(4)  The satellite dish antenna shall be of a nonreflective surface material. 
(5)  The installer of any satellite dish antenna, prior to installation, shall submit detailed blueprints/drawings of the proposed satellite dish antenna installation and foundation, which shall be certified by the manufacturer or a professional engineer. 
(6)  The satellite dish antenna installation shall not be permitted to be placed in front of the main dwelling or commercial structure. 
(7)  In residential districts, the satellite dish antenna shall, to the maximum extent possible, be screened from view from a public right-of-way. 
(b)  Standards for installation in residential developments. 
(1)  A satellite dish antenna shall be considered an accessory structure and shall not constitute the principal use of the property. 
(2)  The satellite dish antenna installed pursuant to this subsection (b) shall not be used for any commercial purposes. It shall only provide service to the main dwelling structure. 
(3)  Satellite dish antenna installations shall be limited to one installation per residential lot. 
(4)  The maximum size of the satellite dish antenna, whether ground-mounted or pole-mounted, shall be six feet in diameter. 
(5)  The maximum height of a ground-mounted satellite dish antenna installation shall be eight feet. 
(6)  The maximum height of a pole-mounted satellite dish antenna installation shall be five feet above the eaves of the roof. 
(7)  A satellite dish antenna shall not be permitted to be installed on the roof of any main dwelling structure. 
(8)  The satellite dish antenna installation, whether ground-mounted or pole-mounted, shall be mounted at a fixed point and shall not be portable. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-92. - Storage buildings, utility buildings, sheds, stables, carports, gazebos and greenhouses. 
(a)  No accessory buildings used for industrial storage of hazardous, incendiary or noxious materials shall be located nearer than 50 feet from any property line. 
(b)  Storage buildings, or other buildings regulated by this section, and the like shall be permitted only in compliance with standards for distance between buildings, and setbacks, if any, from property lines. 
(c)  Storage or other buildings regulated by this section shall be permitted only in side and rear yards, and shall not encroach into any required building setback from an abutting right-of-way. 
(d)  Storage or other buildings regulated by this section shall be included in calculations for impervious surface, floor area ratio, or any other site design requirements applying to the principal use of the lot. 
(e)  Vehicles, including manufactured housing and mobile homes, shall not be used as storage buildings, utility buildings, or other such uses. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-93. - Swimming pools, enclosures, hot tubs, and similar structures. 
(a)  Swimming pools shall be permitted only in side and rear yards. 
(b)  Enclosures for swimming pools shall not be considered a part of the principal structure. 
(c)  All swimming pools shall be completely enclosed with an approved wall, fence or other substantial structure not less than five feet in height. The enclosure shall completely surround the pool and shall be of sufficient density to prohibit unrestrained admittance to the enclosed area through the use of self-closing and self-latching doors. 
(d)  No overhead electric power lines shall pass over any swimming pool unless enclosed in conduit and rigidly supported, nor shall any power line be nearer than ten feet horizontally or vertically from the pool's water's edge. 
(e)  Excavations for swimming pools to be installed for existing principal buildings shall not exceed a two-to-one slope from the foundation of buildings, unless a trench wall is provided. 
(f)  Swimming pools, which are not to be enclosed by a structure other than fences or screening as required or permitted by the city, may be constructed within the rear and side yard areas but not the front, street side or street rear yards as prescribed by this chapter. However, no part of the pool structure may protrude more than 12 inches above finished grade level and the pool walls shall be at least ten feet from the lot lines. In determining the percentage of building lot coverage of a lot by buildings, swimming pools shall not be counted in the computation. Any pool deck shall be setback a minimum of five feet from the property lines. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-94. - Tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, and similar structures. 
(a)  Tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, and similar uses of a recreational nature which are not covered by a structure may be constructed within yard areas except the required front yard, required street side yard, or required street rear yard as prescribed by this chapter. In determining the percentage of coverage of a lot by buildings, tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, and similar uses shall not be counted in the computation. Private recreational facilities within a structure shall conform with all pertinent yard requirements as set forth in this chapter, pertaining to lot area, lot coverage, setbacks, and yards. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-95. - Walls and fences. 
(a)  All garden walls and fences located in residential zoning districts or constructed within the required yard areas shall conform to the following regulations, except where special requirements are set forth for specific buffering or screening purpose elsewhere in this chapter: 
(1)  All garden walls or fences located within the required front yard shall not exceed four feet in height, measured from the final grade, and six feet for side or rear yards, except for a required street side yard or required street rear yard of a corner lot which shall be limited to four feet. In the E-1 district front walls may be increased by an additional two feet if architectural design features such as columns or wrought iron or other grillwork are added. 
(2)  The garden wall or fence shall in addition conform with the lot regulations set out in Article IV of this chapter. 
(3)  Where any concrete wall directly abuts another property, it shall conform to the following standards: 
a.  It will consist of a finished block wall, stucco block and painted, six feet in height, as measured from the final grade adjacent to the property wherein the wall is being constructed. 
b.  The wall shall be located completely within the limits of the residential lot and shall have equal architectural treatment of both sides. 
(4)  In areas where the property faces two roads or is located in any other area construed to be a corner lot, no wall or fence shall be located in the vision triangle. 
(5)  Any wall or fence located adjacent to a public right-of-way or private road shall be placed with the finished side facing that right-of-way. 
(6)  No wall or fence shall be constructed or installed in such a manner as to interfere with drainage on the site. 
(7)  Any encroachment of a wall into a utility easement shall be supported by a letter from the respective utility authorizing such encroachment, prior to obtaining the building permit. 
(b)  The height limitation for walls and fences in business, commercial and industrial areas shall be eight feet in height from the final grade, except where there is a conflict with sight distance triangle requirements or the city's design guidelines. 
In all cases, the final grade in the areas served by septic tanks shall be determined to be no more than 1.75 feet above the highest elevation of the crown of the road. The minimum crown of the road is determined to be six feet above mean sea level. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-96. - Entrance features. 
Entrance features are any combination of decorative structures and landscape elements located at the entrance to a development, which identifies or draws attention to the development. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, entrance features in compliance with each of the standards enumerated below shall be permitted: 
(1)  Entrance features that are placed on private property shall be continually and properly maintained by the owners. To assure the proper maintenance of entrance features: 
a.  An executed covenant, stating that all structures shall be maintained in good condition and repair and that all landscaping shall likewise be so maintained, shall be delivered to the zoning department for review and, upon approval, shall be duly recorded prior to the issuance of any permits. 
(2)  Entrance features may be placed within public rights-of-way provided: 
a.  Prior approval is granted by the Miami-Dade County Public Works Department and City of Hialeah Gardens Zoning and Public Works Departments; and 
b.  A bond is submitted to the city in an amount to cover the removal of said features if deemed necessary at a later date by the city's public works department. The bond shall have an initial ten-year life and shall be renewed for five-year periods thereafter; and 
c.  An executed covenant, stating that all structures shall be maintained in good condition and repair and that all landscaping shall likewise be so maintained, shall be delivered to the city for review and, upon approval, shall be duly recorded prior to the issuance of any permits. The city shall forward copies of all approvals to the Miami-Dade County Public Works Department. 
(3)  Entrance features shall be placed so as not to encroach upon utility lines or traffic control devices whether overhead or underground; and where a conflict is encountered, the developer or designated property owner shall be responsible for the removal or relocation of said features or any parts thereof. 
(4)  Entrance features shall be placed so as not to cause a visual obstruction which would create a traffic hazard, and should any illumination be incorporated it shall be placed so as to be unobtrusive to moving traffic lanes or adjacent properties. 
(5)  The character and scale of entrance features shall be designed to be complementary to the identified development and compatible with the immediate neighborhood. 
(6)  All structures within entrance features shall meet all standards of the Florida Building Code and any other applicable standards. 
(7)  Applications for permits for entrance features shall be made by the fee owner of the property in question and shall be submitted to the zoning department. Applications shall include an accurately dimensioned plot plan identifying all structures and landscaping incorporated in said features and identifying all setbacks and elevations of the same. 
(8)  Upon receipt of all necessary information, the city shall review the same, and in turn, render a decision either approving, modifying, or denying the request. 
(9)  The applicant, or any aggrieved property owner in the area, may appeal the decision of the zoning department to the city council, in the manner provided for appeals. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-97. - Accessory uses generally. 
Accessory uses shall be clearly supplementary and incidental to the principal use of the lot and shall be located on the same lot as the principal use to which it is subordinate. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-98. - Home occupations and professional offices. 
(a)  A home occupation or professional office shall be allowed in a bona fide dwelling unit, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such use, with not more than one other person engaged in the use. 
(2)  The use of the dwelling unit for such accessory use shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and shall under no circumstances change the residential character of the structure. 
(3)  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation, other than one sign not exceeding two square feet in area, non-illuminated, mounted flat against the wall of the principal building or in a window. 
(4)  No home occupation or professional office shall occupy more than 15 percent of the first floor area of the residence. No accessory building, freestanding or attached, shall be used for such accessory use. 
(5)  No traffic shall be generated by such occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such accessory use shall be met off the street and other than in a front yard required pursuant to this chapter. 
(6)  No equipment, tools, or process shall be used in such accessory use which creates interference to neighboring properties due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio, telephone, or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
(7)  Permitted uses include not more than one of the following secondary uses: arts and crafts, dressmaking, tailoring, artist or musician including giving instruction to one person at a time, professional office. 
(8)  Outdoor storage of materials shall not be permitted. 
(9)  The following shall not be considered home occupations: beauty shops, barbershops, band instrument or dance instructors, swimming instructor, studio for group instruction, public dining facility or tea room, antique or gift shops, fortunetelling or similar activity, outdoor repair, food processing, retail sales, nursery school, or kindergarten. 
(10)  A home occupation or professional office shall be subject to all applicable City occupational licensing requirements, fees, and other business taxes. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-99. - Dining facilities, recreation centers, and other amenities. 
(a)  Residential and nonresidential development projects may provide amenities for the exclusive use of the employees and/or residents of the project. Such amenities shall be allowed as provided in this section. 
(1)  Dining facilities. A development may provide a central dining facility, cafeteria, or snack shop to serve the employees and/or residents of the project, subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  The facility shall not be open to the general public. 
b.  There shall be no off-site signs advertising the presence of the facility. 
(2)  Community centers, recreation centers. Residential projects may provide a central facility to provide a meeting place and indoor recreation opportunities for residents subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Such facilities shall not include health clubs, gyms, and the like offering services to the general public. 
b.  Parking to serve the building shall be provided as required by this chapter. 
c.  There shall be no identification signs, other than directional signs pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  Employee fitness centers. Nonresidential development projects may provide a fitness or exercise center for the use of employees subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Such facilities shall not be open to the general public. 
b.  There shall be no signs, other than directional or occupant signs, identifying the facility. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-100. - Incidental services. 
Incidental services used in connection with either motels or hotels, including news or candy stands, restaurants and lounges, personal service shops, and similar uses, may be permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  At least 25 dwelling units shall be contained within the building group. 
(2)  Not more than ten percent of the total floor area within the buildings shall be so used. 
(3)  All incidental services shall be situated within the principal building. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-101. - Storage of boats, recreational and commercial vehicles. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose for regulating the storage methods of recreational vehicles, boats as well commercial vehicles is to enhance the visual ambiance of the community. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Recreational vehicle: A recreational vehicle is defined as a motored or non-motored vehicle bearing two or more axles and primarily used for recreational purposes such as camping or lodging. 
(2)  Boat: A small vessel for travel on water up to 35 feet in length. 
(3)  Boat trailer: A non-automotive vehicle designed to be hauled by road as a vehicle for the transportation of boats. 
(4)  Commercial vehicle: A motor vehicle with two axles or more used for the purchase, sale or transportation of commodities including but not limited to motor or non-motored vehicles displaying the name(s) of commercial entities. 
(c)  Recreational vehicles, boats and boat trailers. Recreational vehicles, whether non-powered or self propelled, boat trailers or combination of boat/trailer shall be permitted to be parked within any residential zoning district as long as the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Residents of the E-1 residential zoning district shall be allowed to store one recreational vehicle, boat trailer or combination of boat/trailer up to 35 feet in length in side and rear yards as long as the vehicle is not stored within any existing front setbacks. 
(2)  Residents of the R-1 and R-2 residential zoning districts shall be allowed to store one recreational vehicle, boat trailer or combination of boat/trailer up to 22 feet in length in side and rear yards as long as the vehicle is not stored within any existing front setbacks. And each property owner shall be limited to the storage of only one category; recreational vehicle, boat trailer or combination of boat/trailer. 
(3)  Residents of the R1Z and R-1P residential zoning districts shall be allowed to store one recreational vehicle or one boat trailer or one combination of boat/trailer up to 22 feet in length in the front and street side yards of the property as long as the recreational vehicle or boat trailer or the combination of boat/trailer is confined within the boundaries of the property. 
(4)  Residents of the R-TH and R-M1 residential zoning districts or private developments shall be allowed to store one recreational vehicle or one boat trailer or one combination of boat/trailer up to 22 feet in length in the front and street side yards as long as the recreational vehicles or boat trailer or the combination of boat/trailer is confined within the boundaries of the property. In the case of private developments where no individual lots exist, a designated parking area for rec 
reational vehicles, boat trailers or combination of boat/trailer shall be part of the development's site plan. 
(5)  Residents of the R-M2 residential zoning districts that reside in areas known as condominiums or planned unit developments shall be allowed to store one recreational vehicle or one boat trailer or a combination of boat/trailer up to 22 feet in length as long as the recreational vehicles, boat trailers or combination of boat/trailer are confined to a designated parking area that is part of the development's site plan. 
(d)  Commercial vehicles. Commercial vehicles will be divided into three categories: 
(1)  The first category shall include passenger vans, pick-up trucks or lunch trucks with commercial lettering. These vehicles classified as type I trucks may be parked in any residential district subject only to the same restrictions applicable to automobiles. 
(2)  The second category shall include vans, pick-up trucks and utility trucks which openly display commercial equipment and supplies such as ladders, pipes, etc. These vehicles classified as type II trucks may be parked in any residential district provided that: 
a.  The residential property has a principal building; 
b.  The truck is owned or leased by the property owner or tenant or has been assigned to the property owner or tenant by their employer; 
c.  The owner or tenant shall only maintain one vehicle on his or her property; 
d.  The vehicle is parked behind the front and side street building lines and at least ten feet from the rear or side setback of the property line. The vehicle shall be screened from public view from the street and adjacent properties by a wood fence, wall or landscape; and 
e.  No mechanical repair shall be permitted. 
(3)  The third category includes but is not limited to, vehicles that are primarily larger than passenger vans and pick-up trucks which have been designed for a special purpose associated with the conduct of a business enterprise or are used in business or for personal purposes for the transportation of cargo, equipment, supplies or vehicles. Examples of type III trucks are buses, tow trucks, semi-tractor trailers, step vans, ice cream trucks, etc. Type III trucks shall not be permitted in any residential district, including on adjacent right-of-ways, unless engaged in loading or unloading material or actively performing repairs or services on the property where the vehicle is parked or unless approved via a special exception process. 
It shall be unlawful to have commercial vehicles of more than one-ton carrying capacity, parked for more than one hour within any residential district, including on adjacent right-of-ways unless engaged in the practice of loading or unloading material or actively performing repairs or services in front of the property where the vehicle is parked. 
(e)  Special exception uses. Any resident of the city, who is adversely affected by the provisions of this section shall have the right to appeal to the city council. The council in all such cases shall consider hardship if any and grant relief hereunder should such hardship exist. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-102. - Electrical generators required for automobile gas and/or service stations. 
Automobile gas and/or service stations that sell gasoline at retail to consumers shall have an alternative energy source, such as a generator that is capable of providing electrical service during an interruption of the normal electrical supply, of sufficient wattage to power some or all the gasoline pumps. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-103. - Temporary outdoor events. 
(a)  Requirement for permit. All temporary outdoor events require a special temporary outdoor event permit to be issued by the city specifically for the planned activity. Applicants wishing to hold a temporary outdoor event must submit a completed application to the planning and zoning department, including but not limited to a site plan, fees, deposits, at least 14 days prior to the date of the scheduled event. The chief zoning official or building official will determine specific requirements for the permit; city departments will determine minimum staffing levels for the event consistent with this section. Temporary outdoor events shall be limited to once every six months per location and for no longer than seven consecutive days per event. Events longer than seven consecutive days shall require city council approval. This permit requirement shall not eliminate the need for a separate building permit for a temporary structure if such a structure is to be constructed or used in connection with the temporary outdoor event. 
(b)  Enforcement. Permits shall be posted in a conspicuous location at the site on which the temporary outdoor event occurs. Upon request of any police officer or code compliance officer of the city, the owner, lessee of the property or the other representative of the temporary outdoor event shall produce such permit for inspection. 
(c)  Immediate cease and desist order. Any temporary outdoor event which takes place without compliance with this section may be subject to the issuance of an immediate cease and desist order to be issued either by a code compliance officer or the Hialeah Gardens Police Department. In addition, violation of this section shall subject the violator to fines and other penalties as set forth in this Code for violations. For an applicant who has previously violated this provision, the building official or designee may decline to issue a temporary outdoor event to such person or entity for one year following the violation or such period as the building official deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2008-15, § 3, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 78-104. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 78-105. - Estates one-family residential (E-1) district. 
Land Use Category 	Estate Residential 
Maximum Density (gross) ..... 	1 dwelling unit/1.25 acres (gross) 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	48,000 sq. ft. (net) 
	40,000 sq. ft.—corners (net) 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	150 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	200 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	3,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	30 ft. 
 Side ..... 	15 ft. (min. 40 ft. total both sides) 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	30 ft. 
Minimum Setbacks — Accessory Bldgs. 	
 Front ..... 	30 ft. 
 Side ..... 	10 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	10 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	10 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) Includes Accessory Buildings ..... 	20% 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	50% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	50% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	2/30 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	150 ft. 
 
See next page for typical site plan.  

Figure 1. Typical E-1 Site Plan 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-106. - Single-family residential (R-1) district. 
Land Use Category 	Low Density Single-Family Residential 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	3 dwelling units/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	14,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	100 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	125 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	2,500 sq. ft. 
Minimum Setbacks ..... 	
Front ..... 	25 ft. 
Side ..... 	10 ft. 
Side Street ..... 	15 ft. 
Rear ..... 	25 ft. 
Minimum Setbacks—Accessory Bldgs. 	
Front ..... 	25 ft. 
Side ..... 	7.5 ft. 
Side Street ..... 	15 ft. 
Rear ..... 	7.5 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	10 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) Includes Accessory Buildings ..... 	35% 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	55% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	45% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	2/30 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	100 ft. 
 
See next page for typical site plan.  

Figure 2. Typical R-1 Site Plan 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-107. - One- and two-family residential (R-2) district. 
Land Use Category 	Low Density Single-Family Residential 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	3.75 dwelling units/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	11,500 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	90 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	100 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	2,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	25 ft. 
 Side ..... 	0/15 ft. (if not two-family 10 ft. each side) 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	20 ft. 
Minimum Setbacks — Accessory Bldgs. 	
 Front ..... 	25 ft. 
 Side ..... 	5 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	5 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	10 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) Includes Accessory Buildings ..... 	30% 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	40% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	60% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	2/30 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	90 ft. 
 
See next page for typical site plan. 
Note: Two-family homes are allowed along the north side of NW 129th Street between NW 102nd and 104th Avenues.  

Figure 3. Typical R-2 Site Plan 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-108. - Single-family residential zero-lot-line (R-1Z) district. 
Land Use Category 	Moderate Single-Family Residential 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	6 dwelling units/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	7,500 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	60 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	100 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	1,500 sq. ft. 
Minimum Setbacks ..... 	
 Front ..... 	25 ft. (adjustable to 22 ft.) 
 Side ..... 	0/15 ft. (if not ZLL 7.5 ft. each side) 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	20 ft. (adjustable to 15 ft.) 
Minimum Setbacks — Accessory Bldgs. 	
 Front ..... 	25 ft. 
 Side ..... 	5 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear 	5 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) Includes Accessory Buildings ..... 	40% 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	60% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	40% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	2/30 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	60 ft. 
 
See next page for typical site plan.  

Figure 4. Typical R-1Z Site Plan 
(a)  Zero lot line units are single-family dwellings that: 
(1)  Make more efficient use of land; 
(2)  Are designed to integrate and relate internal-external living areas resulting in more pleasant and enjoyable living; 
(3)  Permit outdoor space to be utilized to its maximum capacity by placing the dwelling against one of the property lines. 
(b)  Generally. 
(1)  Each dwelling unit shall be on individually platted lot fronting on a public street. 
(2)  Any adjustment to the front and/or are setback shall be subject to site plan approval by the city council and a developer's agreement. 
(3)  Patios, garden features, and other similar elements shall be permitted within the 12-foot setback area; provided, however, no structure, with the exception of fences or walls, shall be placed within any easements required by this section. 
(4)  For zero lot line units built prior to August 15, 2006 the following development parameters shall apply: 
a.  Minimum lot sizes. The minimum lot size in the north district shall be a minimum width of 55 feet by a minimum depth of 90 feet and a minimum lot area of 4,950 square feet. The minimum lot size in the central district shall be a minimum width of 55 feet by a minimum depth of 82 feet and a minimum lot area of 4,510 square feet. This shall not include any credit for streets, recreation areas, common open space, or water bodies. 
b.  Dwelling unit setback. 
1.  Interior side yard. The dwelling unit shall be placed on one interior side of the property line with a zero setback. The dwelling unit setback on the other interior side of the property line shall be a minimum of 12 feet, excluding the connecting elements such as fences, walls and trellises. Provided, however, that units are not required to be on the zero lot line of the property line when the units fall at the end of a sequential row of units and where the units cannot be placed on a separate zero lot line without attaching the unit to an adjacent unit. Additionally, ten percent of the total number of units on any individual site plan may be developed without being placed on the zero lot line property line if such development is approved with a site plan approval. Patios, garden features, and other similar elements shall be permitted within the 12-foot setback area; provided, however, no structure, with the exception of fences or walls, shall be placed within easements. 
2.  Front setback. All dwelling structures shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet, adjustable to 22 feet, from the front property line (right-of-way line for public streets). 
3.  Rear setback. The rear setback for the dwelling unit shall be a minimum setback of 12.5 feet, adjustable to 15.5 feet, except that patios, garden features, and other similar elements shall be permitted within the 12.5-foot setback areas. A four-foot rear setback shall be maintained as a minimum for permitted accessory uses and slabs including pools. 
4.  Front and rear setback adjustment. Front and rear setbacks may be adjusted as follows: 
i.  Front setback may be adjusted from 25 feet to 22 feet or any portion in between. 
ii.  Rear setback may be adjusted from 12.5 feet to 15.5 feet or any portion in between. 
The adjustment to the front setback and rear setback may be made in any combination, consistent with this section, which totals 37.5 feet total combined front and rear setback area; provided, however, that any adjustment from less than 25 feet front setback shall be subject to site plan approval by the city council and a developer's agreement. 
5.  Side street setback. The side street setback for any dwelling shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the side street property line. Side street setback shall be in compliance with the clear visibility triangle. 
6.  Accessory buildings and structures. Accessory buildings and structures shall observe setback requirements as otherwise provided in these land use regulations, and only mesh screen material shall be allowed on an enclosure, except that commercially manufactured utility storage sheds may be enclosed with aluminum or metal material and shall be allowed in the rear setback area consistent with subsection 3. above provided a minimum four-foot side setback is maintained. 
c.  Maximum permitted lot coverage. 
1.  The total lot coverage permitted for all buildings on the site shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area. In addition to the 50 percent lot area coverage, there shall be permitted not more than five percent of the total lot coverage as used for outside storage or structures (with outdoor access only), which shall include all buildings, permitted accessory uses, concrete slabs, walkways and driveways. 
2.  Permit applications which render greater than 55 percent total lot coverage shall be submitted with an accompanying drainage plan, acceptable to the city, to assure adequate on-site retention drainage of the applicant's property and the property benefited by easement. 
3.  Total lot coverage shall not exceed 75 percent of the property. 
4.  Permit applications rendering greater than 50 percent total lot coverage require verification of continued compliance with originally required landscaping, prior to permit issuance. 
d.  Building heights. The maximum building height shall not exceed two stories or 35 feet in height. 
e.  Penetrable openings. The amount of penetrable opening shall be determined by multiplying 0.018 times the interior floor area, excluding garages and utility rooms, up to a maximum of 1,000 square feet on the ground floor of a dwelling unit. Penetrable openings shall be provided to exterior patio court areas and shall be totally visually and physically passable. The amount of penetrable opening for units greater than 1,000 square feet shall be calculated on a basis of 0.014 times the square feet of the ground floor area. In all cases, the final linear dimension shall be calculated to the nearest even foot. 
f.  Minimum dwelling size. No residential unit shall be smaller than 1,500 square feet of living space in the north district and 1,350 square feet of living space in the central district. 
(c)  Penetrable openings. The amount of penetrable opening for units shall be calculated on a basis of 0.014 times the square feet of the ground floor area (excluding garages and utility rooms). In all cases, the final linear dimension shall be calculated to the nearest even foot. 
(d)  Openings in zero lot line side. The wall of the dwelling located on the lot line shall have no windows, doors, air conditioning units, or any other type of opening, except the following: 
(1)  Atriums or courts shall be permitted on the zero lot line side when the court or atrium is enclosed by three walls of the dwelling unit and a solid wall of at least eight feet in height is provided on the zero lot line. The wall shall be constructed of the same material as the exterior walls of the unit. 
(2)  Windows shall be permitted on the zero lot line side provided the windows are placed at a minimum height of five feet above the finished floor level of any floor and which do not protrude in any way on the adjoining landowner's property. 
(e)  Maintenance and drainage easements. 
(1)  A perpetual four-foot-wide maintenance easement shall be provided on the lot adjacent to the zero lot line property line, which, with the exception of walls or fences, shall be kept clear of structures or concrete slabs and walkways. This easement shall be noted on the plat and incorporated into each deed transferring title to the property. The zero lot line wall shall be maintained in its original color and treatment unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the two affected lot owners. 
(2)  Roof overhangs may penetrate the easement on the adjacent lot a maximum of 12 inches, but the roof shall be so designed that water runoff from the dwelling placed on the lot line is limited to the easement area. 
(f)  Common open space and maintenance of facilities. If common open space is provided the subdivider or developer shall provide a covenant that the common open space will be maintained in perpetuity by a property owners' association or by some other mechanism. Additionally, a dormant special taxing district shall be established in the event that the property owners' association fails to maintain private open space or is disbanded. The instruments incorporating such provisions shall be approved by the city attorney, as to form and legal sufficiency, submitted to the city council and be recorded in the public records of the county, if satisfactory to the city council. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-109. - Single-family residential patio detached (R-1P) district. 
Land Use Category 	Moderate Single-Family Residential 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	8 dwelling units/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	5,400 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	50 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	100 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	1,500 sq. ft. 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	25 ft. 
 Side ..... 	5 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	20 ft. 
Minimum Setbacks — Accessory Bldgs. 	
 Front ..... 	25 ft. 
 Side ..... 	5 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	5 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) Includes Accessory Buildings ..... 	40% 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	70% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	30% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	2/30 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	50 ft. 
See next page for typical site plan. 
 
 

Figure 5. Typical R-1P Site Plan 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-110. - Townhouse residential (R-TH) district. 
Land Use Category 	Medium Density Residential 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	12 dwelling units/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	2,250 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	25 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	90 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	
 2 bedroom ..... 	1,350 sq. ft. 
 3 bedroom ..... 	1,500 sq. ft. 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front (includes parking and sidewalks) ..... 	30 ft. 
 Side ..... 	0 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	20 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Building Groups ..... 	20 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) ..... 	40% 
Accessory Buildings ..... 	None Allowed 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	60% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	40% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	15% 
Common Recreational Facility Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	50 ft. 
 Side ..... 	15 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	20 ft. 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	2/30 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	200 ft. 
Minimum Size of Development (net) ..... 	1 acre 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	100 ft. 
Minimum Street Greenbelt ..... 	10 ft. 
See next page for typical site plan. 
 
 

Figure 6. Typical R-TH Site Plan 
(a)  Generally. Townhouses are single-family dwelling units separated by a common fire wall which extends at least to the roof line and serviced by separate utilities. 
(1)  Access for garbage and waste collection, firefighting and utility services shall be provided and be proper and adequate for said purposes. 
(2)  Easements for access shall be dedicated as required and/or necessary and shall not be fenced. 
(3)  At least ten feet of the rear setback must remain landscaped area. 
(4)  Roofed terraces may not encroach more than ten feet into the rear setback. 
(b)  Ownership. In addition to complying with all applicable sections of this chapter, townhouse developments shall comply with one of the following methods of land transfer of ownership: 
(1)  The subdivision of the whole tract into individual parcels in accordance with this chapter, together with the platting of property for record in accordance with the state plat law and applicable ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Providing for the development of the entire tract in accordance with this chapter, retaining, however, title to all of the lands in the name of the condominium corporation and providing for all usual condominium documents and procedures. 
(3)  Providing for the development of the entire tract in accordance with this chapter, retaining, however, title to all of the lands in single ownership by recording a duly executed unity of title in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the Miami-Dade county, thereby stipulating that the tract shall not be eligible for further subdivision. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-111. - Multi-family residential (R-M1) district. 
Land Use Category 	Medium Density Residential 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	16 dwelling units/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	100 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	200 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	800 sq. ft. 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	25 ft. 
 Side ..... 	15 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	25 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	15 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) ..... 	40% 
Accessory Buildings ..... 	None Allowed 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	60% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	40% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	30% 
Common Recreational Facility Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	50 ft. 
 Side ..... 	15 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	20 ft. 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	2/30 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	1 acre 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	100 ft. 
See next page for typical site plan. 
 
 

Figure 7. Typical R-M1 Site Plan 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-112. - Multi-family residential (R-M2) district. 
Land Use Category 	High Density Residential 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	25 dwelling units/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	150 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	200 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	800 sq. ft. 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	50 ft. 
 Side ..... 	25 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	25 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	40 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	15 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) ..... 	30% 
Accessory Buildings ..... 	None Allowed 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	60% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	40% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	30% 
Common Recreational Facility Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	50 ft. 
 Side ..... 	15 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	20 ft. 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	5/60 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	1 acre 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	150 ft. 
See next page for typical site plan. 
 
 

Figure 8. Typical R-M2 Site Plan 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Secs. 78-113—78-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 78-115. - Neighborhood business (B-1) district. 
Land Use Category 	Neighborhood Retail 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	7,500 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	50 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	125 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	50 ft. (if parking is in front) 
	20 ft. (if no parking in front) 
 Side ..... 	15 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	25 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	20 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	15 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) ..... 	40% 
Accessory Buildings ..... 	None Allowed 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio ..... 	0.8 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	75% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	25% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	2/30 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	7,500 sq. ft. 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	50 ft. 
 
See next page for typical site plan.  

Figure 9. Typical B-1 Site Plan 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-116. - General business (B-2) district. 
Land Use Category 	General Business 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	10,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	80 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	120 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	50 ft. (if parking in front) 
	20 ft. (if no parking in front) 
 Side ..... 	0 ft. if adjacent to Business or Industrial uses 
	5 ft. if side wall has openings 
	25 ft. if abutting residential 
 Side street ..... 	25 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	10 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	0 or 10 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) ..... 	40% 
Accessory Buildings ..... 	None Allowed 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio ..... 	1.2 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	70% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	30% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	3/40 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	10,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	80 ft. 
See next page for typical site plan. 
 
 

Figure 10. Typical B-2 Site Plan 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-117. - Commercial business (B-3) district. 
Land Use Category 	Commercial 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	10,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	80 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	120 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	50 ft. (if parking in front) 
	20 ft. (if no parking in front) 
 Side ..... 	0 ft. if adjacent to Business or Industrial uses 
	5 ft. if side wall has openings 
	25 ft. if abutting residential 
 Side street ..... 	25 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	0 ft. if adjacent to Business or Industrial uses 
	5 ft. if rear wall has openings 
	25 ft. if abutting residential 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	0 or 10 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) ..... 	50% 
Accessory Buildings ..... 	None Allowed 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio ..... 	1.5 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	85% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	15% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	3/40 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	10,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	80 ft. 
 
See next page for typical site plan. 
 
Figure 11. Typical B-3 Site Plan 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-118. - Light industrial (IN-1) district. 
Land Use Category 	Industrial 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	12,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	100 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	120 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	20 ft. 
 Side ..... 	0 ft. if adjacent to Business or Industrial uses 
	5 ft. if side wall has openings 
 Side street ..... 	25 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	15 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	0 or 10 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) ..... 	50% 
Accessory Buildings ..... 	None Allowed 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio ..... 	1.5 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	85% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	15% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	3/50 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	12,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	100 ft. 
 
See next page for typical site plan. 
 
Figure 12. Typical IN-1 Site Plan 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2020-08, § 1, 3-3-20)  
Sec. 78-119. - Heavy industrial (IN-2) district. 
Land Use Category 	Industrial 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	12,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	100 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	120 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	20 ft. 
 Side ..... 	5 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	15 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	20 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) ..... 	50% 
Accessory Buildings ..... 	None Allowed 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio ..... 	1.5 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	85% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	15% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	3/50 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	12,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	100 ft. 
 
See next page for typical site plan. 
 
Figure 13. Typical IN-2 Site Plan 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2020-08, § 1, 3-3-20)  
Sec. 78-120. - Controlled industrial (IN-C) district. 
Land Use Category 	Industrial 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	10,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	80 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	120 ft. 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	30 ft. 
 Side ..... 	0 ft. if adjacent to Business or Industrial uses 
	5 ft. if side wall has openings 
 Side street ..... 	25 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	0 ft. if adjacent to Business or Industrial uses 
	5 ft. if side wall has openings 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	0 or 10 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) ..... 	50% 
Accessory Buildings ..... 	None Allowed 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio ..... 	1.5 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	85% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	15% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	3/50 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	10,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	80 ft. 
See next page for typical site plan. 
 
 
Figure 14. Typical IN-C Site Plan 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2020-08, § 1, 3-3-20)  
Secs. 78-121—78-124. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - OTHER ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 78-125. - Community facilities (CF) district. 
Land Use Category 	Community Facilities 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	25 ft. 
 Side ..... 	10 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	25 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	20 ft. 
Minimum spacing Between Buildings ..... 	10 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) ..... 	50% 
Accessory Buildings ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio ..... 	1.0 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	70% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	30% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	3/40 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	N/A 
 
Typical site plan CF—N/A 
No parking areas shall be located within 15 feet of residentially zoned property or within 5 feet of non-residentially zoned property. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-126. - Parks and open space and water (POS) district. 
Land Use Category 	Parks and Open Space and Water 
Maximum Density (net) ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Area (net) ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Width ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Lot Depth ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Dwelling Size ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Setbacks 	
 Front ..... 	25 ft. 
 Side ..... 	10 ft. 
 Side street ..... 	15 ft. 
 Rear ..... 	15 ft. 
Minimum Spacing Between Buildings ..... 	10 ft. 
Maximum Building Lot Coverage (Percent) ..... 	40% 
Accessory Buildings ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio ..... 	1.0 
Maximum Impervious ..... 	60% 
Minimum Landscaped/Open Space ..... 	40% 
Minimum Common Open Space ..... 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) ..... 	3/40 ft. to parapet 
Maximum Group Length ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Size of Development ..... 	N/A 
Minimum Street Frontage ..... 	N/A 
 
Typical site plan CF—N/A 
No parking areas shall be located within 15 feet of residentially zoned property or within 5 feet of non-residentially zoned property. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-127. - Planned unit development (PUD) district. 
Planned unit developments are single unified developments built according to specific and detailed plans which allow a mix of uses but which are substantially related, compatible or complementary. PUD plans include not only streets, utilities, lots and building location and the like, but also site plans for all buildings as are intended to be located, constructed, used, and related to each other, and plans for other uses and improvements on the land as related to the buildings. A PUD includes a program for the provision, operation, and maintenance of such areas, facilities, and improvements as will be for common use by some or all of the occupants of the PUD district, but which will not be provided, operated, or maintained at general public expense. 
See section 78-54, "Planned unit development district (PUD) uses", for all permitted, permitted similar, accessory and special exception uses for this district. 
Land use category: All except for estate and low density single-family residential uses and within industrial the heavy industrial (IN-2) district. 
Standards: Development standards shall be dictated by the proposed underlying land uses and applicable zoning districts. 
Minimum size of development: 5 acres 
Typical site plan PUD—N/A 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-128. - Mixed use residential commercial district (MU) and mixed use entertainment (MU-E) district. 
Mixed use developments are unified developments, built according to specific and detailed plans which allow a mix of uses but which are substantially related, compatible or complementary. Mixed use developments shall emphasize pedestrian use and accessibility through urban design principals as referenced in the City of Hialeah Gardens Design Guidelines Ordinance, and as may be amended from time to time. Additionally, all buildings shall be of a cohesive design. 
See section 78-55, mixed use residential commercial district (MU) and mixed use entertainment district (MU-E) uses for all permitted, permitted similar, accessory and special exception uses for this district. 
Land use category: MU—medium (R-TH only) and high density residential, neighborhood retail and general business; MU-E—neighborhood, general and commercial business and industrial. 
The MU district shall be allowed only on parcels contiguous to section line and other major access roads, including frontage roadways, and shall promote connectivity to the surrounding roadway network. 
Standards: 
For the MU district, any residential component shall be no greater than 75 percent or less than 40 percent of the gross floor area of the development. Commercial components shall be no greater than 60 percent or less than 25 percent of the gross floor area. 
The maximum number of units allowed shall be based on the density of the residential units proposed X the net acreage of the parcel X the percentage of the residential component as enumerated above. 
Residential uses may be located on any floor while commercial uses shall be restricted to the ground floor of a multi-story building. 
For the MU-E district, specific entertainment, restaurant or retail uses shall be allowed that are deemed appropriate by the chief zoning official. 
Commercial loading areas and trash enclosures shall be located way from residential units and be substantially screened. 
Parking, landscaping and signage requirements shall be regulated by the respective articles of this chapter. 
Recreation and open space shall be provided as required based on the type of residential unit being proposed. 
Maximum Building Height (stories/feet) 	5/60 ft. to parapet 
Minimum Size of Development 	5 acres 
 
Parking areas shall not be located within 15 feet of residentially zoned property or within five feet of non-residentially zoned property. Parking garages shall be substantially screened. 
Typical site plan MU and MU-E—N/A 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC USES 
 
Sec. 78-130. - Specific use requirements. 
Adult day care centers: 
a.  Shall additionally be regulated by F.S. ch. 400, "Nursing Homes and Related Health Care Facilities", Part V, "Adult Day Care Centers" (§§ 400.55 — 400.564). 
Adult living facilities: 
a.  Shall additionally be regulated by F.S. ch. 400, "Nursing Homes and Related Health Care Facilities", Part III, "Assisted Living Facilities" (§§ 400.401—400.454). 
Attendant or hand car wash (non-commercial vehicles only): 
a.  The facility must have a working oil/sand interceptor to which all drainage from the car wash must flow. 
b.  The hours of operation may be no longer than the principal use. 
c.  All unused supplies shall be screened from the public. 
d.  The facility shall provide at least two waiting spaces per service position, separated from access drives and internal drive aisles. In addition, there shall be one parking space per attendant. 
e.  The facility shall not exceed 600 square feet. 
f.  The facility shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
g.  The applicant must provide written consent from the property owner to the city. 
Automatic car wash: 
a.  The facility shall not be located closer than 50 feet to any residential zoning district. 
b.  The facility shall be located on a public street and shall provide ingress and egress so as to minimize traffic congestion. 
c.  The facility shall provide at least five off-street waiting spaces on the lot in the 
moving lane to the automatic car wash building entrance so as to prevent blocking any public streets. 
d.  The facility shall be located either to the side or rear of the principal building. 
e.  The maximum capacity shall be only one vehicle per wash cycle. 
f.  The facility must have a working oil/sand interceptor to which all drainage from the car wash must flow. 
g.  The hours of operation may be no longer than the principal use. 
h.  Screening of vehicle opening. A wall, berm, or similar opaque visual buffer shall be provided for the facility opening when it is oriented toward the streetside of the lot. 
Automobile gas and/or service stations: 
a.  Entrances and exits for vehicles shall not be closer than 30 feet to any intersection. 
b.  Lots shall not be less than 10,000 square feet with a minimum frontage of 100 feet. 
c.  All oil drainage pits and hydraulic lifts shall be located within an enclosed structure. 
d.  All permitted mechanical repair work shall be conducted within an enclosed structure. 
e.  Service stations shall have their gasoline pumps set back at least 30 feet from any property or street line. 
f.  The following restrictions shall apply to storage of vehicles: 
1.  Not more than one unlicensed vehicle shall be stored on the premises. 
2.  Not more than ten licensed vehicles shall be stacked or parked for immediate servicing or fueling. Other licensed vehicles may be stored provided that they are parked in the side or rear yard and screened from view from the public right-of-way in accordance with section 78-86, pertaining to buffer and screening requirements. 
g.  In any instance where this use adjoins a residential zoning district, screening shall be provided in accordance with section 78-86, pertaining to buffer and screening requirements. 
Auto and truck repairs and paint and body shops: 
a.  This use shall be permitted in the B-3 and IN-1 zoning districts. 
b.  The minimum floor area shall be 650 square feet in the South and Central Districts and 1,000 square feet on the Northwest District. 
c.  This use shall only be conducted in a completely enclosed structure aside from the normal ingress-egress accessibility. 
d.  No vehicles for repair shall be parked along streets, in vacant lots, visitor parking areas or in driveways. 
e.  A minimum of three parking spaces for visitors and employees shall be provided. 
f.  Permits must be obtained, as applicable, from the (DERM) Department of Environmental Resource Management, Miami-Dade Fire-Rescue Department and City of Hialeah Gardens Building Department prior to a City of Hialeah Gardens Local Business Tax Receipt being issued or renewed. 
g.  It shall be unlawful to deposit, store, keep or maintain junk or trash or junk yards, salvage facilities, or wrecking yards in any vacant lot or parcel, along streets, or in visitor parking areas or along driveways. 
h.  All materials and products associated with this use shall be stored within the building, in a walled, completely enclosed area. 
i.  Spray painting shall only be permitted within an enclosed building which is equipped with an approved spray booth. 
Automobile and truck sales for new and/or used vehicles including as ancillary uses automobile and truck rentals, wholesale distribution, parts sales, body work and painting and automobile repairs: 
a.  This use shall be permitted in the B-3 and IN-1 zoning districts. 
b.  The minimum floor area shall be 1,300 square feet in the Central and South Districts and 3,000 square feet in the Northwest District. Additionally, the minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet in the B-3 and 12,000 square feet in the IN-1 zoning districts. 
c.  No more than 20 percent of the total gross building area shall be devoted to repair/service bays. 
d.  A continuous, densely planted greenbelt of not less than 15 feet in width, penetrated only at points approved by the chief zoning official and public works department for ingress and egress to the property, shall be provided along all property lines abutting public rights-of-way or residential zoning districts. Said greenbelt shall have shade trees planted at a maximum spacing of 30 feet on center. In addition, a hedge with a minimum of three feet in height and spaced 24 inches on center shall be planted. 
e.  A minimum of 20 percent of the net lot area of the site shall be developed as landscaped open space. 
f.  This use shall be located only on major access roads, including major roadways (three or more lanes) and frontage roadways serving limited access highways and expressways. 
g.  No vehicles for sale, rental or repair shall be parked on streets, in vacant lots, or in visitor parking spaces. 
h.  Outdoor paging or speaker systems are prohibited. 
i.  Outdoor lighting shall be designed to avoid light spilling beyond the site boundaries. 
j.  Vehicular test drives shall be prohibited on local residential streets. 
k.  All repair work must be conducted indoors. 
l.  Attention attracting devices, such as blinking or flashing lights, streamer lights, pennants, banners, streamers and all fluttering, spinning advertising devices (either mobile or stationary) are prohibited, except as permitted under point of sale sign regulations. 
m.  The applicant for this use must first obtain a certificate of use, which shall be automatically renewable yearly only upon compliance with all terms and conditions contained herein. All dealers with repair and/or body shops shall obtain a separate local business tax receipt. 
n.  All DERM approvals shall be obtained prior to the issuance of the local business tax receipt. 
o.  The applicant shall provide the city with proof of business registration from the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles. 
Cabinet working and carpentry shops: 
a.  Minimum size requirement is two bays or 1,000 square feet for the Northwest district only. 
Child day care family homes or centers: 
a.  Shall additionally be regulated by either F.S. § 402.302(2) or (7), based on the number of children requested. 
Collection, recycling and processing facilities: 
a.  Definitions: 
1.  Processing: the preparation of material for efficient shipment or to an end-user's specifications by such means as baling, compacting, flattening, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, or cleaning. 
2.  Recycling unit: a machine providing automatic compensation to the customer engaged in the collection and processing of recyclable or reusable material, including but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture or reconstruction. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. 
b.  General requirements: 
1.  Typical uses for a recycling unit include paper salvage or aluminum can recycling operations, but do not include the collection and sale of used clothing. 
2.  All recyclable materials collected shall be stored within an enclosed structure. 
3.  Recyclable material shall not be displayed for sale outside the recycling unit, regardless of the particular regulations of the applicable zoning district. 
4.  Only three recycling units will be permitted in the city at any one time based upon city council approval. 
c.  Location: Recycling units shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any residential zoning district, as measured from the unit to the edge of the residential property, and a minimum of 1,000 feet from another recycling unit. 
d.  Parking. Recycling units shall provide one parking space for loading and an additional one for employees. In no event shall required off-street parking be utilized for the recycling unit. 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 42. 
Educational facilities (charter and/or private): 
a.  Shall be additionally regulated by the Miami-Dade County School Board and/or Miami-Dade County Chapter 33 XA "Educational and Child Care Facilities, Nonpublic." 
Heavy equipment repair and sales: 
a.  This use shall permitted in the B-3 and IN-1 zoning districts. 
b.  The minimum floor area shall be 1,300 square feet in the South and Central Districts and 3,000 square feet on the Northwest District. Additionally, the minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet in the B-3 and 12,000 square feet in the IN-1 zoning districts. 
c.  This use shall only be conducted in a completely enclosed structure aside from the normal ingress-egress accessibility. 
d.  No heavy equipment shall be parked or new or used parts stored alongside streets, on vacant lots without first obtaining site plan approval or in visitor 7 parking areas. 
e.  A minimum of three parking spaces for visitors and employees shall be provided. 
f.  Permits must be obtained from the Department of Environmental Resource Management (DERM), Miami-Dade County Fire-Rescue Department, Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services and the City of Hialeah Gardens' Building Department prior to the City of Hialeah Gardens' Local Business Tax Receipt being issued or renewed. 
g.  Spray painting shall only be permitted within an enclosed building which is equipped with an approved spray booth. 
h.  All materials and products associated with this use shall be stored within the building, in a walled, completely enclosed area. 
Cross reference— Location of sexually oriented businesses in the business, BU-1 District, § 18-96. 
Hospital use: 
a.  Any structured parking shall not count as part of the floor area, but shall be counted in computing building height and number of stories. 
b.  Enclosed or non-enclosed mall areas shall not count as part of the floor area or as part of the lot coverage for building computation purposes. 
c.  Such uses shall be located on sites having frontage on a major access road, including major roadways (three (3) or more lanes), section or half section line roads, and/or frontage roadways serving limited access highways and expressways. 
Hotel and motel use: 
a.  Accessory uses for hotel and motel use: 
1.  Business or commercial establishments of the B-1 type, bars and cabarets shall be permitted in hotels provided they are located within the principal building. 
Such business or commercial establishments and bars in this district shall be entered only through the lobby except when the entrance opens into a courtyard or patio (away from the street side) which is enclosed and not visible from the street. However, a fire door or emergency exit shall be permitted. 
2.  Hotels and motels with 150 or more guest rooms may have liquor package service on the premises for the accommodation and use of their guests only, provided the operation housing such use is entered only through the lobby and does not have the appearance of commercial activity as viewed from the highway or street. No advertisement of the use is permitted which can be seen from the outside of the building. 
Houses of worship: 
a.  Applications for houses of worship shall contain documentation for a site plan review, including a site development plan showing all structures, roadways, pathwalks, parking areas, recreation areas, utility and exterior lighting installations, and landscaping on the site, all existing structures and uses within 200 feet of the site boundaries, and any other elements as may be deemed essential by the city. The following regulations shall be utilized as guidelines in reviewing the proposed development: 
1.  Site size. A minimum site size of 60,000 square feet with a minimum lot width of 150 feet for stand alone structures. 
2.  Lot, yard and bulk requirements. The development should not exceed two stories or 25 feet in height, a maximum lot coverage of 30 percent, or violate the least restrictive yard regulations for the district in which it is located. However, the city may permit a variance of height for a spire or unusual roof structure form in excess of the height requirements for the district in which it is located. 
Nursing homes: 
a.  Applications for nursing homes shall be additionally regulated pursuant to F.S. ch. 400, "Nursing Homes and Related Health Care Facilities", Part II, "Nursing Homes". 
Pharmaceutical storage: 
a.  That the applicant secure a license from the State of Florida Department of Health for such pharmaceutical storage. 
b.  That the pharmaceutical storage area be air conditioned to continuously control temperature and humidity as required by the State of Florida Department of Health for pharmaceutical products. 
c.  That the premises be secured with a security system. 
Private clubs: 
a.  Applications for private clubs shall contain documentation for a site plan review, including a site development plan showing all structures, roadways, pathwalks, parking areas, recreation areas, utility and exterior lighting installations, and landscaping on the site, all existing structures and uses within 200 feet of the site boundaries, and any other elements as may be deemed essential by the city. The following regulations shall be utilized as guidelines in reviewing the proposed development: 
1.  Site size. A minimum site size of 60,000 square feet with a minimum lot width of 150 feet for stand alone structures. 
2.  Lot, yard and bulk requirements. The development should not exceed two stories or 25 feet in height, a maximum lot coverage of 30 percent, or violate the least restrictive yard regulations for the district in which it is located. 
Salesrooms and storage showroom-wholesale: 
a.  Salesrooms and showrooms, subject to the prohibitions and limitations in subsection b. in this section, incorporated as a part of a permitted industrial use upon compliance with the following conditions: 
1.  Any industrial use and its related retail sales/showroom uses in different units or bays within the same building must be under one certificate of use and occupancy, and must be connected by communicating doors between units or bays. 
2.  Only merchandise, which is warehoused, stored, manufactured or assembled on the premises, can be sold on a retail basis. 
3.  The size of retail sales/showroom floor area must be less than 40 percent of the total floor area of the subject premises under a single certificate of use and occupancy. Outside storage areas are to be excluded from consideration in determining the percentage of uses. 
4.  A solid wall shall separate retail sales/showroom area from the balance of the industrial area to prevent public access to the industrial portion of the building. The industrial use area shall not be accessible to the general public. 
5.  A declaration of use in a form to be approved by the city's chief zoning official shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy specifying compliance with the foregoing conditions. Said declaration of use shall include a floor plan for the intended use as required by the planning and zoning department. 
b.  Subsection (a) above is intended to permit retail salesrooms and showrooms in recognition of the compatibility and reasonableness of incorporating certain retail uses into the other uses permitted in this district. To assure said compatibility and reasonableness, the retail uses enumerated, in the B-1 zoning district and uses similar thereto, shall be permitted. 
Telecommunications hubs: 
a.  At least 85 percent of the gross floor area of a telecommunications hub building shall be designated for equipment or machinery; no more than 15 percent of the gross floor area shall be designated for employees and support personnel. 
b.  A declaration of use in a form meeting with the approval of the city's chief zoning official specifying compliance with the conditions set forth above, shall be submitted and approved by the department prior to the issuance of a building permit. Said declaration of use shall include a floor plan and site plan for the intended use. 
Upholstery and furniture repair: 
a.  Minimum size requirement is two bays or 1,000 square feet for the Northwest District only. 
Warehouse for sale of merchandise to membership or home improvement center: 
a.  The area of such occupancy shall contain no less than 80,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  The subject use shall be located on a major or minor roadway as depicted on the adopted land use plan map and shall be within one-quarter mile of that roadway's intersection with another major or minor roadway. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-09)  
Sec. 78-131. - Unity of title or covenant in lieu thereof required in business and industrial zoning districts for multiple buildings on one parcel. 
(a)  Unity of title; covenant in lieu thereof. In the B-1, B-2, B-3, IN-1, IN-2, and IN-C districts, all applications for building permits where multiple buildings are proposed for a single site shall be accompanied by one of the following documents as specified by the chief zoning official: 
(1)  A unity of title document approved for legal form and sufficiency by the city attorney, which shall be recorded and run with the land and be binding upon the heirs, successors, personal representatives and assigns, and upon all mortgagees or lessees and others presently or in the future having any interest in the property; or 
(2)  A declaration of restrictive covenants, approved for legal form and sufficiency by the city attorney, which shall be recorded and run with the land and be binding upon the heirs, successors, personal representatives, and assigns, and upon all mortgagees and lessees and others presently or in the future having any interest in the property. The declaration shall contain the following necessary elements: 
a.  That the subject site will be developed in substantial accordance with the approved site plan. That no modification shall be effectuated without the written consent of the owner of the phase or portion of the property for which modification is sought, and the chief zoning official; provided the official finds that the modification would not generate excessive noise or traffic, tend to create a fire or other equally or greater dangerous hazard, or provoke excessive overcrowding of people, or tend to provoke a nuisance, or be incompatible with the area concerned, when considering the necessity and reasonableness of the modification in relation to the present and future development of the area concerned. Should the chief zoning official withhold such approval, the then owner of the phase or portion of the property for which modification is sought shall be permitted to seek such modification by application to modify the plan or covenant at public hearing before the city council. 
b.  That if the subject property is to be developed in phases, then each phase will be developed in substantial accordance with the site plan. 
c.  That in the event of multiple ownerships of the property subsequent to site plan approval, each of the owners is bound by the terms, provisions, and conditions of the declaration of restrictive covenants. The owner shall further agree that he or she will not convey portions of the subject property to such other parties unless and until the owner and such other party (parties) shall have executed and mutually delivered, in recordable form, an instrument to be known as an "easement and operating agreement" which shall contain, among other things: 
1.  Easements in the common area of each parcel for ingress and egress from the other parcels; 
2.  Easements in the common area of each parcel for the passage and parking of vehicles; 
3.  Easements in the common area of each parcel for the passage and accommodation of pedestrians; 
4.  Easements for access roads across the common area of each parcel to public and private roadways; 
5.  Easements for the installation, use, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement, relocation, and removal of utility facilities in appropriate areas in each such parcel; 
6.  Easements of each such parcel for construction of buildings and improvements in favor of each such other parcel; 
7.  Easements upon each such parcel in favor of each adjoining parcel for the installation, use, maintenance, repair, replacement, and removal of common construction improvements such as footings, supports, and foundations; 
8.  Easements on each parcel for attachment of buildings; 
9.  Easements on each parcel for building overhangs and other overhangs and projections encroaching upon such parcel from adjoining parcel such as, by way of example, marquees, canopies, lights, lighting devices, awnings, wing walls and the like; 
10.  Appropriate reservation of rights to grant easements to utility companies; 
11.  Appropriate reservation of rights to road right-of-ways and curb cuts; 
12.  Easements in favor of each such parcel for pedestrian and vehicular traffic over dedicated private ring roads and access roads; and 
13.  Appropriate agreements between the owners of the several parcels as to the obligation to maintain and repair all private roadways, parking facilities, common areas and common facilities and the like. 
These provisions or portions thereof may be waived by the chief zoning official if they are not applicable to the subject property. In addition, such easement and operating agreement shall contain such other provisions with respect to the operation, maintenance and development of the property as to which the parties thereto may agree, all to the end that although the property may have several owners, it will be constructed, conveyed, maintained and operated in accordance with the approved site plan. 
d.  The declaration of restrictive covenants shall be in effect for a period of 30 years from the date the documents are recorded in the public records of Miami Dade County, Florida, after which time they shall be extended automatically for successive periods of ten years unless released in writing by the owners and the chief zoning official, acting for and on behalf of the city upon the demonstration and affirmative finding that the same is no longer necessary to preserve and protect the property for the purposes herein intended. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Secs. 78-132—78-139. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TRANSPORTATION, PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 78-140. - Transportation system design. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. This section establishes minimum requirements applicable to the transportation system, including public and private streets, bikeways, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, parking and loading areas, and access control to and from public streets. The standards in this section are intended to minimize the traffic impacts of development, and to assure that all developments adequately and safely provide for the storage and movement of vehicles consistent with good engineering and development design practices. 
(b)  Compliance with county standards. All required elements of the transportation system shall be provided in compliance with the engineering design and construction standards contained in the Public Works Manual of Miami-Dade County, latest issue, and related standards. 
(c)  Street classification system. 
(1)  Generally. 
a.  All streets (public and private) in the city are classified and mapped according to function served in order to allow for regulation of access, road and right-of-way widths, circulation patterns, design speed, and construction standard. 
b.  Streets that are to be dedicated to the city are classified in a street hierarchy system with design tailored to function. The street hierarchy system shall be defined by road function and average daily traffic (ADT), calculated by trip generation rates prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Trip generation rates from other sources may be used if the developer demonstrates the alternative source better reflects local conditions. 
c.  When a street continues an existing street that previously terminated outside the subdivision, or is a street that will be continued beyond the subdivision or development at some future time, the classification of the street will be based upon the street in its entirety, both within and outside of the subdivision or development. 
d.  All development proposals containing new streets or taking access from existing streets shall conform to the standards and criteria contained in this section. 
(2)  Arterial roads. This category of street is subdivided into principal arterial road and minor arterial road. Arterial roads provide links between communities or to limited access expressways. Arterial roads limit direct access from abutting properties except for regionally significant uses. No parking is allowed on any arterials. Each subcategory of roads shall conform to the usage, design and construction standards of the county. 
a.  Principal arterial. These roads include the Palmetto expressway and U.S. Highway 27. Principal arterials provide regional and areawide accessibility at high speeds. These controlled access facilities shall be under the jurisdiction of a state or county agency. Principal arterials shall have a design speed of 45 miles per hour. The minimum acceptable peak hour level of service standard shall be LOS "D." 
b.  Minor arterial. These roads link community districts to regional or state highways. Minor arterials may also give direct access to regionally significant land uses. These roads may take access from other arterials or freeways and may give access to any lower order nonresidential street type. Lots of less than 150 feet in width may not take access from a minor arterial. Minor arterials shall have a design speed of 45 miles per hour. The minimum level of service standard shall be LOS "D." 
(3)  Collector roads. Collector roads provide access to residential or nonresidential uses and connect lower order streets to arterial streets. Design speeds and average daily traffic volumes will be higher than for lower order streets. 
a.  Major collector. These streets serve as major community or commercial facilities and may carry through traffic. Major collector streets may take access from other major collectors and arterials, and may give access to any same or lower order street type. Lots of less than 50 feet in width may not take access from a major collector. Major collectors shall have a design speed of 35 miles per hour. Major collectors shall have a minimum ADT of 7,000. The minimum level of service standard shall be LOS "D." No parking is allowed on major collectors. 
b.  Residential collector. Where possible, this order of street should be a half-section road. It may provide access for abutting land uses although the number of curb cuts shall be controlled by approved site plan design. Lots of less than 40 feet in width may not take access from a residential collector. This order shall have a maximum ADT of 2,000 and a design speed of 30 miles per hour. 
(4)  Local streets. Local streets provide direct access to residential development, but may give access to nonresidential uses, provided average daily traffic (ADT) volume generated by the nonresidential use does not exceed applicable standards for the affected streets. All local streets should be designed to minimize unnecessary and/or speeding traffic. Each local street shall be classified and designed for its entire length to meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  A local street is a frontage street which provides direct access to abutting properties and is designed to carry no more traffic than is generated on the street itself. 
b.  The design speed for local streets is 15 to 25 miles per hour. 
c.  Local streets in the north and central districts shall have a maximum ADT of 500. 
d.  Local north-south streets in the north district shall not carry through traffic from NW 137th Street to Frontage Road. 
e.  A cul-de-sac shall serve a maximum of 25 dwelling units and a have maximum ADT of 250. 
f.  When a ten-foot moving lane is provided, two eight-foot parking lanes shall be provided, except that in apartment house areas, two moving lanes should be provided. 
(d)  Rights-of-way. 
(1)  Right-of-way widths. Right-of-way requirements for road construction shall be as specified in the Public Works Manual of Miami-Dade County. The right-of-way shall be measured from lot line to lot line. 
(2)  Right-of-way requirements. Right-of-way locations for collector and arterial roads are identified in the transportation circulation map of the city, on file in the zoning department. Where roadway construction, improvement, or reconstruction is not required to serve the needs of the proposed development project, future rights-of-way shall nevertheless be reserved for future use. 
(3)  Protection and use of right-of-way. 
a.  No encroachment shall be permitted into existing rights-of-way, except for temporary use authorized by the city. 
b.  Use of the right-of-way for public or private utilities, including but not limited to sanitary sewer, potable water, telephone wires, cable television wires, gas lines, or electricity transmission, shall be allowed subject to placement specifications in city or other applicable regulations. 
c.  Sidewalks and bicycle ways shall be located within the right-of-way. 
(4)  Vacation of rights-of-way. Applications to vacate a right-of-way shall not be approved unless the city council finds that all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  The requested vacation is consistent with the transportation circulation map of the city. 
b.  The right-of-way does not provide the sole access to any property. 
c.  The requested vacation would not jeopardize the current or future location of any utility. 
d.  The requested vacation is not detrimental to the public interest, and provides a positive benefit to the city. 
(e)  Street design standards. 
(1)  General design standards. 
a.  All streets in a new development shall be designed and constructed pursuant to the standards in chapter 28, pertaining to subdivisions, Code of Miami-Dade County. Streets shall be dedicated to the city upon completion, inspection, and acceptance by the city. 
b.  Private streets may be allowed within developments that will remain under common ownership, provided they are designed and constructed pursuant to the standards in chapter 28, pertaining to subdivisions, Code of Miami-Dade County. 
c.  Streets in proposed subdivisions shall be connected to rights-of-way in adjacent areas to allow proper inter-neighborhood traffic flow by means of a collector street. If adjacent lands are unplatted, stub-outs in the new development shall be provided for future connection to the adjacent unplatted land. 
d.  Local streets shall be arranged to discourage through traffic. 
e.  The crown of all roads shall be six feet, six inches above sea level. 
f.  Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and in no case shall be less than 75 degrees. 
g.  New intersections along one side of an existing street shall, where possible, coincide with existing intersections. Where an offset (jog) is necessary at an intersection, the distance between centerlines of the intersecting streets shall be no less than 150 feet. 
h.  No two streets may intersect with any other street on the same side at a distance of less than 400 feet measured from centerline to centerline of the intersecting street. When the intersected street is an arterial, the distance between intersecting streets shall be no less than 1,000 feet. 
(2)  Curbing requirement. 
a.  Except in the R-TH and R-M1 zoning districts where valley gutters may be used, curbing shall be required for the purposes of drainage, safety, and delineation and protection of pavement edge along streets in the following cases: 
1.  Along designated parking lanes. 
2.  Where the surface drainage plan requires curbing to channel stormwater. 
3.  Where narrow lots averaging less than 40 feet in width take direct access from a street upon which no on-street parking is allowed. 
b.  All curbing shall conform to the construction standards in Chapter 28, pertaining to subdivisions, Code of Miami-Dade County. 
(3)  Shoulders. Shoulders, where required, shall measure at least five feet in width and shall be required on each side of street and located within the right-of-way. Shoulders shall consist of stabilized turf or other material permitted by Chapter 28, pertaining to subdivisions, Code of Miami-Dade County. Shoulders and/or drainage swales are required as follows: 
a.  According to city public works department requirements on local and residential collector streets where necessary for stormwater management or road stabilization. 
b.  Where required, all residential streets shall provide two five-foot-wide shoulders. Shoulders should be grass surfaced except in circumstances where grass cannot be expected to survive. In no case shall the shoulders be paved. 
c.  Where shoulders are required by the Florida Department of Transportation. 
d.  On collector streets where curbing is not required. 
e.  On arterial streets where curbing is not required. 
(4)  Cul-de-sacs and turnarounds. Dimensions and design of the cul-de-sac moving lane and the turning radius or T configuration shall conform to the Miami-Dade County Public Works Manual. 
(5)  Stub streets. 
a.  Local and collector stub streets may be permitted only within subsections of a phased development for which the proposed street in its entirety has received final site plan approval. 
b.  Residential collector and higher order stub streets may be permitted or required by the city provided that the future expansion of the street is deemed desirable by the city or conforms to an adopted traffic circulation map. 
c.  Temporary turnarounds shall be provided for all stub streets providing access to five or more lots or housing units. Where four or fewer lots or units are being served, a sign indicating a dead-end street shall be posted. 
(6)  Clear visibility triangle. In order to provide a clear view of intersecting streets to the motorist, there shall be a triangular area of clear visibility formed by two intersecting streets or the intersection of a driveway and a street. The following standards shall be met: 
a.  Nothing shall be erected, placed, parked, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two feet and ten feet above the grade, measured at the centerline of the intersection. 
b.  The clear visibility triangle shall be formed by connecting a point on each street centerline, to be located at the distance from the intersection of the street centerlines indicated in subsection c. below of this section, and a third line connecting the two points. 
c.  The minimum distance from the intersection of the street centerlines for the various road classifications shall be as follows: 
Road classification 	Distance from street centerline intersection 
Driveway or local street 	100 feet 
Collector 	160 feet 
Arterial 	200 feet 
 
(7)  Signage and signalization. The developer shall deposit with the city sufficient funds to provide all necessary roadway signs as may be required by the city, based upon county or state signage standards. At least two street name signs shall be placed at each four-way street intersection, and one at each T intersection. Signs shall be installed near light standards and free of visual obstructions. The design of street name signs shall be consistent, in a style appropriate to the community, and of uniform size and color. 
(8)  Street trees. 
a.  Street trees shall be provided in accordance with the standards established in Article VII, Landscape Requirements. 
b.  No development shall be approved without reserving an easement, at the time of final plat approval, authorizing the city to plant shade trees within five feet of the required right-of-way boundary. No street shall be accepted for dedication until the easement required by this subsection has been provided. 
(9)  Blocks. 
a.  Where a tract of land is bounded by streets forming a block, such block shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. 
b.  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be consistent with adjacent areas. In no case shall block lengths in residential areas exceed 1,200 feet nor be less than 400 feet in length. 
(f)  Sidewalks and bikeways. 
(1)  When required. 
a.  Projects abutting collector or arterial facilities shall provide sidewalks adjacent to the collector or arterial roadway. Projects in neighborhood retail (B-1), business (B-2), high density residential (R-M2), medium density residential (R-TH and R-M1), moderate single-family residential (R-1Z and R-1P), PUD, MU or MU-E districts shall provide sidewalks. Location of sidewalks shall be consistent with planned roadway improvements. 
b.  All residential projects adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of an activity center comprised of office, service, school, or recreation activities shall provide pedestrian and bicycle access from the development to the activity center. 
c.  Pedestrian ways or crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide with a sidewalk meeting the requirements of this chapter, may be required by the technical review committee to be placed in the center of blocks more than 800 feet long where deemed necessary to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other facilities. 
(2)  Design and construction standards. Design and construction of sidewalks, bikeways, or other footpaths shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 28, pertaining to subdivisions, Code of Miami-Dade County unless required to conform to the city's urban design guidelines. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-141. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Applicability; computation; standards. 
(1)  Applicability. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for all development within the city. All parking areas and their access driveways shall be paved. The facilities shall be maintained as long as the use exists that the facilities were designed to serve. 
(2)  Computation. When the number of off-street parking spaces required by this chapter results in a fractional space, the fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded, and a fraction in excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space. 
(3)  Standards. 
a.  A standard parking space shall have minimum dimensions of nine feet in width by 19 feet in length for the parking of each automobile exclusive of access drives or aisles thereto. 
A parallel parking space shall have minimum dimensions of nine feet in width by 23 feet in length for the parking of each automobile. 
A standard motorcycle parking space shall be 4¼ feet wide and 9¼ feet long. 
The minimum width of an access drive shall be 12 feet. 
The minimum width of an aisle between opposing parking spaces shall be 24 feet. 
No tandem parking shall be permitted. 
b.  Streets or sidewalks may not be used for off-street parking purposes as defined in this section. Individual ingress and egress drives extending across the public sidewalks and curbs and connecting the off-street parking spaces to the public street areas shall not exceed a maximum of 12 feet for a one-way drive and 24 feet for a two-way drive. The design, number, and placement of these drives is subject to the approval of the city before being constructed. 
c.  Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the installation of a fully automatic parking facility in which the placement and removal of automobiles are accomplished wholly by machinery. 
d.  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided at the time of construction to meet any increase in density or intensity of use pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
e.  Parking spaces for all uses or structures shall be located on the same lot, and have the same land use district as the principal use or structure they are intended to serve. 
f.  In all residential districts, required parking spaces for single-family and two-family dwellings may be permitted in any setback areas or yards and shall be counted as meeting off-street parking requirements. All parking within the required front yard setback area shall be located in a driveway or turnaround. 
In all other districts for all permitted uses, approved permitted uses with site plan review or approved special exception uses, required front, street side, or street rear yards shall not be used for off-street parking except as permitted in this section; a maximum of 50 percent of the required yards may be utilized for off-street parking and other vehicular storage or circulation provided the plan for the use is approved by the city as provided for in subsection (a)(3)g of this section; each parking space shall have an adequate and substantial wheel stop located at least six feet from any abutting property line and parking area surfaces shall not extend closer than five feet from any abutting property line; all parking areas shall have each parking space and aisle marked; and all parking areas shall be landscaped. 
g.  Plans for ingress and egress to and from the off-street parking area, including a landscape plan, shall be subject to the approval of the city. In non-residential districts, there shall be no direct or back-up access between parking spaces and the street. No curbs or sidewalks may be cut or altered in any manner without a permit from the city and all other applicable county and/or state agencies. 
h.  When off-street parking facilities are located within a separate parking structure, the following conditions and restrictions shall apply: 
1.  The structure shall conform to all lot, yard and bulk requirements of the district in which it is located. 
2.  The parking facilities shall be designed so as to conform to all other provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances of the city. 
3.  All nonstructural portions of the exterior elevations, except for vehicular ingress and egress areas, shall, in addition to any required safety provisions, be screened by a material providing at least 50 percent opacity for the total area between deck levels. 
4.  When parking facilities are located on the roof of a parking structure the first four feet shall be screened. The height of the structure shall be measured to the top of the screening. 
(b)  Table of off-street parking requirements. 
_____ 
Use 	Parking Spaces Required per Unit of Measurement 
Single and Two-Family Dwelling Units 	Dwelling Units with: 
	1-2 Bedrooms — 2.0 
	3 or more Bedrooms — 3.0 
Townhouses 	Dwelling Units with: 
	1-2 Bedrooms — 2.0 
	3 or more Bedrooms — 3.0 
	plus .2 per Dwelling Unit for guest/visitor parking 
Multi-Family Dwelling Units 	2.2 per Dwelling Unit plus .2 per Dwelling Unit for guest/visitor parking 
Cultural, Social, Recreation and Entertainment 	Houses of Worship, Theaters, Auditoriums, Stadiums and Gymnasiums — .25 per seat 
	Banquet/Convention/Bingo Halls and Private Social Clubs — 1 per 200 square feet 
	Bowling Alleys or Karate/Dance/Health Studios — 1 per 200 square feet 
	Libraries, Art Museums and Other Cultural Facilities — 1 per 200 square feet 
	Open Recreation — 1 per 250 square feet 
	Private Swimming, Golf or Tennis Clubs — 1 per 500 square feet of floor area plus 4 per court, 1 per 100 square feet pool area and 6 per hole of golf 
Educational Facilities 	Day Care: 1 per faculty and staff plus 1 per 10 students 
	Kindergarten — Grade 8: 1 per faculty and staff plus 1 per 20 student stations 
	Grades 9 through 12 — 1 per faculty and staff plus 1.1 per 10 student stations 
Hospitals, Clinics and Rehabilitation Centers 	2 per bed 
Homes for the Aged, Convalescent Centers 	1 per bed 
Restaurants, including take-out, and Nightclubs 	.3 per seat or 1 per 150 square feet (whichever is greater) 
Lodging Establishments 	1.1 per room plus requirements for accessory and/or restaurant uses 
Office, Professional (includes medical and dental) 	1 per 250 square feet 
Retail: Grocery and Drug Stores, Banks, Post Offices, other similar uses and Shopping Centers 	1 per 250 square feet 
Membership Warehouses, Home Improvement Centers 	1 per 250 square feet 
Gas Stations/Mini Marts 	1 per 200 square feet (minimum 3 spaces) 
Plant Nursery 	8 for first acre, or fraction thereof, and 1 for each two acres thereafter 
Furniture Showrooms 	3 for first 2,500 square feet then 1 per 500 square thereafter 
Automotive Sales 	1 per 500 square feet 
Open lot Commercial Uses 	1 per 1,000 square feet of lot area, or fraction thereof, for first 5,000 square feet and 1 per 500 square feet thereafter 
Warehouse/Industrial Uses 	1 per 400 square feet (minimum 3 spaces) up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area and then one space for each additional 2,000 square feet of gross warehouse floor area. Office, retail and wholesale showroom areas provided in conjunction with the industrial use shall have parking spaces provided for such areas as otherwise contained in this section 
Wholesale Showrooms 	1 per 800 square feet 
Self-storage Facilities 	1 per 2,500 square feet 
 
NOTES: 
(1)  For residential districts, any room that has the potential to be utilized as a bedroom shall be considered when calculating the number of bedrooms for parking purposes. 
(2)  Gross floor area is used in calculating square feet. 
(3)  For uses not referenced but similar to one of the above categories the chief zoning official or designee shall determine the number of required parking spaces. 
(4)  If more than one use is within one building or development parking for said uses shall be calculated separately. 
(5)  Loading areas in front of warehouse buildings will not be counted towards parking requirements. 
_____
(c)  Special parking spaces. 
(1)  Parking for handicapped persons. Any parking area to be used by the general public shall provide suitable, paved and marked parking spaces for handicapped persons. The number, design, and location of these spaces shall be consistent with the standards contained in the Florida Building Code, as may be amended. No parking space required for the handicapped shall be counted as a parking space in determining compliance with the table of off-street parking requirements of this section, but optional spaces for the handicapped shall be counted. 
(2)  Motorcycle parking. 
a.  A portion of the parking spaces required by this chapter may be designed as exclusively for motorcycle parking if the following conditions are met: 
1.  The building official, chief zoning official or code compliance officer recommends that the spaces be so designated, based upon projected demand for them and lessened demand for automobile spaces. 
2.  The technical review committee approves the recommendation and the designated spaces are shown on the final development plan. 
3.  The designated spaces are suitably marked and striped. 
4.  The designation does not reduce the overall area devoted to parking, so that if motorcycle spaces are converted to automobile spaces, the minimum requirements for automobile spaces will be met. 
b.  The approval may later be withdrawn, and the spaces returned to car spaces, if the building official, or chief zoning official finds that the purposes of this chapter would be better served thereby, based upon the actual demand for motorcycle and automobile parking. 
(3)  Bicycle parking. 
a.  Racks or other means of storage that can secure at least four bicycles are required for all park, shopping center, office, industrial and restaurant uses with parking lots, as follows: 
1.  Number of bicycle parking spaces required: 
Total Parking Spaces in Lot 	Required Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces: 
25 to 50 	4 
51 to 100 	8 
101 to 500 	12 
501 to 1,000 	16 
Over 1,000 	Four additional spaces for each 500 parking spaces over 
 
2.  Other uses. Any other uses, except single family, duplex, or townhouse, which are exempt, shall provide bicycle racks or other means of storage as provided herein only where their total parking lot has 101 or more spaces. 
3.  Location and design of bicycle parking spaces; requirements: 
i.  The bicycle parking spaces shall be located near the entrances to the building. 
ii.  At buildings and shopping centers that have multiple parking lots, the bicycle parking spaces must be installed near the entrances to the buildings served by the lots. 
iii.  The bicycle parking spaces should be in a highly visible, well-lighted location that provides enough clear space to facilitate easy use and does not impede pedestrian traffic or handicap accessibility. 
iv.  The parking spaces may not be placed in the city maintained right-of-way. 
v.  The design of the bicycle rack shall permit the locking of the frame and at least one wheel with a standard size "U" lock and accommodate the typical range of bicycle sizes. 
vi.  The bicycle rack must resist removal, resist rust, corrosion, and vandalism, and must be properly maintained. 
4.  Other forms of storage. At the owner's option, bicycle parking may also be installed in the form of storage rooms, lockers or cages. 
5.  Signage and markings. All bicycle parking spaces shall be posted with a permanent and properly maintained aboveground sign. The bottom of the sign must be at least five feet above grade when attached to a building, which may not be installed in the city maintained right-of-way. No permit shall be required for such signs. 
(4)  Parking for persons transporting young children and strollers. Parking spaces specifically designed for persons transporting young children under the age of three and strollers, shall be required for all uses other than single-family, duplex, townhouse, multifamily or industrial zoned properties. Such baby stroller parking spaces shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Quantity of specially designated parking spaces: 
Total Parking Spaces in Lot 	Required Number of Spaces 
Up to 100 	0 
101 to 500 	2 
501 to 1,000 	3 
Over 1,000 	One additional space for each 500 parking spaces over 1,000 
 
b.  Location of parking spaces. Such spaces shall be located as closely as possible to parking spaces designated for the physically handicapped and/or disabled persons; provided however, parking spaces designated for the physically handicapped and/or disabled persons shall take precedence. Where no parking spaces designated for the physically handicapped and/or disabled persons have been provided, parking spaces for persons transporting young children and strollers shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible entrance. 
c.  Signage and markings. All parking spaces for persons transporting young children and strollers shall be prominently outlined with green paint and posted with an approved permanent above-ground sign which shall conform to the figure entitled "Baby Stroller Parking Sign" hereby incorporated in this section. The bottom of the sign must be at least five feet above grade when attached to a building, or seven feet above grade for a detached sign. 
(d)  Parking variance. 
(1)  As a condition for obtaining a variance of parking requirements from the city, as allowed under section 78-74, "Requirements and Procedures for Variances and Administrative Variances", the developer must show one or more of the following: 
a.  A parking study indicates that there is not a present need for the required parking. 
b.  Public transportation satisfies transportation demands for a portion of the users of the facility that corresponds to the amount of parking to be varied. 
c.  The developer has established or will establish an alternative means of access to the use that will justify varying the number of parking spaces. Alternative programs that may be considered by the city include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Private and public car pools and van pools. 
2.  Charging for parking. 
3.  Subscription bus services. 
4.  Flexible work-hour scheduling. 
5.  Ride sharing. 
d.  The percentage of parking spaces sought to be varied corresponds to the percentage of residents, employees, and customers who regularly walk, use bicycles or other non-motorized forms of transportation, or use mass transportation to come to the facility. 
(2)  Any parking study, shall contain, at a minimum, the following data for the relevant type of development: 
a.  For residential development: 
1.  Type of housing: detached single-family, townhouse, multi-family, etc. 
2.  Total square footage and number of dwelling units. 
3.  Mix of units: opportunities for shared parking. 
4.  Average cost per unit. 
5.  Cost of parking: purchase or rental of spaces. 
6.  Any other factor that may reduce/increase the parking demand. 
b.  For nonresidential development: 
1.  Type of use. 
2.  Total square footage or gross leasable area. 
3.  Maximum number of patrons or users at peak time. 
4.  Employment characteristics such as number of employees and number of shifts. 
5.  Cost of parking, if applicable. 
6.  Any other factor that may reduce/increase the parking demand. 
(3)  If the developer satisfies one or more of the criteria in subsection (d)(1) of this section, the city council may approve the variance of parking request and parking plan submitted by the developer. The number of parking spaces varied shall correspond to the estimated number of parking spaces that will not be needed because of the condition or conditions established. 
(4)  A parking plan: 
a.  Shall be designed to contain sufficient space to meet the full parking requirements of this chapter. 
b.  Shall include a written agreement with the city that, one year from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the number of spaces varied will be converted to parking spaces that conform to this chapter at the developer's expense should the city determine from experience that the additional parking spaces are needed. 
c.  Shall include a written agreement that the developer will cover the expense of a traffic study to be undertaken by the city public works director or chief zoning official to determine the advisability of providing the full parking requirement. 
(5)  Based upon the study and the recommendations of the city public works director or chief zoning official, the city shall determine if additional operable parking spaces are necessary. 
(6)  The developer may at any time request that city approve a revised parking plan to allow additional parking spaces. 
(e)  Reduction for mixed or joint use of parking spaces. The city council shall authorize a reduction in the total number of required parking spaces for two or more uses jointly providing off-street parking when their respective hours of need of maximum parking do not normally overlap. Reduction of parking requirements because of joint use shall be approved if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The developer submits sufficient data to demonstrate that hours of maximum demand for parking at the respective uses do not normally overlap. 
(2)  The developer submits a legal agreement approved by the city attorney guaranteeing the joint use of the off-street parking spaces as long as the uses requiring parking are in existence or until required parking is provided elsewhere in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Standards for drive-up facilities. All facilities providing drive-up or drive-through service shall provide on-site stacking lanes in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  The facilities and stacking lanes shall be located and designed to minimize turning movements in relation to the driveway access to streets and intersections. 
(2)  The facilities and stacking lanes shall be located and designed to minimize or avoid conflicts between vehicular traffic and pedestrian areas such as sidewalks, crosswalks, or other pedestrian accessways. 
(3)  A bypass lane shall be provided. 
(4)  Stacking lane distance shall be measured from each service window to the property line bordering the furthest street providing access to the facility. 
(5)  Minimum stacking lane distance shall be as follows: 
a.  Financial institutions shall have a minimum distance of 200 feet. Two or more stacking lanes may be provided which together total 200 feet. 
b.  All other uses shall have a minimum distance of 120 feet. 
(6)  Alleys or driveways in or abutting areas designed, approved, or developed for residential use shall not be used for circulation of traffic for drive-up facilities. 
(7)  Where turns are required in the exit lane, the minimum distance from any drive-up station to the beginning point of the curve shall be 34 feet. The minimum inside turning radius shall be 25 feet. 
(g)  Pavement markings. 
(1)  Generally. Designated parking spaces shall be marked on the surface of the parking space with paint or permanent marking materials and maintained in clearly visible condition. 
(2)  Handicapped spaces. Signs or signs combined with color-coded stall lines shall be used to distinguish handicapped spaces from standard size car spaces. 
(3)  Directional arrows. In parking facilities, all aisles, approach lanes, and maneuvering areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to expedite traffic movement. 
(h)  Landscaping. All off-street parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Article VII, "Landscape Requirements", pertaining to landscaping. 
(i)  Lighting. Parking lots that are to be used after dark shall be lighted. The lighting shall not shine directly upon any adjacent property or street and shall not produce excessive glare. 
(j)  Access for handicapped persons. Access to each principal building shall be provided from rights-of-way and parking areas by means of a hard-surfaced pathway leading to at least one entrance generally used by the public. The pathway shall be at least five feet wide, unobstructed, and devoid of curbs, stairs or other abrupt changes in elevation. Ramps shall be designed in accordance with the ramp requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, § 1, 5-15-12)  
Sec. 78-142. - Off-street loading. 
(a)  Generally. Spaces to accommodate off-street loading or business vehicles shall be provided as required in this section. 
(b)  Off-street loading requirements. Every building, building group, or part thereof, which is to be occupied by multifamily, business, commercial, institutional or other uses, receives materials or merchandise and contains 4,000 square feet or more of floor area will provide the following number of berths: 
Off-Street Loading Requirements 
Gross floor area 	Number 
of 
berths 
4,000 to 25,000 sq. ft. 	2 
25,001 to 40,000 sq. ft. 	3 
40,001 to 60,000 sq. ft. 	4 
For each additional 50,000 sq. ft. 	1 
 
The loading berths required in each instance shall be at least 12 feet in width, 30 feet in length, and 14 feet in height. The length of one or more of the loading spaces may be increased up to 55 feet if full-length tractor-trailer must be accommodated. Berths may not be within the required front yard setback. 
(c)  Trash enclosures requirements. Designated spaces for trash enclosures shall be provided in projects in all zoning districts, except single-family, two-family and townhouse districts. 
(d)  Adjustments to requirements. The planning and zoning board may, upon the recommendation of the building official or chief zoning official, require that a study be done to determine the actual number of loading spaces needed for a proposed use. 
(e)  Marking. Designated loading spaces shall be marked on the surface of the loading space with paint or permanent marking materials and maintained in clearly visible condition. 
(f)  Landscaping. All loading areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Article VII, Landscape Requirements, pertaining to landscaping. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Secs. 78-143, 78-144. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 78-145. - Landscaping. 
Editor's note— The Miami-Dade County Landscaping Ordinance is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Landscaping and open space shall be regulated by Chapter 18A, Miami-Dade County Landscape Ordinance and associated Landscape Manual and the City of Hialeah Gardens Design Guidelines and this article. Where there is conflict the most stringent or restrictive regulations shall apply. These regulations shall be considered the minimum standards which shall be enforced by the city. Additional landscaping may be required by the city in order to maintain and enhance its aesthetic environment. If a building permit is issued for renovating or remodeling within a commercial or industrial-zoned property, the city reserves the right, during site plan review prior to issuing the building permit, to require additional trees and landscaping to supplement existing landscaping. 
(a)  Exemptions. Lots or parcels of land, on which a single-family home is used as a residence in the E-1, R-1 and R-2 residential district(s), shall be exempt from all provisions of these regulations. This shall not exempt any residential developments that require the approval of a site plan by the technical review committee. 
(b)  Additional exemptions from tree protection standards. 
(1)  Utilities. Any utility operators (publicly or privately owned) may remove, without permit but with prior written notice to the building department, protected trees located within utility easements and public rights-of-way that endanger public safety and welfare, or are interfering with utility service. When needed to restore interrupted service under emergency conditions, utility operators may remove trees immediately and without prior written notice. 
(2)  Nurseries. All commercial nurseries, botanical gardens and tree farms shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Required landscaping. 
(1)  Landscaped open space. 
a.  The amount of landscaped open space required shall be provided as specified for each zoning district as enumerated in Article V, Development and Design Standards. Such space may include entrance features, greenbelts, unpaved passive areas, and other similar landscaped open space at ground level (See Article V, Development and Design Standards). 
b.  Continuous, extensively planted eight-foot wide greenbelts, penetrated only at approved points for ingress or egress to the property, shall be provided along all property lines abutting public right-of-way and/or business (BU) or industrial (IN) properties abutting residential districts. 
c.  Trees, as defined in Miami-Dade Code, Chapter 18A, pertaining to landscaping, shall be provided on the basis of one tree for each 1,000 square feet of required landscaped open space, with a minimum of four trees to be provided. 
d.  All canal and lake shorelines within the city shall be preserved, landscaped and maintained by the abutting property owners or the city. 
(2)  Parking areas. 
a.  Landscaping in parking areas shall be regulated by Chapter 18A, County Landscaping Ordinance. Additionally, one landscaped island five feet wide shall be provided between every ten spaces. 
(3)  Use of required landscape areas. No accessory structures, garbage or trash collection points or receptacles, parking, or any other functional use contrary to the intent and purpose of this article shall be permitted in a required landscape area. This does not prohibit the combining of compatible functions such as landscaping and drainage facilities. 
(d)  Use of native plants and xeriscape principles. 
(1)  The use of native plants and principles of xeriscape shall be encouraged. 
(2)  Prohibited plants are those listed in the Miami-Dade County Landscape Manual and considered detrimental to the ecosystem. 
(e)  Signs and lighting. Signs and lighting must be designed, installed, and constructed in accordance with City Ordinance 2004-11 (Urban Design Guidelines), which is incorporated by reference herein. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-146. - Irrigation. 
(a)  Landscaping which is installed during the construction and/or renovation of properties within the city, shall have an appropriate irrigation system installed and maintained in order to ensure the survival and growth of the installed landscaping. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or lessee of developed real property to perpetually maintain such irrigation system in an operable condition. 
(c)  Irrigation systems required in accordance with this section shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 18A, County Landscaping Ordinance. 
(d)  Failure to comply with this section may result, at the discretion of the city, in fines, code compliance orders and/or local business tax receipt revocation. 
(e)  Single-family and two-family developments shall be exempted from this section except if they include common areas. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-09)  
Sec. 78-147. - Landscaping and irrigation certification and recertification for residential, commercial and industrial properties. 
(a)  All landscaping and irrigation must be installed according to certified plans approved by the city before a certificate of occupancy is issued. The landscaping and irrigation plan shall be signed and sealed by a landscape architect or the professional of record. 
(b)  Every five years from the issuance date of a certificate of occupancy, a property owner or lessee must recertify its landscaping and irrigation plan. The city shall recertify a property owner's or lessee's landscaping and irrigation plan only if the trees, hedges, shrubbery, grass, ground cover and other plantings are viable, sustainable and properly maintained as represented on the landscaping and irrigation plan or site plan approved by the city at the time of issuing the certificate of occupancy. The city shall inspect the property and then notify the property owner or lessee to recertify the property on payment of an inspection fee according to a fee schedule established by administrative order of the city council and in compliance with this section. 
(c)  If a property owner or lessee does not recertify its property as provided herein, the city may suspend or revoke all local business tax receipts issued to the property address of the property owner in addition to other remedies provided in the code. Recertification shall apply to landscaping and irrigation plans approved by the city after August 15, 2006. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-09)  
Sec. 78-148. - Renovation and remodeling of commercial and industrial developments; supplemental landscaping. 
(a)  If a building permit is issued for renovating or remodeling a development within a commercial or industrial-zoned property, the city reserves the right, during site plan review prior to the issuing the building permit, to require additional trees and landscaping to supplement existing landscaping. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-149. - Pathways and greenbelts required around lakes. 
(a)  The intent and purpose of pathways with greenbelts adjacent to lakes is to create an aesthetically pleasing component of the city. Construction and improvements on any property, which abuts or is adjacent to a lake within the city, must include the following improvements adjacent to or abutting a lake within the city: 
Location and components: 
(1)  A five-foot wide sidewalk adjacent to the lakes from the top of the banks. 
(2)  An eight-foot wide greenbelt adjacent to the sidewalk with landscape material. 
(3)  A one-foot wide strip for guardrail. 
(4)  Planting standards for trees: trees shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height at the time of planting. 
(5)  Tree types required: a minimum of 75 percent of all trees required within the landscape greenbelt shall be shade trees, as defined in Chapter 18A. 
(6)  Planting standards for shrubs: shrubs, as defined in Chapter 18A, shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height at the time of planting. 
See City Ordinance 2004-11 (Urban Design Guidelines) for more details. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-150. - Maintenance of swales. 
The owner of real property within the city (the "swale") shall maintain the swale area which abuts their property. Such maintenance responsibility shall include, but is not limited to, maintaining grass or other appropriate vegetation in a healthy and dense enough manner to provide for water and run-off filtering while protecting underlying soils from erosion, for replacing vegetation where soils are exposed, for mowing on a regular basis to maintain a maximum grass height of three inches, and for maintaining proper elevations within the swale. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 2-21-17)  
Secs. 78-151—78-154. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 54; landscaping, § 78-145; signs. 
 
Sec. 78-155. - Purpose and intent. 
The regulations and requirements set forth herein are intended to accomplish the following purposes: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of communication towers and antennas within municipal limits; 
(2)  Minimize adverse visual effects of communication towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflage techniques; and 
(3)  Encourage collocation or shared use to reduce the number of communication towers needed within municipal limits. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-156. - General provisions. 
(a)  General regulations. The standards listed in this article apply specifically to all antennas, towers and telecommunications facilities, except those owned by the city, located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled and approved by the city or located on private property as specified herein. 
(b)  Local, state or federal requirements. The construction, maintenance and repair of telecommunications facilities are subject to the supervision of the city to the full extent permitted by applicable law, and shall be performed in compliance with all laws, ordinances and practices affecting such facility including, but not limited to, zoning codes, building codes, and safety codes, and as provided herein. The construction, maintenance, and repair shall be performed in a manner consistent with applicable industry standards, including the Electronic Industries Association. All telecommunication towers and antennas must meet current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, including emissions standards, and any other agency of the local, state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such applicable standards and regulations are revised and require that existing facilities adhere to such revised standards, then the owners of telecommunications towers and antennas within the city shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling organization, state or federal agency. Failure to comply with applicable standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the telecommunications tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(c)  City approval required. Unless otherwise authorized by state or federal law, no person shall construct, install or maintain a telecommunications facility within the city without the city's approval pursuant to this article. The city shall review and respond to an application within the time dictated by the nature and scope of the individual application, subject to the generally applicable time frames and consistent with the intent of the Telecommunications Act and Florida law. 
(d)  Consistency with Comprehensive Plan. The city shall review the application for consistency with the city's Comprehensive Plan, the city's zoning code, this article, and compatibility of the proposed telecommunications facility with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(e)  Site plan review required; exception. All new towers, antennas and other telecommunications facilities shall require site plan review. All new towers and antennas and repairs or modifications to existing telecommunications facilities in the city shall also be subject to the regulations in this article to the full extent permitted under applicable state and federal law. Telecommunications facilities owned by the city shall not be subject to this article, except as specifically referred to herein. Micro wireless facilities and small wireless facilities as defined herein do not require site plan review process approval, 
Definitions: 
(1)  Micro wireless facility means a small wireless facility having dimensions no larger than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
(2)  Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets the following qualifications: 
a.  Each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of antennas that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume; and 
b.  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and utility poles or other support structures. 
(2)  In public rights-of-way or in the public rights-of-way means over, above, in, on or under the public rights-of-way within the city over which the city has jurisdiction, control and authority to regulate. The term also includes those rights-of-way over which the county or state has jurisdiction and authority under the Florida Transportation Code. F.S. ch. 334, as same may be amended from time to time, but where the county or state or both have delegated to the city the authority to regulate the registration, permitting, placement, installation and maintenance of facilities. 
(f)  Permit issuance. Upon receipt of a complete application, as determined by either the chief building official or zoning official, a co-location permit shall be issued within 45 days, as may be amended by state or federal law. 
Upon receipt of a complete application, as determined by either the chief building official or zoning official, a new tower, antenna or other telecommunications facility permit shall be issued within 90 days, as may be amended by state or federal law. 
(g)  Fee required. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee as referenced in Chapter 58 of the Code. Failure to comply with the filing fee requirements shall cause the application to be deemed withdrawn or any approvals previously issued to be revoked. 
(h)  Licenses. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all local business tax receipts required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the city have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required local business tax receipts with the city. 
(i)  Pre-existing towers or pending applications. This article shall not apply to pre-existing telecommunications towers or applications that have received preliminary approval from the technical review committee which shall be considered vested. Those applications with preliminary approval shall comply with the prior code requirements. All applications not yet vested shall comply with the new code requirements set out in this article. 
(j)  Broadcasting facilities/amateur radio station operators/receive only antennas. This article shall not govern any broadcasting facility, telecommunications facilities owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator, or receive only antennas. Antennas, as governed under this article, shall not include any traditional residential television antennas, satellite earth stations or microwave antennas, which are covered separately in this chapter. 
(k)  Nonessential services. The providing of personal wireless services and the siting and construction of telecommunications facilities shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services or city telecommunications as defined herein. 
(l)  Responsibilities of chief zoning official. Except for matters herein specifically reserved to the city council, the chief zoning official shall be the principal city official responsible for the administration of this article. The chief zoning official may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder unless prohibited by applicable law. 
(m)  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant shall provide the city with an inventory of its pre-existing telecommunications towers and antennas within the city, and the pre-existing sites of other service providers' telecommunications towers within a one-mile radius of the proposed site regardless of city boundaries. 
(n)  Co-location. It is the intent of the city to encourage co-location of antennas by more than one service provider on pre-existing telecommunications towers and structures. Except as provided herein, all towers shall have the capacity to permit multiple users. At a minimum, monopole towers shall be able to accommodate two wireless service providers and, at a minimum, lattice or guyed towers shall be able to accommodate three wireless service providers. The city may deny an application for a new single-use communication tower if co-location is feasible. 
(o)  Exclusions for residential districts; exception. Pursuant to state law, as may be amended, the city may exclude the placement of wireless communications facilities in a residential area or residential zoning district only when it does not constitute an actual or effective prohibition of the provider's service to that residential area or residential zoning district. 
(p)  Signs. No signs, including commercial advertising, logo, political signs, flyers, flags, or banners, whether or not posted temporarily, shall be allowed on any part of an antenna, telecommunications facility, or telecommunications tower unless required by applicable law or permit. 
(q)  Warning signs. Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of the city's Code, the following shall be utilized in connection with any telecommunications facility, tower or antenna site, as applicable: 
(1)  If high voltage is necessary for the operation of the telecommunications tower or any accessory structures, "HIGH VOLTAGE—DANGER" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall surrounding the structure and spaced no more than 40 feet apart and at a minimum one sign per side of the enclosure. 
(2)  "NO TRESPASSING" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall and spaced no more than 40 feet apart and at a minimum one sign per side of the enclosure. 
(3)  The height of the lettering of the warning signs shall be at least 12 inches and be consistent with any federal or state law. Said signs shall be installed at least five feet above the finished grade. 
(4)  The warning signs may be attached to freestanding poles. Said poles shall be obstructed by landscaping. 
(r)  Abandonment of telecommunications facility. Any antenna, equipment facility, or telecommunications tower that is not operated for a continuous period of six months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna, equipment facility, or telecommunications tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna, equipment facility, or telecommunications tower within the 90 days shall be grounds for the city to remove the telecommunications tower, equipment facility or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single telecommunications tower or telecommunications facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the telecommunications tower or telecommunications facility. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3, 9-16-09; Ord. No. 2019-05, § 1, 2-19-19)  
Sec. 78-157. - Where permitted. 
(a)  Antennas. Rooftop or building-mounted antennas may be permitted in the following land use categories and corresponding zoning districts and shall not to exceed a height which is more than 15 feet above the highest point of the roof, including mechanical rooms. 
(1) 	High Density Residential (HDR) (only buildings which are six stories or greater in height) 	R-M2 
(2) 	Neighborhood Retail (NR) 	B-1 
(3) 	General Business (BU) 	B-2 
(4) 	Commercial Business (CM) 	B-3 
(5) 	Industrial Use (IN) 	IN-1, IN-2 and IN-C 
(6) 	Community Facilities (CF) 	CF 
(7) 	Parks, Open Space and Water (POS) 	POS 
 
(b)  Communication towers and facilities. Communication towers and facilities may be permitted in the following land use categories and corresponding zoning districts: 
(1) 	Neighborhood Retail (NR) 	B-1 
(2) 	General Business (BU) 	B-2 
(3) 	Commercial Business (CM) 	B-3 
(4) 	Industrial Use (IN) 	IN-1, IN-2 
and IN-C 
(5) 	Community Facilities (CF) 	CF 
(6) 	Parks, Open Space and Water (POS) 
 a. Only those owned by the city 	POS 
 
Regarding parks and open space owned by the city or government use buildings, the city shall authorize the use and development of the property only after the applicant executes a lease agreement acceptable to the city. The city shall have no obligation whatsoever to execute such lease even if the applicant satisfies the criteria set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-158. - Antenna standards and requirements. 
(a)  Minimum standards. All building-mounted or rooftop antennas shall be subject to the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Antennas, and related equipment buildings, shall be located or screened to minimize the visual impact of the antenna upon adjacent properties and shall be of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building or structure upon which it is situated. 
(2)  No commercial advertising or logo shall be allowed on an antenna or tower. 
(3)  Unless required by the Federal Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration, no signals, lights, or illumination shall be permitted on an antenna or tower. Lighting and signals, if required, may be reviewed by the technical review committee. 
(b)  Dimensions. 
(1)  Whip (omni-directional) antennas and their supports shall not exceed 15 feet in height and three inches in diameter and must be constructed of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building to which it is attached. 
(2)  Microwave dish antennas located below 65 feet above the ground may not exceed six feet in diameter. Microwave dish antennas located 65 feet and higher above the ground may not exceed eight feet in diameter. Ground-mounted dish antennas must be located or screened so as not to be visible from abutting public streets. 
(c)  Limitations. No more than four dish antennas shall be installed on a monopole tower. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-159. - Telecommunications facilities and towers standards and requirements. 
(a)  Minimum standards. Telecommunications facilities and towers shall be subject to the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Height. The height of a tower shall not exceed 150 feet in the RM-2 (or any other residential district if required for the provision of service), CF and POS zoning districts and 250 feet in the B-1, B-2, B-3, IN-1, IN-2 and IN-C zoning districts. Tower height shall be measured from the crown of the road of the nearest public right-of-way. 
(2)  Minimum setbacks. The minimum setbacks shall conform to the zoning districts where the towers are situated. Notwithstanding the above, the minimum setback requirements for property zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, IN-1, IN-2 and IN-C shall be 25 feet for the front and rear yards and 15 feet for the side yards. All setbacks shall be measured from base of the tower or from the guy wire anchor, whichever is the closest to the property line or right-of-way. 
(3)  Minimum distance separations. 
a.  Telecommunications towers shall not be closer than 1.25 times the height of the tower from any residential areas or district, as measured by a straight line from the two closest points between any residential zoning district line and the nearest point of the proposed tower structure. 
b.  The minimum distance separation between an existing tower and a proposed tower in the RM-2, CF and POS zoning districts shall be as follows: 
Height of Existing Tower 	Height of Proposed Tower 	Minimum Separation 
Up to 150 feet 	Less than 50 feet 	300 feet 
Up to 150 feet 	50 feet—100 feet 	600 feet 
Up to 150 feet 	100 feet—150 feet 	1,000 feet 
 
There shall be no minimum distance separation between towers required for property zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, IN-1, IN-2 or IN-C. 
(4)  Landscaping. All communication tower sites must comply with the landscaping requirements of the Miami-Dade County Landscape Ordinance and Manuals, as amended. 
a.  Landscaping, consistent with the requirements of Article VII, "Landscape Requirements", as amended, shall be installed around the entire perimeter of the fence or wall. 
1.  Additional landscaping may be required around the perimeter of the fence or wall and around any or all anchors or supports if deemed necessary to buffer adjacent properties. 
2.  The chief zoning official, upon site plan review, may require landscaping in excess of the above requirements as is deemed reasonably necessary in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent residential and nonresidential land uses. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of the perimeter wall. 
b.  Landscaping, consistent with the requirements of Article VII, Landscape Requirements, as amended, shall be installed around any accessory buildings or structures. 
c.  A row of shade trees, at least eight feet in height, at a maximum distance of 20 feet apart, shall be planted around the perimeter of the fence. 
d.  A continuous hedge at least 30 inches in height at planting and capable of growing to a height of 36 inches within 18 months shall be planted on the outside of the perimeter fence and tree line. 
e.  All landscaping shall be properly maintained to insure good health and viability. 
(b)  Parking. Each telecommunications facility site may provide parking only for use by maintenance personnel. No vehicle storage shall occur. 
(c)  Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage of maintenance equipment is permitted on sites approved for telecommunications facilities. 
(d)  Accessory cellular equipment permitted. Any additional wireless communications facilities such as communication cables, adjacent accessory structures, or adjacent accessory equipment used in the provision of cellular, enhanced specialized mobile radio, or personal communications services, required within the existing secured equipment compound within the existing site shall be deemed a permitted use or activity. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all life safety codes, including but not limited to the building code, land development regulations, including any aesthetic requirements, shall apply. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-160. - Unattended telecommunications buildings. 
(a)  Minimum setbacks. Unattended telecommunications buildings shall comply with the setback requirements of the zoning district where such buildings are situated. 
(b)  Size limitations. An unattended telecommunications building shall be a permanent structure not to exceed 500 square feet in floor area. More than one unattended telecommunications building may be permitted on a site; provided, however, that the total square footage of such buildings, added together, do not exceed 1,000 square feet. If the site contains more than one building, the required spacing between the buildings may be excused. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-161. - Permit required for telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  Permits shall be required for the construction of telecommunications towers and facilities through application to the building department. 
(b)  Permit applications. A building permit application and associated fee shall be fully completed and accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Current survey of the property; 
(2)  Application for site plan review and ordinance as approved by the city council; 
(3)  Description of the telecommunications services currently provided and/or will be provided in the future by the applicant over its telecommunications facilities; 
(4)  Two copies of engineering plans and specifications, signed and sealed, of the facilities in sufficient detail to identify: 
a.  Location of the proposed facilities (show on the site plan); 
b.  Location of all overhead and underground public utility telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, drainage and other facilities; 
c.  Trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate. 
(5)  Written approval or a statement, if required, of no objection from federal and state agencies that may regulate telecommunication tower siting, height, design and construction. 
(6)  A landscaping plan showing the specific placement of the telecommunications facility and tower on the site indicating the location of existing structures, trees and other significant site features, type and location of landscaping used to screen the facility and the proposed color of the tower. 
(7)  Statement that applicant shall notify all other telecommunication providers of the permit application at the time the application is accepted by the building department. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-162. - Construction, installation and inspection of telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  The construction and installation of a telecommunications facility and tower shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's prescribed installation and safety procedures and shall meet the requirements of the Florida Building Code, as amended. 
(b)  Foundations for communication towers and appurtenances thereto shall be constructed and installed so as to withstand the forces due to wind pressure as provided in the Florida Building Code, as amended. 
(c)  All installations shall conform to the Florida Building Code, as amended, National Electrical Code, as amended, and FCC, regulations, as amended. 
(d)  Regardless of whether a permit is required for the installation of the communication tower, separate building permits for structural or electrical work, pouring concrete or other work may be required as provided in the Florida Building Code, as amended. 
(e)  Inspection. The Building Department may require periodic inspections of communication facilities and towers to ensure structural and electrical integrity and compliance with the Florida Building Code, as amended, the City of Hialeah Gardens Land Development Regulations, as amended, and other applicable codes and regulations. Communication towers shall be inspected at least once every five years by a Florida licensed engineer and the results submitted to both the building and zoning departments. Based upon the results of the inspection, the chief building official may require repair or removal of a communication tower. The fee for such inspections shall be established by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-163. - Appeals of building or zoning department decision. 
(a)  If a permit is denied by the chief building official or chief zoning official for noncompliance with the Florida Building Code or Land Development Regulations provided herein, then the applicant may appeal the decision, pursuant to section 78-77, "Requirements and Procedures for Appeals" to the city council, which shall then consider the permit application at a public meeting and either uphold or overrule the denial of the permit. The city council action shall be by ordinance. 
(b)  If a permit is denied, or conditions imposed, then the city council shall consider the action taken upon review of the following factors: 
(1)  The technical and practical necessity for the installation of the communication tower. 
(2)  Alternative measures or modifications that could be made to preserve the character of the neighborhood and to prevent aesthetic blight if installation were permitted. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-164. - Municipal property. 
(a)  If an applicant requests a permit to develop a site on city-owned property, the permit granted hereunder shall not become effective until the applicant and the city have executed a written agreement or lease setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the permit to occupy and use the public lands of the city will be granted. 
(b)  Nonexclusive grant. No permit granted under this section shall convey any exclusive right, privilege, permit or franchise to occupy or use the public lands of the city for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purpose. 
(c)  Rights granted. No permit granted under this section shall convey any right, title or interest in the public lands, but shall be deemed a permit only to use and occupy the public lands for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no permit shall be construed as a conveyance of a title interest in the property. 
(d)  Exemption. Government-owned property is exempt from the minimum distance separation and height requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-165. - Variances from requirements. 
Any deviation of the location, setback, type, number and height limitations shall require a zoning variance. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Secs. 78-166—78-169. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SIGNS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— Definitions have been included as Article X. 
 
Sec. 78-170. - Purpose and intent. 
It shall be the purpose of this article to promote the aesthetics, safety, health and general welfare by regulating the general posting, displaying, erection, use and maintenance of signs. This article shall also govern the number, size, location and character of all signs which may be permitted by the city. 
It shall be the intent of the city to discourage pole mounted signs. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-171. - Compliance required. 
All permanent and temporary signs shall be erected, constructed, posted, painted, modified, relocated and maintained only when permitted and in compliance with the provisions of this article. Every sign or other advertising structure lawfully in existence on the date of adoption of this article shall be subject to all of its provisions, except as specifically exempted under section 78-10, "Existing Nonconforming Development". 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-172. - General regulations. 
(a)  Building and electrical code requirements. These sign regulations shall not be contrary to the requirements of the building and electrical codes adopted by the city. Wherever there is inconsistency between the regulations contained in this article and the requirements of the building or electrical codes, the more stringent requirement shall apply. 
(b)  Uniform sign plan. All signs in multi-tenant projects shall be subject to a uniform sign plan and shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All signs mounted to a building shall be uniform in terms of illumination, material, fabrication, placement and sign area. 
(2)  All lettering on signs shall be comprised of not more than one font style except for registered trade or service marks. 
(3)  The sign plan shall be limited to no more than one color that is consistent with the building's architecture except for registered trade or service marks. 
(c)  Maintenance. All, including their supports, braces, guys and anchors, electrical parts and lighting fixtures, and all painted and display areas, shall be maintained in accordance with the building and electrical codes adopted by the city, and shall present a neat and clean appearance. Additionally, all landscaping for the required distance of ten feet in front of, behind, and underneath the base of ground signs shall be properly maintain and remain rubbish free. 
(d)  Abandonment. A sign shall be considered abandoned if the occupant or use of the property on which it is located has been vacant for a period of 180 days. At that time, the city shall require the owner of said property to remove said sign within 30 days. If said sign is not removed the city shall put a lien against the property in order to cover any costs that the city may incur for the removal of said sign. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-173. - Exempt signs. 
The following signs are exempt from the permitting requirements of this article so long as they are not placed or constructed so as to create a hazard of any kind and also meet the design standards set forth in this article: 
(1)  Address signs. 
(2)  Artwork. 
(3)  Bulletin boards.* 
(4)  Bus shelter signs. 
(5)  Contractor signs.* 
(6)  Community information signs. 
(7)  Decorative flags and bunting.* 
(8)  Development signs (only when development is under construction).* 
(9)  Flags or insignias of governmental, religious, charitable, fraternal or other organizations. 
(10)  Holiday or seasonal lights and decorations. 
(11)  Legal notices and official instruments. 
(12)  Memorial signs or tablets; including names of buildings and dates of erection. 
(13)  Occupational signs. 
(14)  Political signs. 
(15)  Professional nameplates. 
(16)  Public warning signs. 
(17)  Real estate or rental signs.* 
(18)  Religious displays. 
(19)  Signs in buildings not visible from any street or adjoining property. 
(20)  Street, traffic or warning signs erected by a governmental agency or authorized designee. 
(21)  Wind signs such as flag, sail, teardrop, or feather banners, pennants, streamers or similar objects and balloons, on a temporary basis of up to 30 consecutive days per calendar year.* 
(22)  Window signs. 
(23)  Yard sale signs.* 
In addition to the above, signs that are owned and erected, constructed, posted, painted, modified, relocated or maintained by the city shall be exempted from the provisions of this article. 
Signs denoted by an asterisk (*) shall be considered temporary signs and be regulated by section 78-176, "Sign standards and regulations" of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2015-06, §§ 1(1),(2), 8-4-15)  
Sec. 78-174. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are specifically prohibited within the city: 
(1)  Blank temporary signs. 
(2)  Billboards except as permitted by section 78-177. 
(3)  Fixed projecting signs. 
(4)  Flashing or blinking signs (except time, temperature and date signs). 
(5)  Hazardous signs. 
(6)  Illegal signs. 
(7)  Obscene, indecent or immoral signs (as generally defined). 
(8)  Rotating signs with visible mechanical parts. 
(9)  Signs that emit audible sound, odor or visible matter. 
(10)  Signs in violation of the city's building or electrical codes. 
(11)  Signs that cause interference with communication signals. 
(12)  Signs which obstruct any fire escape route, emergency exit or ventilation point. 
(13)  Signs painted, pasted or imprinted on any sidewalk or street, except house numbers, utility information or traffic control signs. 
(14)  Signs which create an optical illusion. 
(15)  Signs erected on public property by a private entity without governmental approval. 
(16)  Signs resembling traffic control devices. 
(17)  Signs that obstruct or impair the vision of passersby. 
(18)  Snipe signs. 
(19)  Unauthorized signs placed on benches, bus shelters, utility poles or waste receptacles. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3, 8-18-09)  
Sec. 78-175. - Sign permit process. 
(a)  Permit required. No permanent or temporary sign shall be erected, constructed, posted, painted, modified, relocated and maintained without the appropriate permit being issued by the city, except as provided for in other sections of this article. 
(b)  Application. Before any permit is issued, a written application form provided by the city, shall be filed together with two sets of such drawings and specifications as may be necessary to fully advise the city of the location, construction, materials, colors, size, manner of illuminating, method of securing or fastening, the number of signs applied for, the consent of the property owner, and the wording of the sign. Every application for a sign permit shall include the square footage and location of all existing signs on the property, a photograph of all facades, contractor information, and any other necessary information relating to the proposed sign in order for the city to determine compliance with all requirements of this article. In addition, applications for a monument sign shall include an accurate and current survey of the property indicating the lot dimensions, the proposed location of the sign with all setbacks to property lines, and a landscaping plan, if required. 
(c)  Electrical signs. All signs that are electrically illuminated shall require a separate electrical permit and inspection. 
(d)  Compliance with master sign plan. All applications must conform to any master sign plan or document of similar nature, for purposes of uniformity, which applies to the property. 
(e)  Fees. A non-refundable permit application fee is due and payable concurrently with the permit application request. More than one sign on one building or group of buildings located on the same parcel of land may be included on one application, provided that all such signs are applied for at the same time. Fees shall be based on the total number of signs. 
(f)  Permit review. Based on the application, the chief building or zoning official (or his or her designee) shall approve or deny the sign permit based on compliance with the requirements of this article. Such approval or denial of the sign permit shall be made within 30 days after the city's receipt of a complete application. If the application is denied the applicant may file a written notice of appeal pursuant to section 78-77, "Requirements and procedures for appeals". If the city council does not grant the appeal, then the appellant may seek relief in the Circuit Court for Miami-Dade County, as provided by law. 
(g)  Modifications. After a permit has been granted no modifications shall take place without first obtaining written authorization from the city. A written record of any such modification shall be maintained with the original approved permit application. 
(h)  Failure to commence. Every sign permit issued by the city shall become null and void if installation is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit. If work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for 180 days any time after the work is commenced and in accordance with the Florida Building Code, a new permit shall first be obtained and the associated application fee provided. 
(i)  Revocation. The city may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this article whenever the permit is issued on the basis of a misstatement of fact or fraud or of the failure of the holder to comply with same. 
(j)  Inspection. After the issuance of the appropriate permit(s), the applicant may install and display the approved sign(s). Once installed, the city shall inspect the sign(s) for conformance with the approved permit(s) and the standards contained herein. 
(k)  Removal of sign on occupant's vacation of the premises. Within 30 days after an occupant vacates a lot or structure, the owner shall remove the occupant's sign. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06)  
Sec. 78-176. - Sign standards and regulations. 
(a)  Temporary signs. Temporary signs are allowed throughout the city, subject to restrictions imposed by this and may consist of either ground-mounted, building-mounted or small billboard type signs. The chief building or zoning official shall determine the nature of any sign presented as to whether it may be considered temporary. Temporary signs shall include, but are not limited to: bulletin boards, contractor signs, development signs, real estate or rental signs, yard sale signs and wind signs. The following shall apply to temporary signs: 
(1)  Small billboard signs which are used for the sale of a parcel or parcels of land, or to announce a construction project in progress, shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and ten feet in height. Such signs shall be allowed for a period not to exceed 24 months and must be removed thereafter. 
(2)  Political campaign signs shall not exceed eight square feet in area and two feet in height. Such signs shall be removed within 30 days after the election for which it was placed. Only one sign is permitted per candidate per property. 
(3)  Temporary signs on residentially zoned parcels, except on parcels zoned RM-1 and RM-2, shall be allowed a maximum of two temporary signs not to exceed an aggregate of ten square feet in area with any sign not greater than six square feet and four feet in height. Unless otherwise allowed under subsection (1), such signs shall be allowed for a period not to exceed 60 days, except real estate signs, and must be removed thereafter. 
(4)  Temporary signs on parcels zoned RM-1 and RM-2 shall be allowed a maximum of four temporary signs not to exceed an aggregate of 16 square feet in area with any sign not greater than six square feet and four feet in height. Unless otherwise allowed under subsection (1), such signs shall be allowed for a period not to exceed 60 days, except real estate signs, and must be removed thereafter. 
(5)  All parcels in the B and IN zoning districts are allowed one square foot of signage per ten feet of public right-of-Way frontage not to exceed an aggregate of 100 square feet in area with any sign (maximum four temporary signs) not to exceed 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height. Signs must be spaced at least 100 feet apart. Unless otherwise allowed under subsection (1) such signs shall be allowed for a period not to exceed 60 days, except real estate signs, and must be removed thereafter. 
(6)  Temporary signs indicating the grand opening of a new business shall only be allowed for a maximum of 30 days and only after a permit application for any permanent sign associated with the new business has been applied for to the city. 
(7)  Temporary signs for uses such as fairs, carnivals, circuses, revivals, sporting events, or any public, charitable, educational, holiday or religious events or functions shall be allowed for a maximum of 30 days. Such message shall be removed within five days after the special event. 
(8)  Banner signs. These include flag, sail, teardrop, feather banner signs or other similar freestanding banner signs. The size of each sign shall not exceed 30 inches in width at the sign's full extension. The permitted maximum height of the sign is 15 feet as measured from the ground to the top of the sign when installed. Signs shall only be installed on the landscape buffer along the front property line, entirely within private property excluding the swale area. No portion on the sign or support structure shall be located or encroach into or over the right-of-way. 
a.  Installation. Banner signs shall be installed as follows: (1) no less than 15 feet from one another, (2) no less than ten feet from the side property lines, and (3) out of the sight-triangle, clear vision, or sight distance areas at intersections of public streets or public streets and private driveways. 
Signs shall be firmly affixed to the ground and supported solely by the sign's support structure as designed by the sign's a manufacturer, such that it does not fall, fold, sag, bend, or collapse. Signs shall not be attached to any portion, part, or surface of a building, monument, or any other structure. 
b.  Application for banner sign. Banner signs are permitted only upon an application for placement. The application must be made by applicant upon a form provided by the city and the application must include the written approval of the property owner. No off-site advertisement by banner sign is allowed. The property owner shall acknowledge that any violation of these provisions can be enforced against the property owner in addition to the applicant. As part of the application, a sketch of the proposed location must be submitted for review by the planning and zoning department together with a fee of $50.00 per sign. Any additional display period allowed as provided herein shall also require an additional fee of $50.00 per sign. 
c.  Construction and maintenance. All banner signs and any supporting structure or hardware must be made of durable material capable of withstanding the outdoor elements for the period of time allowed to be displayed. Banner signs shall not contain any tears, tattered edges, stains or other signs of wear. Any banner sign that is broken, damaged or in poor condition will be deemed an abandoned sign and must be removed within 24 hours' notice by the city. All banner signs must be removed and safely stored indoors whenever the public is instructed by a qovernment authority that weather conditions require the storage of any loose items or materials as a result of an impending storm or other weather system. 
d.  Enforcement. All banner signs must be removed immediately upon the expiration of the permitted display period. Failure to comply with any requirement set forth in these requlations shall be enforced pursuant to chapter 78 herein and any other remedy available pursuant to city ordinance, city code, or Florida Statutes. 
(b)  Permanent signs. 
(1)  For detached single family dwelling units, signs indicating the name and address of a property, or occupant, are exempt from the provisions of this article so long as such signs do not exceed two square feet in area. Only two such signs per parcel are allowed. 
(2)  For attached and multifamily dwelling units, a monument identification sign, not exceeding ten square feet in area and six feet in height above the lot grade (columns may be higher subject to design review), nor closer than ten feet to the front or street side lot line shall be allowed. Said sign shall indicate only the name and address of the building or development and the name of management (if applicable). If the parcel is a corner lot two such signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. In addition to the permitted monument signs, one sign for each street frontage may be installed flat against the main wall of a building, each wall sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. 
(3)  For all parcels in the B and IN zoning districts, signs shall be permitted if in accordance with the following regulations: 
a.  A monument identification sign, not exceeding 32 square feet in area and six feet in height above the lot grade, nor closer than ten feet to the right-of-Way shall be allowed. If the parcel is a corner lot two such signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. Said sign shall indicate only the name and address of the building or development or tenant names and the name of management (if applicable). 
b.  In addition, wallmounted signs (uniformly placed) for each storefront or bay shall be allowed. These signs shall be no greater than ten percent of the gross area of the front facade of each storefront or bay. 
c.  Professionally made window signs are allowed which indicate the business identification, a message or hours of operation. The maximum total coverage shall be ten percent of the total window area. 
d.  Although discouraged by the city, an application for a variance to allow a pole mounted sign may be submitted to the city. 
A pole mounted sign shall be no higher than the roof line of the building on the parcel on which the sign is located or 30 feet, whichever is less. 
e.  No signs pertaining to any entity on a particular parcel of land shall be located on any other parcel or in the public right-of-Way. 
(4)  Entrance features designed and constructed as an integral part of any entrance beautification to a development shall be permitted. The design of the entrance feature, including any signs, shall be approved by the city as part of a site plan review. However, if an entrance feature application is submitted separately, the entrance feature shall be reviewed and approved in the same administrative manner as a site plan review. See also section 78-96. 
(5)  Signs for schools, places of worship, or other institutional uses of a similar public or semiprivate nature may be erected and maintained, provided the following regulations are complied with: 
a.  The size of any sign shall not exceed 12 square feet. 
b.  Not more than one sign shall be placed on a property unless the property fronts on more than one street, in which event two signs may be erected, one on each frontage. 
(6)  Directional, traffic or warning signs designating entrances or exits to or from a parking area, or designating the conditions of use or identity of the parking area shall be permitted. On corner lots, two signs shall be permitted, one facing each street. Such signs shall be limited to a maximum of two square feet each. 
(7)  Time-temperature-date signs are permitted in all nonresidential zoning districts. These signs shall be kept accurate and shall be counted as part of the allowable sign area. 
(8)  No more than three flags or insignias of governmental, religious, charitable, fraternal or other organizations may be displayed on any parcel of land. The maximum height of a flagpole shall be 50 feet. The height of a flag shall be no more than ten feet from top to bottom. 
(9)  Public utility signs that identify the location of underground utility lines and facilities, high voltage lines and facilities, and other utility facilities and appurtenances are permitted so long as they do not exceed three feet in height and the sign face one-half square foot. 
(c)  Permanent sign standards. 
(1)  Sign area. 
a.  Shall be calculated as the area within the smallest square, rectangle or parallelogram within which the sign face type is located. 
b.  Where a sign is composed of letters or pictures not enclosed by a border or trimming, the sign area shall be the area within the smallest square, rectangle or parallelogram, the sides of which touch the extreme points of the letters or pictures. 
c.  Where two sign faces of identical size and shape are placed back to back on a single monument identification sign structure, and the faces are at no point more than two feet apart, the sign area shall be calculated as the area of one of the faces. 
(2)  Facade area. The facade area shall be measured by determining the gross area of the front facade of each storefront or bay including roof areas which have slopes of greater than 45 degrees. 
(3)  Sign height. The height of a sign shall be determined by the vertical distance from the base of the structure to the top of the sign. 
(4)  Sign width. The width of a sign shall be determined by the horizontal distance between the extreme points of the sign face or letters. 
(5)  Number of signs. 
a.  In general, the number of signs shall be determined by the number of noncontiguous sign faces. Multiple contiguous sign faces may be counted as a single sign if all the sign faces are included in the geometric figure used for determining the sign area. 
b.  Where a sign has two faces, placed back to back, of identical size and shape it shall be counted as one sign. 
(6)  Distance between signs. The minimum required distance between signs shall be measured along street rights-of-way from the closest parts of any two signs. 
(7)  Illumination standards. 
a.  No illumination from any sign shall obstruct or impair the vision of passersby. 
b.  Illuminated signs shall not have lighting mechanisms that project more than 18 inches perpendicularly from any surface of the sign. 
(8)  Placement standards. No sign greater than two feet in height shall be located within the sight vision triangle. No sign shall be located closer than ten feet from the public right-of-Way. 
(9)  Clearance standards. 
a.  All signs over pedestrian ways shall provide a minimum of seven feet, six inches of clearance. 
b.  All signs over vehicular ways shall provide a minimum of 14 feet of clearance. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1(3), 8-4-15)  
Sec. 78-177. - Voluntary pilot billboard corridor program. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose and intent of the voluntary pilot billboard corridor program is to allow, notwithstanding the prohibition of such signs as found elsewhere in this code, a limited number of billboards within the city and to accept offsetting voluntary contributions to be used solely for city beautification, including the voluntary reduction of other signs. The city's regulations concerning the placement, size, structure, and special conditions of such signs on private property within the city shall comply with state law, rules and regulations, but to the extent that city regulations are supplemental or more stringent than state law, the city regulations shall prevail so long as such regulations do not conflict with state law. 
(b)  Definitions. For definitions pertaining to the voluntary pilot billboard corridor program, see Article X. 
(c)  Geographic area. The voluntary pilot billboard corridor program shall be comprised of two geographic areas: 
Area 1. A strip of land 200.00 feet wide lying in Sections 18 and 19, Township 52 South, Range 40 East, Miami-Dade County, Florida, bounded on the west by the easterly Right-of-Way line of Homestead Extension of Florida's Turnpike as shown in Florida Department of Transportation Right-of-Way Map of section No. 87005-2312, sheet 5 of 7 and sheet 6 of 7, bounded on the east by a line parallel with and 200.00 feet easterly of said easterly Right-of-Way line. The last line to be lengthened or shortened at angle points and intersection points to form a contiguous strip of land and to terminate at the southerly line of said Section 19 and at the northerly line of said Section 18. 
Together with: 
A strip of land 200.00 feet wide lying in Section 30, Township 52 South, Range 40 East, Miami-Dade County, Florida bounded on the southwest by the northeasterly Right-of-Way line of State Road 25 (US 27 Highway, Okeechobee Road), as shown in Florida Department of Transportation Right-of-Way Map of section No. 87090, sheet 6 of 23 and sheet 7 of 23, bounded on the northeast by a line parallel with and 200.00 feet northeast of said northeasterly Right-of-Way line. The last line to be lengthened or shortened at angle points and intersection points to form a contiguous strip of land and to terminate at the northerly line of said Section 30 and at the center line of NW 138th Street, as shown on "Shoma Commercial Replat", according to the Plat thereof, as recorded in Plat Book 161 at Page 100 of the Public Records of Miami-Dade County, Florida, as shown on exhibit A. 
Area 2. A strip of land 200.00 feet wide lying in Section 3, Township 53 South, Range 40 East, Miami-Dade County, Florida bounded on the south by the northeasterly Right-of-Way line of State Road 25 (US 27 Highway, Okeechobee Road), as shown in Florida Department of Transportation Right-of-Way Map of section No. 87090, sheet 21 of 23, sheet 22 of 23 and sheet 23 of 23, bounded on the northeast by a line parallel with and 200.00 feet northeast of said northeasterly Right-of-Way line. The last line to be lengthened or shortened at angle points and intersection points to form a contiguous strip of land and to terminate at the center line of NW 95th Street, as shown on "F.F. at Hialeah Gardens", according to the Plat thereof, as recorded in Plat Book 156 at Page 75 of the Public Records of Miami-Dade County, Florida, and to terminate at a line parallel with and 200.00 feet northwest of the northwesterly Right-of-Way line of State Road 826 -Palmetto Expressway's Frontage Road, as shown in Florida Department of Transportation Right-of-Way Map of section No. 87260-2519, sheets 5 of 13 and 8 of 13. 
Together with: 
A strip of land 200.00 feet wide lying in Section 3, Township 53 South, Range 40 East, Miami-Dade County, Florida bounded on the east by the westerly Right-of-Way line of State Road 826 -Palmetto Expressway's Frontage Road as shown in Florida Department of Transportation Right-of-Way Map of section No. 87260-2519, sheets 5 of 13 and 8 of 13; and in Florida Department of Transportation Right-of-Way Map of section No. 87260-2589 sheet 2 of 6, sheet 3 of 6 and sheet 5 of 6, bounded in the west by a line parallel with and 200.00 feet west of said westerly Right-of-Way line. The last line to be lengthened or shortened at angle points and intersection points to form a contiguous strip of land and to terminate at the northeasterly Right-of-Way line of State Road 25 (US 27 Highway, Okeechobee Road), as shown in Florida Department of Transportation Right-of-Way Map of section No. 87090, sheet 23 of 23 and to terminate at the center line of State Road 932 (N.W. 103rd Street) as shown in Florida Department of Transportation Right-of-Way Map of section No. 87260-2589, sheet 3 of 6, as shown on exhibit A. 
No variances shall be granted for approvals outside the boundaries established for the voluntary pilot billboard corridor program. 
(d)  Sign type. The billboard shall only be a detached, non-mobile sign. No mechanical signs are permitted. 
(e)  Maximum number of sign faces. A billboard may contain no more than two sign faces but only if the billboard is of a unipole construction. 
(f)  Maximum size and area of the sign face. The maximum dimensions shall be 14 feet in height by 48 feet in length for the sign face with a total area of 672 square feet. Embellishments may be used to increase or enhance the size of the sign in accordance with industry standards. 
(g)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall be no more than 65 feet from the normal or average grade to the top of the sign. 
(h)  Minimum setback, spacing, and distance separation. The minimum setback shall be 20 feet from the surface edge of the right-of-way; five feet from the interior side of the property line. No sign shall be, erected closer than 100 feet from a house of worship, school, park or recreations facility. No billboard shall be erected closer than 1,000 feet to another billboard on the same side of the street measured along the center line of the same roadway or street, except that cantilever back-to-back signs shall be considered as one sign for the purposes of spacing. No digital sign shall be erected closer than 2,500 feet from another digital sign and no closer than 1,000 feet from a non-digital sign. Anyone seeking a variance for this subsection shall present its variance application first to the TRC board, planning and zoning board for recommendation and then to the city council for final decision. 
(i)  Illumination. No illumination shall be installed on a billboard that may conflict with adjacent or abutting uses or may negatively impact residential uses or areas. Examples of appropriate illumination will be set forth in the administrative guidelines and standards issued by the city's administrative staff. 
(j)  Special conditions. When a billboard has two sign faces, they shall be placed at an angle to form a single "V" or placed back-to-back and not be placed in a straight line. 
(k)  Permit application and review; renewal. Any person seeking to participate in voluntary pilot program ("permittee") may apply for a sign permit which form shall be prepared by the planning and zoning department but which shall require at a minimum the following: 
(1)  Plans indicating that the billboard placement conforms with the requirements of F.S. Ch. 479, all other applicable federal, state, county and municipal regulations not in conflict with this section. These plans shall also show the location and the setback of all buildings on the property and within 100 feet of the proposed sign location; 
(2)  Plans containing all electrical, structural, elevation and color depictions and measurements as needed for review and approval by the building department of the city; 
(3)  A signed copy of the lease or easement agreement with the property owner and sign owner or operator, if applicable; 
(4)  An initial nonrefundable permitting fee shall be $500.00 for each sign face, which shall be paid at time the application is presented to the city; 
(5)  A restrictive covenant running with the property in a form satisfactory to the city attorney assuring that the property owner agrees not to challenge the validity of the ordinance, and that should the ordinance be nullified by court action, the city will have an easement onto the property to assure removal of the sign; and 
(6)  A signed acknowledgement by the permittee and property owner of the following statement: 
THIS PERMIT IS EXPRESSLY ISSUED IN RELIANCE ON THE CONTINUED VALIDITY OF ORDINANCE NO  2009-07  ALSO KNOWN AS THE "VOLUNTARY PILOT BILLBOARD CORRIDOR PROGRAM" (THE "ORDINANCE"). AMONG OTHER THINGS THE ORDINANCE ACKNOWLEDGES AN ANNUAL VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTION TO THE CITY OF HIALEAH GARDENS' SIGN MITIGATION AND CITY BEAUTIFICATION FUND AS IS HEREIN PROVIDED. AS A CONDITION OF THIS PERMIT, PERMITTEE, AND IF DIFFERENT, THE PROPERTY OWNER, EXPRESSLY AND VOLUNTARILY WAIVES ANY RIGHT TO CHALLENGE THE VALIDITY OF THE ORDINANCE AND AGREES TO INDEMNIFY THE CITY ITS PRORATED SHARE OF ALL REASONABLE COSTS INCURRED BY THE CITY ARISING FROM ANY LAWSUIT OR ADMINISTRATIVE ATION CHALLENGING THE VALIDITY OF THIS ORDINANCE. ALSO IT IS AN EXPRESS CONDITION OF THIS SPECIAL PERMIT THAT THE PERMITTEE AND IF DIFFERENT THE PROPERTY OWNER AGREES THAT SHOULD THE ORDINANCE BE DEEMED INVALID BY A COURT OR OTHER AUTHORITY SUCH THAT THE CITY IS UNABLE TO RECEIVE THE CONTRIBUTION TO THE SIGN MITIGATION AND BEAUTIFICATION FUND, THE SIGN AUTHORIZED BY THIS PERMIT SHALL BE REMOVED IMMEDIATELY. IN SUCH CASE, THE PERMITTEE AND PROPERTY OWNER ALSO EXPRESSLY AND VOLUNTARILY AGREES TO ANY AND ALL LEGAL REMEDIES AVAILABLE TO THE CITY TO REMOVE SUCH SIGN INCLUDING INJUNCTIVE RELIEF AND ATTORNEYS FEES. FINALLY TRANSFER OF THIS PERMIT SHALL BE CONDITIONED ON TRANSFEREE'S EXPRESS AND VOLUNTARY AGREEMENT TO ALL THESE CONDITIONS. 
The issuance of the permit shall be for a time period ending September 30th of the fiscal year in which the permit is issued. The initial permitting fee shall not be prorated but shall be paid in full. Upon approval of the permit, the applicant sign owner or operator shall donate the annual contribution to the sign mitigation and city beautification fund. On or before the first day of October for each year, the sign owner or operator shall donate its annual contribution to the sign mitigation and city beautification fund for the past fiscal year or the permit will be suspended until the contribution is made. 
(l)  Annual contribution to sign mitigation and city beautification fund. The permittee shall as part of its permit contribute the annual fee. The payment of the annual fee for each year thereafter shall be contributed on the anniversary date of the granting of the permit. The annual fee contributed to the, sign mitigation and city beautification fund will be for the following amounts: For each billboard located in Area 1 the annual fee is $16,128.00 and in Area 2 the annual fee is $21,500.00 per billboard. The city reserves the right to increase the annual fee in an amount not to exceed the annual percent charge in the consumer price index. The sign mitigation and city beautification fund is established to provide funding, for entrance features and other beautification projects of the city and to providing funding for programs and incentives to reduce sign clutter and to eliminate deteriorated signs. 
(m)  Indemnification to city. As a condition to the issuance of the permit, the permittee shall agree to indemnify the city, and its officers and agents, for all reasonable cost incurred by the city arising from any lawsuit or administrative procedure challenging the validity or enforceability of the voluntary billboard pilot program. Each permittee obtaining a permit under the voluntary billboard pilot program shall be responsible for a pro rata share of any such costs. 
(n)  Transferability of billboard permits. 
(1)  Transfer of location. A permit issued under the voluntary pilot billboard corridor program shall be transferable to a new location only for cause, which only means that: 
a.  The lease for the location of the billboard is cancelled, terminated, or otherwise invalid; 
b.  The billboard is partially or totally obstructed; or 
c.  The location of the billboard is or would no longer be feasible because of construction or development. Such transfer of location must be approved by the planning and zoning department or city council in accordance with this section. 
d.  The new location of the billboard shall only be located within the two geographic areas approved by this section. 
(2)  Transfer of ownership. A permit may be transferred to a new owner subject to the city's right to approve the transfer only upon transferee's express agreement with all conditions of the permit and restrictive covenant. 
(o)  Appeal of denied permits. Anyone seeking an appeal of the denial of a permit application or its subsequent transfer shall present its appeal according to section 78-77 of the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 8-18-09; Ord. No. 2010-21, §§ 1—3, 10-5-10) 
Editor's note— At the city's direction, definitions adopted by Ord. No. 2009-07 on Aug. 18, 2009, and designated as subsection 78-177(b), have been included in Article X.  
Sec. 78-178. - Opt-out of Miami-Dade County Code for billboards in proximity to expressways. 
Having established in section 78-177, regulations for billboards, the city, as permitted by Section 33.121.11 of the Miami-Dade County Code, opts-out of Chapter 33, Division 5, of the Miami-Dade County Code, but only to the limited extent that it pertains to billboards, as defined in section 78-177. This section shall not supersede any other section of this Code, or any other ordinance of the City of Hialeah Gardens, which provides for the opting-out of Chapter 33, Division 5, of the Miami-Dade County Code, as it may pertain to any type of sign other than billboards. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § 2, 10-4-11)  
ARTICLE X. - DEFINITIONS[5] 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abut: To physically touch, or having property or district lines in common. 
Access: A way of approaching or entering a property from either a public street or private way. 
Accessory structure: A subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to that of the principal structure. Where there is no principal structure on the lot, the accessory structure shall be considered as a principal structure for the purpose of the height, area and bulk regulations. 
Accessory use: A use incidental to, and on the same lot as, a principal one. 
Addition: Any construction or alteration which increases the size of a building. 
Adult living facility: Pursuant to F.S. ch. 400, "Nursing Homes and Related Health Care Facilities", a state licensed residential facility for four or more persons, within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services, and room cleaning. Such facilities may also provide other services, such as transportation for routine social and medical appointments, and counseling. 
Alley: A through public right-of-way of less than 25 feet in width that offers only secondary access to abutting properties. 
Alteration, structural: Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders. The superficial enhancement of the exterior of an existing building for the purpose of beautifying and modernizing shall not be considered a structural alteration (see Florida Building Code). 
Amusement arcade: A building or a part of a building in which five or more pinball machines, video games, or other similar player operated amusement devices are maintained. 
Antenna: A transmitting and/or receiving device used in telecommunications that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies, wireless communications signals and other communication signals, including directional antennas, such as panel and microwave dish antennas, and omni-directional antennas, such as whips, but excluding radar antennas, amateur radio antennas and satellite earth stations. 
Automobile wrecking yard (see also junkyard): An area where the dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts takes place. 
Banner sign: A sign having letter, characters or illustrations applied to cloth, plastics, paper or fabric of any kind with only such material for backing. This definition includes flag banners, sail banners, teardrop banners or feather banners, pennants and streamers. 
Basement: A story partly underground and having at least one-half of its height above the average adjoining grade. A basement shall be termed a cellar when more than one-half of its height is below the average adjoining grade. A basement or cellar shall be counted as a story if vertical distance from the average adjoining grade to the ceiling is over five feet. 
Bedroom: Any room used principally for sleeping purposes, an all-purpose room, a study, or a den, provided that no room has less than 100 square feet of floor area. 
Billboard means an off-site large outdoor structure that is predominately a sign in which the message or advertisement comprises an activity or business that is not operating or being conducted on the property in which the billboard is located. The words "billboard" and "sign" as used in this section are interchangeable since the regulations concern only billboards. 
Borrow pit: Any place or premises where dirt, soil, sand, a gravel, or other material is removed below the grade of surrounding land for any purpose other than as necessary and incidental to site grading or building construction. 
Buffer area (see also screening): A landscaped area or green space intended to separate two adjacent land uses or properties from one another. 
Camouflaged facility (stealth facility): A facility that is disguised, hidden, part of an existing or proposed structure, or placed within an existing or proposed structure in a manner that makes it not readily identifiable as a personal wireless services facility. A camouflaged facility may or may not have a secondary function (e.g., bell tower, spire, flag pole, etc.). 
Child day care center: Any facility where care, protection, and supervision for a minimum of six children are regularly provided, for a fee or grant and as further enumerated in F.S. § 402.302(2). 
Child day care family home: An occupied residence where care, protection, and supervision for a maximum of five children are regularly provided, for a fee or grant and as further enumerated in F.S. § 402.302(7) and Miami-Dade County Chapter 33, Zoning, Article XA "Educational and Child Care Facilities, Nonpublic". 
Club, private: Buildings, facilities or premises used or operated by an organization or association for some common purpose, such as, but not limited to, a fraternal, social, educational or recreational purpose. In addition, the main purpose shall not be for serving alcoholic beverages to its members and others. 
Cluster development: A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas. 
Collocated personal wireless service facility or collocated: The placement of a new personal wireless service facility on an existing tower, existing building or other single support structure. 
Common recreational facility: Recreational structures or areas in a particular development such as: community buildings; pools; cabanas; tennis, basketball or racquetball courts; solariums and play lots for the use and enjoyment of the residents and guests. 
Communication tower: A mono pole, self-supporting/lattice tower or guyed tower, constructed as a free-standing structure, containing one or more antennas intended for transmitting or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication, excluding radar towers, amateur radio support structures and satellite earth stations. 
Condominium: That form of ownership of real property created pursuant to F.S. ch. 718, comprising entirely of units that may be owned by one or more persons and in which there is appurtenant to each unit an individual share in the common elements. 
Convenience store: Any neighborhood retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other goods and having a gross floor area of less than 5,000 square feet. 
Cul-de-sac: A local dead-end street, one end of which is closed and consists of a circular or T turnaround. 
Development: Generally consists of changes in land use or intensity; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any excavation, landfill, or land disturbance; any use or extension of the use of land and that which is further defined in F.S. § 380.04. 
Development order: The granting, denying or granting with conditions any application for a building permit, zoning permit, subdivision approval, rezoning, certification, special exception, variance or any other official action having the effect of permitting the development of land. 
Digital billboard means a billboard that allows advertisements to rotate in succession electronically with LED or other technology. 
Drive-thru facility: Any portion of a building or structure from which business is transacted, or is capable of being transacted, directly with customers located in a motor vehicle during such business transactions. 
Dwelling: One or more rooms physically arranged so as to create an independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one family with separate toilets and facilities for cooking and sleeping, but not including hotels, motels, mobile homes, boardinghouses and lodginghouses. 
Dwelling, multifamily: A building or portion thereof used for occupancy of three or more families living independently of each other and containing three or more dwellings, including, but not limited to, what is commonly known as an apartment building. 
Dwelling, single-family attached (group, row, duplex, and townhouses): One or more dwellings having a common or party wall. 
Dwelling, single-family detached: A dwelling entirely surrounded by open space. 
Easement: The right of a person, government agency, or public utility company to use public or private land owned by another for a specific purpose. 
Embellishments means a physical or structural extension to the billboard that enhances, emphasizes or directs attention to the sign message. 
Entrance features: Any combination of decorative structures and landscape elements located at the entrance to a development, which identifies or draws attention to the development. 
Essential service: Those services provided by the city and other governmental entities that directly relate to the health and safety of its residents including fire, police and rescue. 
Facade: The exterior wall of a building exposed to public. 
Family: One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit. No more than four unrelated persons shall be allowed to live within a single dwelling. 
Fence: A barrier used to enclose a property as a means of protection or confinement. 
Final plat: The final tracing, map or drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the governing body for approval, and which, if approved, will be submitted to the clerk of the circuit court for recording. 
Floor area, gross: The sum of the horizontal areas of all floors of a building, including areas used for human occupancy in basements and attics, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. Such area does not include basements, unenclosed porches, or attics not used for human occupancy. 
Floor area ratio (FAR): A measurement of development intensity determined by dividing the floor area of the building or buildings an any lot by the net area of the lot. 
Footprint: The outline or shape of a building or structure as determined on a horizontal plane. 
Frontage: The length of any one property line of a site, which property line abuts a legally accessible street right-of-way. 
Garage, private: A structure for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal structure situated on the same lot for the storage of motor vehicles. 
Garage, public: A structure designed and used for the storage of motor vehicles. 
Garage, repair (see also service station): A building designed and used for the storage, care, repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles, including both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint, and body work. 
Grade means crown or highest elevation of the adjacent road (including elevation for a highway or highway extension, flyover, or overpass). 
Guesthouse: Living quarters within a detached or semidetached accessory building located on the same lot with the main building for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises, such quarters having no kitchen facilities or separate utility meters and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Guyed tower: A communication tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
Height of building: The vertical distance from grade to the parapet or roof ridge. 
Helistop, unlimited use: Any landing area used for the landing and taking off of helicopters for the purpose of picking up or discharging of passengers or cargo, but with no fueling, refueling, or service facilities. 
Home occupation: An occupation, activity, or use which is located in a home office that is clearly a customary, incidental, and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood. 
House of worship: A tax-exempt institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services and meetings. 
Impervious area: That portion of a building site measured in square feet which is incapable of being penetrated by rainwater. This shall include, but not be limited to, all structures, roof extensions, terraces, porches, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, swimming pools and athletic courts. 
Junkyard: A parcel of land on which waste material, such as furniture, lumber, metal, glass or other materials, inoperative vehicles and other machinery are collected, stored, salvaged, or sold. 
Kennel: An establishment licensed to operate a facility housing dogs, cats, or other household pets and where grooming, breeding, boarding, training, or selling animals is conducted as a business. 
Lattice tower: A self-supporting communication tower, other than a monopole tower, that is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
Laundry or dry cleaner: A business that provides washing, drying, dry cleaning and/or ironing services. 
Lot: A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed or built upon. 
Lot area: The area of land, measured in square feet, within a lot. 
Lot, corner: A lot abutting the intersection of two or more streets. 
Lot coverage, building: Determined by dividing that area of a lot which is occupied or covered by the total horizontal projected surface of all buildings, including covered porches and accessory buildings, by the gross area of that lot. 
Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot frontage: The distance for which the front lot line and the street right-of-way line are coincident. 
Lot line, front: The front of a lot shall be construed to be that portion abutting the street. For corner lots, the lot front shall be the narrowest portion of the lot abutting any street, unless determined otherwise by the zoning department. 
Lot line, rear: The rear property line of a lot is that lot line opposite to the front property line, unless otherwise determined by the zoning department. 
Lot line, side: Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line. 
Lot width: The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the required front setback line. 
Manufactured housing: A factory-built, single-family structure that is manufactured under the authority of 42 USC section 5401, the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act. 
Mechanical billboard means a billboard that utilizes tri-action movement to allow rotation of three advertisements. 
Microwave dish antenna: A dish-like antenna used to link communication sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data. 
Mobile billboard means a billboard that includes a sign, installed on or attached to a vehicle, or connected to a vehicle as a trailer, that is capable of transport. Mobile billboards are prohibited. 
Mobile home: A transportable, factory-built home designed to be used as a year round residential dwelling. Also reference Section 19A-1 of the Code of Miami-Dade County. 
Mobile home park: A parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for dwelling purposes. 
Monopole tower: A free standing communication tower consisting of a single pole or spire supported by a permanent foundation, construction without anchored guy wires. 
Nightclub: A commercial establishment such as a bar, restaurant, coffeehouse, or similar establishment where alcoholic beverages may be dispensed for consumption on the premises and in which dancing and live performances are permitted. 
Nonconforming lot: A lot not in full compliance with the land use district in which it is situated but which lawfully existed prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this chapter. 
Nonconforming use: A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use regulations for its land use district but which did so at the time the use was established. 
Nonconforming development: Development that does not conform to this chapter or other applicable chapters of the city code. 
Open space, common: Areas within or related to a development-which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of a development. 
Parcel: A lot or tract of land owned and recorded as the property of, the same person or persons or controlled by a single entity. 
Park: Any public or private land available for recreational, educational, cultural, or aesthetic use. 
Parking space or stall: An area on a lot and/or within a building intended for parking of a personal vehicle. 
Performance guarantee: A financial guarantee (letter of credit or bond) to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required will be completed in compliance with the ordinances, regulations, plans, permits and specifications of a development. 
Permittee means the entity that submits an application to the voluntary pilot billboard corridor program and is the owner or operator of a proposed billboard. 
Personal wireless services: Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services. Personal wireless services shall not be considered as essential services, public utilities or private utilities. 
Planned unit development (PUD): Land under unified control to be planned and developed as a whole or in phases. A PUD includes structures and uses substantially related to the character and purpose of the planned development and is built according to general and detailed plans. A PUD includes a program for the operation and maintenance of such areas, facilities, and improvements as will be for the common use by some or all of the occupants of the PUD zoning district, but which will not be provided, operated, or maintained at general public expense. 
Plat: See final or tentative plat definitions. 
Property means the land upon which a proposed billboard will be established. 
Property owner means the entity which owns the property on which a proposed billboard will be established. 
Public service/utility uses: Those which provide essential or important public services such as: emergency dispatch centers for fire, police and rescue; broadcasting stations; utility facilities such as water or wastewater plants, electricity substations, maintenance facilities for schools or telephone companies. 
Restaurant: A food and/or beverage establishment that prepares food on the premises for consumption either on or off the premises. Bars or lounge areas are considered an incidental use to the restaurant. 
Restaurant, drive-thru: A food and/or beverage establishment that has a dedicated drive-thru lane for customers in motor vehicles. 
Right-of-way: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or other utilities. 
Road, private: A way open to vehicular ingress and egress established as a separate tract for the benefit of certain adjacent properties not abutting public right-of-way. 
Satellite dish antenna (see also antenna and tower; see also section 78-91, for residential use): A round, parabolic antenna intended to receive signals from orbiting satellites and other sources. 
Screening: The method by which a view of one site from another adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden. Screening techniques include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other features. 
Self-service storage facility (mini-warehouse): An enclosed building consisting of individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods or contractor supplies. 
Service station: Any premises where gasoline and other petroleum products are sold and/or limited light maintenance activities such as engine tuneups, lubrication, minor repairs, and carburetor cleaning are conducted. 
Setback: The required minimum horizontal distance between the front, rear or side lines of a lot and the front, rear and side lines of a building, or any building element at any level or, in the case of open structures, to the face of the structural columns; however, that none of such projections of the open structures shall project into the minimum setback area more than 24 inches. 
Shopping center: A grouping of retail business and service uses on a single site with common parking facilities. 
Sidewalk cafe: An area adjacent to and directly in front of a street-level eating or drinking establishment located within the sidewalk area of the public right-of-way exclusively for dining, drinking, and pedestrian circulation. 
Sign: Any device or representation for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject matter to the attention of the public. Signs include, but are not limited to, figures, letters, logos, devices, flags, pennants, emblems, and pictures. 
Address sign: An attached sign indicating the address of the structure, dwelling unit, or business to which it is attached. It may be in the form of an awning sign. 
Attached sign: A sign painted on or attached to and supported by a building or other structure. 
Awning or canopy sign: A sign painted, stamped, perforated, stitched, or otherwise applied on the valance or surface of an awning. An illuminated architectural canopy sign (backlit awning) is an enclosed, illuminated structure that is attached to the wall of a building with the face of the sign approximately parallel to the wall and with the message integrated into its face. 
Billboard: A sign that directs attention to a commercial business, commodity, service, product, or activity not conducted, sold, offered, or available on the premises where such sign is located, the copy (face) of which may be intended to be changed periodically. A billboard is the principal use of the property on which it is located. It includes a sign displayed on a trailer or the bed of a truck that advertises something other than the identity of the truck, the driver or its contents. 
City public information sign: A sign erected by the City of Hialeah Gardens for the purpose of providing noncommercial public information and announcements of city-sponsored meetings, events, and activities to the community. Said sign may be permanent or temporary in nature and is exempted from the requirements of this article. 
Community information sign: A sign, located on and relating to, an activity on or near the premises upon which the sign is located. Examples include: "Children at Play," "Crime Watch Area," "Drug Free School Zone," and "Adopt a Highway." 
Directional sign: A sign relating to navigation on the property on which it is located, such as "Entrance," "Exit," "Parking," "Drive-thru," "Loading," or that identifies the name of a place or location on the property on which it is located with a directional symbol. 
Electronic message board: Any sign that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified electronically. 
Face of sign: That part of the sign that is or can be used to identify, advertise, and communicate information or for visual representation, which attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. Sign face includes any background material, panel, trim, color, and internal or external illumination used that differentiate the sign from the building, structure, backdrop surface or object upon or against which the sign is placed. 
Flashing sign: Any sign which, by method or manner of illumination, flashes on or off, blinks with varying light intensity, shows motion, or creates the illusion of motion or revolves in a manner to create the illusion of being on or off. 
Freestanding sign: A self-supported structure not attached to any building or structure. 
Grand opening sign: A temporary sign that is used to denote the fact that a new business or residential development is present. 
Hazardous sign: A sign that approximates a traffic sign and is not placed for a legitimate public safety reason, or includes words such as, "Stop," "Danger," "Caution," "Look," or similar words or obscures a traffic sign or a directional sign. 
Illegal sign: A sign erected in violation of any ordinances in effect at the time of the sign's installation. 
Illuminated sign: A sign which contains a source of light or which is designed or arranged to reflect light from an artificial source, including indirect lighting, incandescent lights, neon gas and back-lighting. 
Logo: An item of information or graphic used to signify an organization, corporation or the like. 
Marquee sign: An attached sign that is customarily used by theaters to advertise show times. 
Monument sign: A freestanding, self-supported structure not attached or affixed in any way to a building or any other primary structure, with concealed means of support that is built into the ground and could not be construed to be a pole sign. 
Nonconforming sign, illegal: A sign located within the city on the effective date of this chapter or existing in an area annexed by the city after the effective date of this article (or amendments hereto), which by its height, type, area, design, colors, materials, location, use, or structural support, did not conform to the city's sign regulations, or the date of amendments hereto (or Miami-Dade County's regulations if in an area that was annexed by the city) and does not conform to the requirements of this article. 
Nonconforming sign, legal: A sign located within the city limits on the effective date of this article or existing in an area annexed by the city after the effective date of this article (or amendments hereto) which, by its height, type, area, design, colors, materials, location, use, or structural support, conformed to the city's sign regulations that were in effect prior to the effective date of this article, or the date of amendments hereto, but does not conform to the requirements of this article. This shall include signs that had been granted variances that were approved, and signs that were issued a permit by the city (or Miami-Dade County if in an area that was annexed by the city), or the date of amendments hereto. 
Pole sign: A sign erected upon a pole, poles, post, or "pole-like" structure that are visible and wholly independent of any building or structure for support. 
Political sign: A sign that indicates the name, cause or affiliation of anyone seeking public office, or that indicates any political issue. 
Portable sign: Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building, including any sign attached to or displayed on a vehicle, that is used for the express purpose of advertising a business establishment, product, service, or entertainment, when that vehicle is so parked as to attract the attention of the motoring or pedestrian traffic. 
Projecting sign: Any sign other than a wall sign that is attached to and projects from the wall or face of a building or structure, including a marquee sign. 
Real estate sign: A temporary sign erected by the owner or his agent, indicating that the property on which it is located or existing structures on that property are for sale, rent, or lease. This shall include signs that indicate that a property for sale or is available for inspection, such as signs containing the words "open house." 
Roof sign: Any sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof or roof eave, or on the top or above the parapet, or on a functional architectural appendage above the roof or roof eave. 
Street sign: A sign that specifies the name of a street that is placed adjacent to such street. 
Temporary sign: A sign intended for use for only a limited period of time. 
Traffic sign: A sign that specifies vehicular and traffic information, rules or regulations and is placed for a legitimate public safety reason. 
Wall sign: A sign painted on the outside of a building, or attached to and erected parallel to the face of a building, and supported throughout its length by such building. 
Warning sign: A sign whose purpose is to notify the public of a possible danger or policy that affects a property or to provide instructions at active construction sites, such as "Beware of Dog," "No Trespassing," "Men at Work," "No Parking," "Customer Parking Only," and "Caution." 
Window sign: An attached sign located on the inside of a window or within a building or other enclosed structure, where the sign face is visible and legible from the exterior through a window or other opening. A window sign may be one or all of the following: 
(1)  Identification sign: A sign attached to or painted on an establishment window identifying the occupant and its address and telephone number. 
(2)  Message sign: A sign containing a message. 
(3)  Hours of operation sign: A sign stating hours and days of operation. 
(4)  Advertising sign. 
Yard sale sign: A temporary sign erected by the owner of the property or authorized agent of such owner that indicates that tangible goods are for sale at a certain time on the property on which it is located. 
Sign area: The entire area within a continuous perimeter, enclosing the extreme limits of a sign display, including any frame or border. Curved, spherical, or any other shaped sign face shall be computed on the basis of actual surface area. The copy of signs composed of individual letters, numerals, or other devices shall be the sum of the area of the smallest rectangle or other geometric figure encompassing each of such letters or devices. The calculation for a double-faced sign shall be the area of one face only. Double-faced signs shall be constructed so that the perimeter of both faces coincide and are not more than 24 inches apart. 
Sign face means the sign surface where the advertisement or message is exhibited. 
Site: A parcel of land which is to be developed as a single unit, subdivision, or project. 
Site plan: A document or group of documents containing sketches, text, drawings, maps, photographs, and other material intended to present and explain certain elements of a proposed development, including physical design, siting of buildings and structures, interior vehicular and pedestrian access, the provision of improvements, landscaping and open space and the interrelationship of these elements. 
Special exception use: A use not permitted by right but may provide for an individual or community serving need and which, subject to conditions, would not impact the integrity of the zoning district. 
Special taxing district: Districts which may be created and established in the city, under the provisions of Chapter 18, Improvement and Special-Purpose Districts, Article I, Special Taxing Districts, of the Code of Miami-Dade County for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, reconstructing and installing any of the following public improvements or of providing any of the following special services within such districts: 
(1)  Water systems; 
(2)  Sewerage systems; 
(3)  Storm sewers; 
(4)  Street improvements; 
(5)  Sidewalk improvements; 
(6)  Police and fire protection; 
(7)  Recreation facilities; 
(8)  Street lighting; 
(9)  Incinerators; 
(10)  Beach erosion control; and 
(11)  Such other facilities or services which may be deemed essential by the board. 
Stable: A building or land where animals are kept for remuneration, hire, sale, boarding, riding, or show. 
Stable, private: An accessory structure to an existing residential use that shelters animals for the exclusive use of the occupants of the premises. 
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling above it. A basement shall be counted as a story if its ceiling is over five feet above the average level of the finished ground surface adjoining the exterior walls of such building, or if it is occupied for business or dwelling purposes. 
Street: A public or private right-of-way used, or intended to be used, for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Streets are further classified by the functions they perform. 
Subdivision: The division of any tract or parcel of land. 
Swale is the area within the public right-of-way exclusive of the paved public sidewalk and the paved roadway, curb and gutter, if any. 
Temporary outdoor event: A concert, festival, carnival, race, triathlon, walk, show, sales event, exhibition, promotion or similar event in which the majority of the activities associated with the event are conducted out of doors. 
Tentative plat: A preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision submitted for approval. Said preliminary map, drawing or chart shall not be considered a boundary survey as defined in Chapter 21HH-6 of the Florida Administrative Code, as same may be amended from time to time. It shall be considered a specific purpose survey as defined in said Chapter 21HH-6; said specific purpose being for subdivision design, therefore conceptual in nature, and subject to change prior to the boundary survey being made for which a plat of record is being filed. 
Tower (see also antenna and satellite dish antenna): A structure or antenna situated on a nonresidential site that is intended for transmitting or receiving television, radio, or telephone communications, excluding those used exclusively for dispatch communications. 
Traditional billboard means a large outdoor structure that is predominately a sign where the advertisement does not rotate, but is stationary. 
Two-family (duplex) dwelling unit: Attached single-family dwelling units whereby two units have a common wall. 
Variance: A relaxation of the technical regulations of this chapter where such action will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of actions or the situation of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Warehouse: A building whose permitted use is for the storage, distribution, large-scale purchase or shipping of goods and incidental uses. This definition shall include membership warehouses. 
Whip antenna: As used herein shall mean a cylindrical antenna that transmits signals in 360 degrees. 
Yard: Any open space other than a court located on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground up, except for accessory buildings, or such projections as are expressly permitted in these land use regulations. The minimum depth or width of a yard shall be measured by the horizontal distance between the lot line and the nearest point of the foundation wall of the main building. 
Yard, front: A yard extending along the full width of a front lot line between side lot lines and from the front lot line to the front building line in depth. Front yard depth shall be measured at right angles to the front line of the lot. 
Yard, rear: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the building. Rear yard depth shall be measured at right angles to the rear line of the lot. 
Yard, side: A yard lying between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or in the absence of either of such front or rear yards, to the front or rear lot lines. Side yard width shall be measured at right angles to side lines of the lot. 
Zero lot line: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building's sides rests directly on a lot line. 
(Ord. of 9-25-06; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 2, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 8-18-09; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 2-18-14; Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1(4), 8-4-15; Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2, 2-21-17) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 

